                                           94977




Past and Future - Bank-IFC Cooperation at the
Country Strategy Level
Abbreviations and Acronyms

AAA                    Analytical and Advisory Assistance
CASCRR                 Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report Review
CEDP                   Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project
CLR                    Completion & Learning Review
CPE                    Country Program Evaluation
CPS                    Country Program Strategy
DOTS                   Development Outcome Tracking Data
EAP                    East Asia Pacific
ECA                    Europe and Central Asia
IBRD                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IEG                    Independent Evaluation Group
IFC                    International Finance Corporation
IDA                    International Development Association
IPP                    Independent Power Producer
ISN                    Interim Strategy Note
KPLC                   Kenya Power Lighting Company
LAC                    Latin America and the Caribbean
MENA                   Middle East and North Africa
MIC                    Middle-Income Countries
MIGA                   Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
OPCS                   Secretariat, Operational Policy and Country Services
PCG                    Partial Credit Guarantees
PRG                    Partial Risk Guarantees
PLR                    Performance & Learning Review
PPP                    Public-Private Partnership
PSD                    Private Sector Development
RAP                    Results and Performance of The World Bank Group
RICRP                  Rwanda Investment Climate Reform Program
SAR                    South Asia Region
SCD                    Systematic Country Diagnostics
VPU                    Vice Presidency Unit
WBG                    World Bank Group




Director-General, Evaluation                        :   Ms. Caroline Heider
Director, Independent Evaluation Group, Country ,   :   Mr. Nick York
Corporate, and Global Evaluations
Manager,                                            :   Ms. Geeta Batra
Task Manager                                        :   Mr. Takatoshi Kamezawa
                                                                        i


Contents
Preface...................................................................................................................................... iii
Introduction: Shifting Priorities at Client Countries ................................................................. v
1. WBG’s Country Engagement Model under CAS ................................................................. 1
2. Planned (Ex Ante) Cooperation in Country Assistance Strategies........................................ 4
3. Actual (Ex Post) Cooperation Findings from IEG Reviews and Evaluations ...................... 6
4. Key Findings of the Note .................................................................................................... 15
5. Prospects and Challenges of Cooperation under the New Framework............................... 16


Boxes
Box 3.1. Joint CPSs for Mexico and Pakistan..................................................................... 6
Box 4.1. Recommendations by the IDA-IFC Secretariat on Bank-IFC Cooperation.... 8
Box 4.2 Bank-IFC Cooperation in Rwanda ...................................................................... 11
Box 4.3. WBG Collaboration in the Kenya Power Sector ............................................... 12
Box 4.4. Development Impact of a Joint WBG Project in Uganda ................................ 13



Appendixes


Appendix A. Country Assistance Strategies ........................................................................... 19
Appendix B. IEG CASCR Reviews: ...................................................................................... 20
Appendix C: IEG Country Program Evaluations.................................................................... 21
Appendix D: Thematic, Global and Corporate Evaluations ................................................... 22
                                                iii


Preface
IEG has assessed the development effectiveness of IFC operation at the country level through
Country Program Evaluations (CPEs), Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report
Reviews (CASCR-Rs), and annual Results and Performance of the World Bank Group
(RAPs). These evaluations and reviews also assessed Bank-IFC cooperation. This Learning
Note examines the past experiences of Bank-IFC cooperation at the country level, discusses
key findings from IEG evaluations, and presents prospects and challenges of the new
country-focused approach to intra-World Bank Group (WBG) cooperation.




This paper, co-authored by Takatoshi Kamezawa and Kutlay Ebiri, is one of the IEG’s learning notes
to make evaluation evidence easily accessible to key audiences. Under the new Country Partnership
Framework (CPF), the Bank and IFC have committed to work more closely together at the country
strategy level. IFC’s participation is expected to increase in all stages of the CPF process.
                                                v


Introduction: Shifting Priorities at Client Countries
The needs of World Bank Group (WBG) clients have been changing with the private sector
increasingly becoming the engine of growth, and the governments’ attention shifting from
public projects to dealing with the growing private sector: regulating it, establishing
partnerships with, and/or transferring certain economic activities to it. In this new landscape,
the best way to optimize the WBG’s development impact, promote its overarching goal of
eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner is to put
the array of private sector instruments into full use, bringing enhanced cooperation between
the World Bank/International Development Association (the Bank) and IFC at the country
level to the forefront.

Cognizant of the changing needs of client countries, the WBG has decided to overhaul the
Group’s approach to country engagement with a view to increasing its effectiveness and
development impact. An important tenet of the new approach is to bring in IFC’s private
sector expertise into the fold of country operations to take advantage of potential synergies
that can be generated by the Bank and IFC working in a coordinated fashion, and hand-in-
hand in certain sectors and projects. In the past, the Bank and IFC operated in public and
private domains, respectively, largely independent of each other, although there were
instances and projects where they worked together (e.g. public-private partnerships,
privatizations, regulatory reforms) or had overlapping activities which sometimes led to
“turf” disputes (e.g. credit lines). The different characteristics of public and private sectors,
concerns over conflicts of interest, and the lack of familiarity of the Bank and IFC staff of
each other’s operational objectives and ongoing activities presented obstacles to effective
cooperation at the country level.

As emphasized in the various statements by WBG management, and in the new
organizational directives transforming the process of building country strategies, the Bank
and IFC are expected to work more closely together from diagnosis to strategy formulation,
solutions design, execution, evaluation, and learning. This would help ensure that the private
sector’s role in addressing the challenges of development is fully embedded and the WBG’s
assistance is integrated throughout the spectrum by capturing the benefits of knowledge
exchanges and joint operations across the Bank and IFC.

Changing long-established patterns in any institution presents challenges. If the Bank and
IFC staff regard the new directions as cooperation being a goal by itself, rather than an
instrument to improve the effectiveness and impact, not much may change in terms of
development outcomes, and the efforts may lead to an increase in further bureaucracy and
longer processing times.

The evidence from the recent past shows that a realistic and selective approach to Bank-IFC
cooperation, based on appropriate resource allocation and staff incentives, may yield
significantly better outcomes. Thus the challenges of the new Country Program Framework
(CPF) process are to (i) identify where and when cooperation is likely to improve efficiency
and development outcome; (ii) redefine job descriptions of various administrative units and
re-assign existing staff resources; and (iii) provide staff incentives for joint work.
                                                            1


1. WBG’s Country Engagement Model under CAS
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) have
been the overarching strategy document for the WBG country level operations.
CPSs/CASs lay out the Bank Group’s medium-term priorities as discussed with country
authorities and, in most cases, with the representatives of various stakeholder groups,
including the academe, civil society organizations and, in fewer cases, the private sector.
For the Bank, the CAS process 1 has been the primary vehicle for delivery of the activities
to client countries. The CAS has had clear budgetary implications for operational units of
the Bank, thus it has been influenced by supply driven inter-departmental negotiations as
well as by the countries’ developmental needs. The budgets of the Bank’s networks
depended on the loans and Analytical and Advisory (AAA) activities assigned to them by
the CAS process.

 The Bank’s performance is monitored and self-evaluated throughout the CAS cycle,
including in the CAS Progress Report and CAS Completion Report (CASCR). Nearly all
of the Bank’s lending and AAA activities are included in the results framework under the
CAS. CASCRs are also reviewed and validated by IEG.

Over the last decade, most CASs became “joint” for IFC and the Bank (and where
appropriate, MIGA), to define a WBG strategy at the country level. In FY01, less than
half of CASs were joint; by FY10-12, more than 83% of CASs and Interim Strategy
Notes (ISNs) (63 of 76) were joint. However, most joint CASs appear to have played a
limited role in defining IFC’s country engagement relative to the manner CASs determine
the Bank’s county programs. In many cases, “jointness” usually meant listing IFC’s
forward-looking investment and advisory projects in the relevant country.

IFC strategies are set in a top down and bottom up approach at the institutional 2, regional,
and industry levels. 3 IFC’s de facto country strategies inform IFC’s regional strategies
which are summarized for each region in the IFC’s Road Map. In some large exposure
countries, IFC has country level strategies included in the regional strategy discussions in
the Road Map. In addition, IFC regions present country level strategy updates to IFC
management in a few sectors or countries to inform the discussion of upcoming large
projects, especially when IFC is near its country exposure limits. There are numerous
factors which make it difficult, if not impossible, for IFC to plan over a four-year time
frame on specific projects or program in the same way the Bank does it. The most
important of which is that IFC’s investment opportunities are determined by market
demand from different private sector players and not by an agreement with the
government up to four years ahead.




1
 For this Note, the terms “CAS” and “CAS process” also include the more recent CPS process such as CPS, CPSCR,
and IEG’s CPSCR reviews.
2
  IFC Road Maps identify IFC’s institutional, regional and sectoral priorities and define the instruments (loans, equity,
and technical advice) to be used to execute these strategies.
3
  Examples of regional and sector level strategies are LOTS strategy for the LAC and Financial Market strategy for
EAP.
                                                      2


An increased effort for Bank-IFC cooperation at the country strategy level would require
IFC to focus more on its program delivery at the country, as opposed to regional or
departmental, level. Under the CPF, IFC’s participation is expected to increase from the
Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD), which will be prepared by a multi-sector team
under the direction of the country management, CPF, Performance & Learning Review
(PLR), to the self-assessment of Completion & Learning Review (CLR) at the end of the
CPF cycle. After the SCD is prepared with IFC’s inputs on private sector development
(PSD) issues, Bank and IFC teams will jointly determine the instruments to be used by
the WBG in its assistance to the country.

The CPF aims at increasing the selectivity of WBG activities. A recent board
presentation on WBG’s new country engagement identifies the key issues as fostering
better collaboration among WBG institutions and placing greater emphasis on leveraging
the private sector to provide solutions to development problems. 4 IFC senior
management has already endorsed the CPF, which is to replace the CAS, as an important
vehicle for cooperation within the WBG, 5 and recently announced a new corporate
structure, which will become effective from FY15. 6 Under this new structure, IFC
created a Global Partnership Vice Presidency Unit (VPU). One of the main functions of
this VPU is to increase cooperation between the Bank and IFC. Reflecting that
coordination between WBG institutions was sometimes ad hoc and depended to a degree
on individual teams in the CAS process, regional coordination mechanisms will be
instituted under the new CPF process, including quarterly meetings of regional
management teams from each WBG institution.

Selective cooperation between the Bank and IFC has the potential to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of WBG operations and its development impact. Cooperation
offers the possibility for the Bank and IFC to complement their relative strengths, and
offset relative weaknesses, in pursuit of shared development goals. The Bank has vast
resources of economic and sector analysis and substantial country knowledge, especially
of the public policy sphere. Combined with IFC’s long experience in working with
private companies and worldwide expertise in project development and financial
structuring, valuable synergies can be generated by Bank-IFC cooperation.

Strengths of the Bank include its: (i) close policy dialogue, often supported by program
loans with client governments, the key to promoting regulatory change and helping
improve the business environment; and, (ii) expertise in designing and overseeing the
implementation of public investment projects, which often provide a foundation for
developing public-private partnerships (PPP).

Strengths of IFC include its: (i) knowledge of, and relationship with, the private sector,
which allows IFC to better inform the Bank and client governments of the impact of
regulatory reforms on private industries and companies; (ii) valuable operational
expertise, including in marginal, less developed markets, particularly in countries which
are considered high risk such as fragile and conflict countries (FCS) to attract private
4
    World Bank Group, A new Approach to Country Engagement, April 29, 2014.
5
    IFC Road Map FY15-17 Implementing the World Bank Group Strategy, IFC/SecM2014-0028, March 20, 2014.
6
    This new structure was announced during IFC town hall meeting on April 23, 2014.
                                              3


investment; (iii) expertise in designing, structuring and implementing investment and
advisory service projects with private sector engagement.

Potential benefits of cooperation depend on the sector and the stage of its development.
For some sectors, especially infrastructure, coordination between the Bank and IFC is
desired for some countries because policy-making institutions have not yet developed.
Institutional capacity also needs to be improved, in particular at the subnational level, for
the participation of the private sector. Understandably, IFC may be inclined to distance-
itself from a policy-making role in order to avoid the perception of conflict of interest,
whereas the Bank’s policy dialogue with the country enables it to help develop these
institutions.

Senegal and Uganda electricity sectors are good examples where Bank-IFC cooperation
generated synergies. The Bank established regulatory frameworks and supported capacity
building in these regulatory bodies, and IFC followed with its investment in the power
sector. For countries, such as Bhutan, where the market has recently opened for private
sector development, the coordination of activities between the Bank and IFC is critical to
have a better development outcome. The FY10-14 CAS for Bhutan defined
complementary roles for the Bank and IFC in support of water and transport through PPP
projects. This was also the case for a number of FCS countries where re-building of the
public sector capacity was essential for increasing participation of the private sector.

Cooperation is also required for new areas of private sector financing as new rules have
to be set by the public sector. In many middle-income countries (MICs), the main
infrastructure sectors, such as transport and power, PPPs are often prepared and launched
with the Bank and IFC playing their respective roles. PPPs in social sectors, such as
health and education, are relatively new areas where performance-based contracts are
increasingly used to bring in private sector efficiency.

The Bank can provide its global knowledge and expertise to set new rules of the private
sector engagement in social sectors such as health and education, while IFC can provide
transaction advice and financing to PPPs. For example, under the FY08-11 CAS for
Brazil, the Bank generated strategic analytical work to support broadening health sector
financing, and facilitated reforms at subnational levels, including the use of PPPs, while
IFC’s advisory services worked with providers of diagnostic and health services designed
to serve poor and middle-income groups. Similarly, in Senegal under the FY13-17 CAS,
the Bank and IFC aim to strengthen the PPP framework, beyond the infrastructure
sectors, through capacity building initiatives and best practice PPP transactions in the
social sector.

Cooperation between the Bank and IFC is not necessary for every sector and every
country. In a number of countries, for example, Bank-IFC cooperation in the financial
sector does not necessarily enhance the WBG’s development impact. Unless the sector is
at an early stage of development (for instance, as mentioned below, in Afghanistan),
Bank-IFC coordination is not always a requirement. In many MICs and in some IDA
countries, regulatory frameworks for the financial sector have been well developed,
making coordination redundant. In such situations, the financial market teams of IFC and
the Bank may benefit from information exchanges and a clear understanding of which
                                                            4


institution is best suited to deal with specific projects to avoid getting in each other’s
way, as seen in some cases where the Bank extends credit lines to private sector
institutions at subsidized rates.

For example, Brazil’s financial market is functioning with proper regulatory oversights.
The FY12-15 CPS for Brazil recognizes that the country has successfully restructured,
strengthened, and modernized its financial system since the late 1990s. IFC has planned
to increase its activities in the financial sector, without necessarily cooperating with the
Bank, which would not add significant value. The same applies to a sub-sector such as
microfinance. In Colombia, microfinance is an important part of IFC‘s financial markets
strategy given its impact on low-income communities, women, and minorities. IFC
microfinance portfolio consists of seven projects totaling US$41 million, which accounts
for 10 percent of its financial markets portfolio in Colombia. As the proper regulatory
framework is in place for the microfinance subsector, the FY12-16 CAS does not discuss
the need for the Bank-IFC cooperation in this sub-sector.

2. Planned (Ex Ante) Cooperation in Country
Assistance Strategies
The nature of country-level Bank-IFC cooperation in CASs varies significantly. IEG
reviewed 50 past CASs prepared between FY12 and FY14 (Annex I). Some CASs only
made a brief reference of IFC’s program for the private sector development (e.g. the
Gambia FY08-11 CAS and Guinea-Bissau FY04-13 CAS), while other CASs referred to
individual IFC investment transactions and advisory service projects that will be
implemented during CAS period (e.g. FY08-11 Zambia CPS 7 and FY10-12 Philippines
CAS). Several CASs set investment volume targets for IFC operations during the
implementation of CAS (e.g. FY10-14 Pakistan CPS and FY10-12 Philippines CAS). 8

Reflecting the uncertainty of IFC investments during the initial strategy-setting period,
most CASs lack selectivity and list all sectors where IFC investment operations and
advisory services could potentially take place during the implementation period without
much analysis on which sector and the modes in which IFC can add the most value to the
development needs of the country. The majority of CASs concentrate on describing IFC’s
operational strategy during the CAS as a stand-alone WBG institution, i.e. what IFC
plans to do in which sector, while providing very limited details regarding potential
cooperation between the Bank and IFC.

Despite these limitations, the majority of joint CASs identify areas, at a general level,
where the Bank and IFC have the potential to cooperate. Of the 38 joint CASs reviewed
by IEG between FY12-14, 84% of CASs for IBRD countries included planned Bank-IFC
cooperation. For 12 non-joint strategies, only the Congo Republic (FY10-12) referenced

7
  The FY08-11 CAS for Zambia listed two major IFC investments as potential projects in Zambia. However, neither
project materialized. Kafue Gorge Lower hydropower project was one of these two projects. The CAS included IDA’s
partial risk guarantee as an options to finance the transaction, and it was a potential collaboration project between IDA
and IFC. The project failed to reach financial closure. No reasons and analysis of this failed project was given in the
CASCR.
8
  IEG’s CASCR-Rs find that IFC did not meet this investment volume target for Pakistan for FY10-14 period and for
the Philippines for FY10-13 period.
                                                           5


cooperation. By country lending category, IBRD referenced planned cooperation in 88%
of CAS, while IDA referenced cooperation in 71% of CAS. Latin America and the
Caribbean Region (LAC), Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and South Asia Region
(SAR) all mentioned planned Bank-IFC cooperation at country level, while the Europe
and Central Asia Region (ECA) region included planned cooperation in 75 percent of
country strategies.

The majority of CASs, however, lacked specific proposals to implement WBG
cooperation. Of the 50 CASs reviewed, the majority did not define the instruments
(investment and/or advisory operations of IFC) to be used, the timeline or target
indicators to be achieved through cooperation. The discussion lacked a clearly defined
structure and implementation plan. Cooperation was often presented without quantifiable
metrics or a discussion of planned division of labor between the Bank and IFC, or
expected outcomes. Of the remaining country strategies, references to Bank-IFC
cooperation, when included, are organized within the CAS pillars, sectors or sub-sectors.
However, references often consist of a cursory description without any specific
outcomes. For example, FY09-12 Guatemala CAS describes the planned Bank-IFC
cooperation as follows, “It is expected that operations in energy and tourism will be
coordinated between IBRD and IFC. The IBRD and IFC worked closely to identify areas
where they can exploit synergies and leverage investments.”

CAS results framework does not usually capture the impact of IFC activities. This has
been frequently identified as a shortcoming by CASCR-Rs. Effective monitoring and
evaluation of IFC activities is hindered by the fact that most CASs do not include the
expected outcomes or the indicators of IFC projects. There are, however, good examples
of CAS results frameworks where IFC’s contributions to CAS objectives have been well
documented. The FY10-12 Philippines CAS has results framework with detailed outcome
indicators for IFC investment and advisory activities and it also incorporates IFC’s
project monitoring indicators from IFC’s Development Outcome Tracking Data (DOTS)
into IFC’s outcome objectives.

Building upon the CAS, the Philippines’ CASPR and CASCR results matrixes,
respectively, capture the impact of IFC activities by detailing IFC outcome milestones,
which include quantified details for IFC investment progress to date. The CASPR also
factors in the latest results from DOTS and development outcomes of the investment
projects from IFC’s self-evaluation system of Expanded Supervision Reports (XPSRs) to
assess the outcome of IFC operations in the country. 9 In part, this level of detail reflects
the CAS’s comprehensive discussion of Bank-IFC collaboration which is embedded
throughout the document itself. Therefore, joint Bank-IFC activities may help to improve
IFC results measurement as joint projects, which share common development outcome
objectives, help the incorporation of IFC activities into the results matrix itself.

The FY08-13 Mexico CASCR provides the results of the IBRD-IFC joint program and
includes a comprehensive assessment of all elements of the WBG program. The CASCR
also includes an analysis of IFC DOTS measurement data for the FY08-13 period. In
turn, these lessons and recommendations were incorporated into the subsequent country
9
    XPSR is IFC’s self-evaluation system to review development and other outcomes of IFC’s investment projects.
                                            6


strategy. In fact, the FY15-19 Mexico CAS incorporates many of these recommendations
into its results matrix, which shows a higher level of detail in capturing the expected IFC
development outcomes as compared to the FY08-13 CAS.

Recent joint CPSs indicate that the Bank-IFC cooperation is becoming an important
objective for the WBG management team. Both FY14-19 CPS for Mexico and FY15-19
CPS for Pakistan emphasized Bank-IFC cooperation (Box 3.1).


Box 3.1. Joint CPSs for Mexico and Pakistan
Mexico: The FY14-19 CPS consultations included the private sector, and devoted
substantial attention to Bank-IFC collaboration, mapping out the areas where the two
institutions would coordinate their programs. The CPS defined Bank-IFC cooperation
based on each institution’s respective core competencies. In the technology sector, the
Bank would continue to support capacity building and programs to encourage public–
private collaborative research, while IFC would provide complementary financing in
support of technologically innovative companies. IFC anticipates working on a pilot
project in conjunction with Instituto Nacional del Emprendedor to invest and provide
technical support for innovative SMEs. In infrastructure, the CPS calls for joint IBRD,
IFC, and MIGA activities to help maximize the WBG’s collective impact in the sector.

Pakistan: The FY15-19 CPS emphasizes increased Bank-IFC cooperation, particularly in
the energy sector. Energy security and the development of the power sector are
recognized as the top priorities and necessary conditions for growth in Pakistan. The
CPS defines a cooperative WBG approach in its Transformational Energy Initiative to
support new investments and reforms in the power sector. The Bank has committed
US$600 million to energy in its Development Policy Credit (DPC), while IFC plans to
engage with domestic and international sponsors to finance large private hydropower
and renewable power projects. The Bank and IFC anticipate collaborating in bringing
Central Asian power to Pakistan through Afghanistan. The Bank and IFC also plan a
joint program to promote private sector development, with the Bank’s DPC directed to
fiscally sustainable and inclusive growth to be complemented by IFC’s Investment
Climate and PPP advisory activities.

Source: Mexico FY14-19 CPS and Pakistan FY15-19 CPS.


3. Actual (Ex Post) Cooperation Findings from IEG
Reviews and Evaluations
CPEs and CASCR-Rs identify a few planned or unplanned instances of cooperation with
positive results in selected areas where Bank-IFC cooperation has led to better
development results. The extent and form of the cooperation have varied markedly across
countries. Of the eighteen CPEs, 55% found evidence of cooperation that had been
achieved during the CPE evaluation period with strong positive development outcomes
(Annex 3). The evaluations also point to some missed opportunities because of the lack
of cooperation.
                                              7


For instance, under the Colombia FY08-11 CAS, IFC and the Bank closely coordinated
their support to improve the infrastructure in the country, particularly in areas of transport
and basic services. This was complemented by investments to improve water and
sanitation services, solid waste management, urban housing development, as well as
renewable energy and energy efficiency. In Peru, Bank-IFC cooperation was focused on
specific outcomes around each institution’s core competencies to improve effectiveness.
Strategic coordination in the implementation of complementary interventions by the Bank
and IFC was a critical element in achieving CAS goals in areas such as enhancing
competitiveness and improving business climate, providing SMEs access to financial
markets, developing capital markets, and infrastructure development both with the private
sector and at the municipal level.

A joint team throughout the CAS process facilitated coordination, and helped to define
the respective roles of the Bank and IFC. In the Philippines, the FY10-12 CAS sought to
improve coordination in response to IEG’s evaluation and government feedback. The
CAS called for stronger WBG coordination with the understanding that the development
challenges the Philippines faced needed both public sector engagements to improve
policies, institutions, and incentives, as well as private sector investments. A joint team
developed the strategy based on the shared assessment of the country needs. At the Bank-
IFC strategy meeting in Manila in December 2008, the team identified infrastructure,
agribusiness, and the financial sector as the priority areas of the joint program. For the
water sector, the CAS identified the specific roles for both institutions, and how the WBG
could effectively help catalyze private sector participation in household water service
delivery. For the transport sector, the joint team assessed whether the country had
enabling policies and better institutional processes and arrangements to launch PPPs and
how IFC could add value through its advisory and investment projects to prepare and
implement PPP projects.

The Philippines was one of the six joint CAS pilot countries. In early FY09, the IDA-IFC
Secretariat, Operational Policy and Country Services (OPCS), and IFC’s Strategy
Department initiated a joint CAS pilot with an aim to improve the existing joint CAS
process. IDA-IFC Secretariat came up with the five recommendations as summarized in
Box 4.1.

The Bank’s representative on a program’s governing body is responsible for overseeing
program activities, but the Bank lacks selection criteria, terms of reference and reporting
channels for these representatives. Terms of reference and training would help clarify the
roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities of Bank staff serving on the boards of
partnership programs and bring needed clarity. Bank management has proposed (in July
2013) a Management Framework for partnership programs and Financial Intermediary
Funds that articulates principles of engagement. If implemented, this Framework could
provide the basis for more consistent decision-making related to Bank participation in
partnership programs.
                                                 8



Box 4.1. Recommendations by the IDA-IFC Secretariat on Bank-IFC Cooperation
1.    Early IFC involvement coupled with a smaller core joint CAS team would enhance IFC’s
engagement in the CAS process. Moreover, by linking its country strategy to the joint CAS and
Progress Report, IFC would further enhance its influence.
2.     The potential for Bank-IFC cooperation is primarily at the sector level. Therefore, joint
discussions, as led by Bank and IFC CAS Task Team Leaders, should emphasize key sectors
that are important to the country and where teams agree that cooperation is likely to add value.
3.    IFC planned engagement should be reflected in the results matrix. The CAS should
include a minimum number of investments, with development targets to be set or updated at the
CAS progress report stage.
4.     Cross-learning and awareness should be improved. Face-to face sessions and workshops
provide an opportunity for structured strategy discussions and to build interpersonal
relationships to better understand Bank and IFC comparative advantages and anticipated gains
from cooperation.
5.    Joint dissemination, implementation, and results monitoring should be planned and
pursued systematically with structured reviews either quarterly or semi-annually. Similarly, the
CAS Progress Report and the CAS Completion Report should also be prepared jointly.
Models of Joint Strategy Formulation. FY2009, IDA-IFC Secretariat, World Bank Group,
March 2010.



In Mexico, the FY08-13 joint CAS explored the possibility of Bank-IFC coordination by
combining IFC’s advisory work and the Bank’s capacity building work at the subnational
level. The CAS envisioned that IFC’s advisory projects would improve the business
environment at the subnational level, complementing the Bank’s efforts to raise the
efficiency of public sector institutions. The CAS sought to combine multi-sectoral
capacity building by the Bank and IFC’s business process simplification advisory
services, providing a complete package of advisory services to the subnational
governments. A rolling business plan was prepared to account for all financial and
knowledge products and packages in real time both at entry and exit, helping to maintain
program monitoring and selectivity. The CASCR noted that the constant monitoring of
the business plan confirmed the effective selection of the Bank Group’s engagement and
instruments at the subnational level, and helped assess the realism of the expected
outcomes and the quality of the results framework.

In Brazil, the FY08-11 CPS defined how the financial sector team could support the
operations of IFC and the Bank. The exchange of information and operational
experiences between IFC and the Bank was intended to maximize the WBG impact in the
area of housing finance. Under the Philippines FY10-12 CAS, the Bank and IFC defined
potential expertise and cross-country experience in the areas of fiscal and financial risk
assessment and management, crisis response, managing insolvencies, and advice on risk
reduction strategies and capital market development

Strong government ownership fosters and facilitates cooperation between the Bank and
IFC. In China and Russia, governments sent strong signals to the WBG to coordinate
                                              9


their activities. In China, FY07-12 CAS emphasized the importance of the Bank’s
advisory services, anticipated a more active IFC role, and noted the need for selectivity
and specialization while recognizing that the size and diversity of Chinese economy
would draw the Bank into a wide range of issues and activities. It also encouraged WBG
partnerships with other donors, the private sector, and civil society. For the FY03-05
Russia CAS, IFC took a comprehensive approach to develop the market for investments
in energy efficiency, renewable energy, residential energy efficiency, and resource
efficiency in coordination with the government. The Bank and IFC worked closely with
the Russian government on policies to facilitate investment in the energy-efficiency
sector, including publication of a major policy study discussed at the highest levels of
government. Also, the Egypt CPE indicates that the government’s insistence on better
Bank-IFC cooperation led to Bank and IFC working together effectively.

Regular consultations and joint social events helped the Bank and IFC country teams to
understand their counterparts’ activities and programs, leading to improved cooperation.
In the Philippines, IFC's country manager participated in the Bank's bi-weekly
management meetings, while in China, there was frequent communication between the
country offices of the Bank and IFC. For the EAP region as a whole, Bank and IFC
regional vice presidents established close communication and working relationships,
which led to selective and effective coordination in country offices across the region. In
Brazil, the Bank appointed a water specialist to liaise with IFC to coordinate activities in
the water sector. In turn, these consultations helped to support Bank-IFC coordination
with the federal government and helped to maximize each institution's comparative
advantages.

Strong and explicit support from the Bank and IFC senior management teams helped
drive enhanced cooperation. Under the FY09-12 joint CAS for India, joint teams worked
on an advisory project for the Chennai metro, and supported the Maharashtra State
Electricity Transmission Company through the joint subnational lending program. The
Bank-IFC collaboration improved markedly, yielding positive results. IFC’s
commitment to increase its business in low-income states and its priority on climate
change contributed significantly to key achievements in the overall WBG strategy. The
WBG’s country program in India indicates that cooperation was most successful when
each institution was able to draw upon its comparative strengths.

Appropriate sequencing of Bank-IFC operations was beneficial for sector development.
The Afghanistan CPE (FY01-11) found that complementary engagements and good
sequencing by IDA and IFC played a significant and influential role in the information
and communications technology sector in assisting the government to restructure and
liberalize the sector and make it attractive for private investments. An IFC investment
and MIGA guarantees supported the entry and expansion of mobile network operators to
increase competition and expand coverage from 50 percent to 80 percent of the
population. In microfinance, the Bank focused on the Microfinance Investment Support
Facility for Afghanistan, an apex institution to increase and improve the sustainability of
microfinance funding. Four years later, building upon the groundwork the Bank had
done, IFC investment and technical assistance supported the establishment of a new
microfinance bank, which provided an additional mechanism for mobilizing funds and
                                            10


delivering microfinance services. CPE concluded that without IFC’s efforts, the
microfinance industry in Afghanistan would have suffered greatly.

The engagement in private sector development issues in Rwanda by the Bank and IFC
provides another example where proper sequencing of Bank-IFC operations benefited the
client country (Box 4.2). IFC supported reforms to improve the regulatory environment,
build institutions, and attract private sector participation in key sectors with its Rwanda
Investment Climate Reform Program (RICPP I and II). The Bank helped set the
foundation of the reforms aimed at improving the business and legal environment through
two projects: Competitiveness and Enterprise Development and Governance for
Competitiveness Technical Assistance. The Bank and IFC consolidated the success of
their collaboration by building upon the Doing Business Reform, leveraging each
institution’s comparative advantage. Senior Bank leadership also provided opportunities
for Bank-IFC consultations through retreats and conferences, which helped to facilitate
knowledge-exchange and led to joint Bank-IFC operations.

Similarly, the Peru FY03-09 Country Program Evaluation indicates the value of project
sequencing. The WBG engagement in several sectors reflected effective sequencing and
complementarities of activities among WBG institutions. For example, the Bank helped
establish appropriate regulatory environments and public oversight in the financial sector
and extractive industries, and IFC followed by supporting private investment that helped
stimulate growth, broadened participation in economic activities, and increased attention
to environmental and social issues. There was good coordination between the Bank’s
Property Registration Project and IFC’s investment in Mibanco, the largest microfinance
Bank in Peru. The Bank project supported large-scale property registration in urban areas,
which then enabled Mibanco to expand its lending in these areas through use of property
collateral.

Sector level cooperation is more feasible and effective than that of country level
cooperation. The Brazil CPE, which covered the FY04-11 period, found that the Bank
and IFC coordinated their programs in the water sector, and generated sector-level
synergies. Under the joint subnational financing program, IFC extended loans to water
utility companies in Sergipe and Santa Catarina to improve their operational efficiencies.
This involved close collaboration with a sector specialist from the Bank, who was
instrumental in linking the IFC team with potential subnational clients, supporting
coordination with the federal government, and contributing to analyses on sector-specific
technical issues during the project development phase as the co-leader of the joint team.
Bank’s sector expertise proved to be particularly valuable, given IFC’s relative
unfamiliarity with the water sector in Brazil.
                                                  11



Box 4.2 Bank-IFC Cooperation in Rwanda
Rwanda offers an example of successful Bank (IDA)-IFC cooperation at the country level. . The
Bank supported the post-genocide government’s efforts to improve the business environment
with a full set of instruments: Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP )
provided support towards institutional strengthening for investment, enterprise and financial
sector development activities including establishment of legal and regulatory framework for
micro-finance institutions, modernization of the payment systems, re-structuring and
capitalization of a public bank; privatization of utilities and tea plantations, also bringing in IFC
advisory teams to help set up leasing facilities. Encouraged by their joint success, the Bank and
IFC expanded their cooperation to other fields such as special economic zones, tourism, and
Doing Business reforms. The success of Bank-IFC cooperation in Rwanda has been brought
about by these factors:
 personal familiarity between the teams;
 frequent consultations and joint missions, which led to a good understanding of the Bank and
  IFC activities for PSD;
 good coordination as Bank TTL acted as an overall PSD coordinator for both Bank and IFC;
 joint meetings and retreats, including the participation of weekly Bank meetings by IFC;
 strong advocacy of joint Bank-IFC work by a results-oriented Bank country manager;
 distribution of labor according to each institution’s comparative advantages (close
  government contacts for the Bank and process expediency for IFC);
 co-location (although the effective cooperation was taking place even before IFC opened its
  office in Rwanda as the Bank acted as a liaison for both public and private sector clients for
  IFC); and,
 government counterparts who were interested in seeing the Bank and IFC work together.
The close cooperation has also been reflected at the country strategy level. The Bank and IFC
jointly draft, discuss and approve private sector related aspects of the WBG’s Rwanda CAS. This
exercise provided an opportunity to learn the operation of the Bank and IFC.
Source: CASCR Rwanda FY09-FY13, IEG CASCR-R, staff interviews.



Kenya energy sector presents another good example where the Bank, IFC and MIGA
collaborated successfully. To support independent power producer (IPP) projects, IDA
offered a partial guarantee against the off-taker risk of Kenya Power Lighting Company
(KPLC) which provided comfort to private investors without sovereign guarantees, while
IFC worked with project sponsors to finance two IPP projects. The collaboration resulted
in four IPP projects, even exceeding the CAS targets in results framework (Box 4.3).
Bank and IFC staff participated in each other’s investment decision meetings. IDA-IFC-
MIGA Boards met in one single meeting to approve all projects, saving considerable
time.
                                               12



Box 4.3. WBG Collaboration in the Kenya Power Sector
In Kenya, collaboration among WBG institutions helped increase private investments in the
energy sector. WBG was successful in supporting IPPs by a division of labor with each institution
playing its role. The Bank offered partial credit guarantees (PCG) to backstop the payment
obligation of the public utility Kenya Power and Lighting Company (KPLC). PCG provided
comfort to private investors and lenders without sovereign guarantees as the IMF stand-by would
not have allowed the government to extend guarantees to KPLC. The Bank provided PCGs to
four IPP projects. Building on its existing relationships with sponsors, IFC financed two IPP
projects. MIGA provided political risk insurance cover for the two IPPs. The following factors
contributed to the success in Kenya:
 the Bank had a long established relationship with KPLC through a series of energy sector
  projects, which helped build its financial management. Through these engagements, the Bank
  acquired knowledge of Kenya’s energy sector;
 the Kenyan government was fully on board to increase the participation of private sector
  investments through IPPs;
 Bank and IFC teams established good working relationships;
 the Bank and IFC teams represented their respective clients, carefully avoiding potential
  conflicts of interest;
 the teams addressed the thorny financial and legal issues in the most transparent fashion by
  bringing all interested parties (KPLC, private investors, third-party financiers, government
  officials, as well as the team members from IDA, IFC and MIGA) to a joint meeting in DC;
 mid-management in all three institutions were fully supportive of the joint operation; and,
   incentives were aligned between the Bank and IFC as approvals of both Bank and IFC
    projects were needed for IPP projects to materialize, which led to a coordinated approval
    process with the participation of TTLs in respective decision meetings.
Source: CASCR FY10-FY13, CASCR-R FY10-FY13, and staff interview.




FY13 Results and Performance (RAP) found that the cooperation in the infrastructure
sector led to better development results. IFC-supported PPPs, mostly in the infrastructure
sector, have performed better when IFC involvement was coordinated with the Bank’s
sector reforms, supported by client commitment and political will, and had experienced
sponsors. A review of PPP advisory and investment projects undertaken by IFC in Africa
confirmed the importance of client commitment and political will as top drivers for the
success of PPP advisory projects. IFC’s nonfinancial additionality through technical
expertise during due diligence, was as important as its financial additionality in PPP
investments in Africa.

Power sector project in Uganda showed that coordinated implementation and sustained
collaboration among WBG yield positive development results. Given the high complexity
and risks associated with Uganda’s Bujagali hydropower project, the Uganda FY05-09
CPS recognized that sustained WBG collaboration was necessary to attract private
investors and ensure long-term project viability. Bank-IFC activities were coordinated
                                                      13


well, with the Bank taking the lead role at the sector level in supporting power sector
reforms and providing Partial Risk Guarantees (PRGs), while IFC focused on lender
coordination and due diligence. Moreover, the Bank and IFC adopted a pro-active
communication strategy, encouraging regular communications between the Bank, IFC,
external donors and the Government. This was further bolstered by the existence of good
professional working relationships and knowledge sharing between Bank and IFC staff
(see Box 4.4).


Box 4.4. Development Impact of a Joint WBG Project in Uganda
The Bujagali hydro project (US$798 million) consisted of the development, construction, and
maintenance of a run-of-the-river power plant with a capacity of up to 250 MW on the River
Nile. WBG’s joint financing package was approved in April 2007, which comprised a US$130
million IFC loan, a PRG of US$115 million from the IDA, and an investment guarantee of
US$115 million from MIGA. The Bank also approved US$300 million loan in April 2007 for
power sector support until the Bujagali project is commissioned to reduce short-term power
shortages and financial imbalances.
The IPP, Bujagali Energy Limited (BEL), has been operating profitably since 2012 after it
started its operation in August 2012. According to the March 2013 article by International Water
Power & Dam Construction Group, 10 the full commissioning of the Bujagali dam was a
landmark moment, as it eliminated day and night load-shedding completely in Uganda. The
project also demonstrated that large-scale private power projects could be built in sub-Saharan
Africa.
Bujagali also led to the closures of two thermal power plants and the reduction in the usage of
two thermal plants. Project Finance Magazine awarded its 2007 African Power Deal of the Year
to the project. IFC’s DOTS assigned highly satisfactory rating for overall development outcome
as it met all the socio-economic and financial measures of impact for the project.
Source: Project related documents, including PAD, CRRs, DOTS, and staff interview.



Benefits of the Bank-IFC cooperation are not limited to the infrastructure sector. The
FY12 RAP noted that a review of 10 IFC extractive industries projects with XPSRs
completed in 2008–10 found that strong and timely links to relevant Bank support for
policy and institutional reforms were associated with better development outcome
ratings. Such links help mitigate the considerable risks associated with extractive
industries projects and risks of governance problems leading to unsatisfactory project
outcomes. Similarly, evaluations of IFC- or MIGA-supported infrastructure projects
underline the importance of alignment between public and private sector interests,
including a fair risk allocation in public-private partnerships, and of the quality of the
regulatory environment for project success.

Communication between the Bank and IFC country offices is critical for intra-WBG
awareness, knowledge exchange, and cooperation. The Peru CPE noted that WBG
cooperation was not systematic at the staff level, which led to missed opportunities to

10
  This article can be found at http://www.alstom.com/Global/Power/Resources/Documents/Brochures/bujagali-
uganda-kaplan-hydro-plant-advertorial.pdf.
                                                          14


deliver a stronger WBG country program. While cooperation at the country strategy
development level was strong, there was less interaction and cooperation between the
Bank and IFC staff at the operational level. Although the Bank and IFC are located in
adjacent buildings in Lima, both the Bank and IFC staff reported to the Peru CPE team
that they were often unaware of what project teams in the same sectors were doing.
Reverse was true in the case of Egypt. The Bank and IFC are co-located in Cairo, where
IFC’s hub for the Middle East and North Africa Region is also located. The co-location
of the Bank and IFC offices was credited as a factor for the close working relationships
between the Bank and IFC staff.

Governments’ lack of familiarity with IFC activities limited cooperation. Through the
consultation process with relevant stakeholders, the Brazil CPE team noted that the
Brazilian government agencies generally had little experience in interacting directly with
IFC, and their knowledge about IFC operations was limited. 11 The Brazil CPE concluded
that the combination of the lack of systematic demonstration of WBG synergies and the
government’s limited familiarity with IFC and MIGA operations hampered opportunities
for strategic dialogue to maximize the potential synergies that the WBG as a whole could
provide.

In some countries, changes in government policy also affected the level of Bank-IFC
cooperation. IEG evaluated the WBG’s FY99-07 country program in Egypt, a period
during which the Government emphasized private sector development, public-private
partnership, and privatization. The Egypt CPE noted that the level of cooperation
increased during the CPE period with a shift toward more private sector involvement.
The Government of Egypt also requested a more coordinated engagement in private
sector development (PSD). As a response, the Bank increased its activities focused on
PSD, including in the financial sector.

Missed opportunities for the Bank and IFC cooperation were also found by IEG’s country
and sector level evaluations. IEG's 2013 Forest Sustainability Evaluation finds that the
Bank and IFC had highly complementary operations in the state of Para, Brazil. While it
had the potential to contribute to enhanced success for IFC investments and relevance of
Bank operations, Bank-IFC collaboration was absent. Drawing on IEG’s evaluation
evidence on the WBG cooperation, IEG Evaluation Brief in 2010 12 cited the examples of
the missed opportunities, which include disjointed Bank and IFC activities in the
Brazilian Amazon, infrastructure in Nigeria, and private sector development in Turkey.
For each of these examples, IEG alluded to lost client value from what could have been
achieved with greater communications and cooperation, albeit without specifics.

IEG also finds that Bank-IFC cooperation is not always worthwhile, as costs may
outweigh benefits. 2007 IEG Evaluation on Development Results in Middle Income
Countries (MIC evaluation) assessed the cooperation among the WBG, including the
detailed review of WBG cooperation case reviews for 15 countries. Through staff
interviews during the case studies, MIC evaluation notes that cooperation may increase
internal transaction costs as a result from different processing procedures, legal,

11
     An IEG team evaluating WBG’s agribusiness performance observed similar situations in Argentina and India.
12
     This brief was written in early 2009 as information for the Board and management.
                                                              15


procurement, and financial arrangements that are used by the Bank and IFC respectively.
These costs may be compounded by unfamiliarity among staff of the other institution’s
procedures and decision-making processes. Moreover, aside from financial costs,
cooperation may result in a slower response times as Bank and IFC work to coordinate
their activities.

A staff survey for the MIC evaluation showed concerns over the cost of cooperation, with
a particular concern that it could reduce the WBG’s competitiveness. 13 This same survey
revealed a view that cooperation could impose additional work upon staff themselves,
without a corresponding recognition from management. Accordingly, MIC evaluation
points to the need for the Bank and IFC to carefully calibrate the desired level of
cooperation at the outset, with thorough analyses of the specific circumstances underlying
the proposed project, including a metric-based analysis of anticipated costs and the
corresponding value likely to be achieved from Bank-IFC cooperation.

4. Key Findings of the Note
This section summarizes key findings of the Note as follows:

     •    Despite the increase in the number of “joint” CASs, cooperation between the
          Bank and IFC has varied significantly across countries, with the majority of
          country strategies failing to include specific proposals to implement planned
          WBG cooperation. Instead, references to cooperation were most often perfunctory
          in nature, while a similar absence of reference to cooperation were observed in the
          respective results matrixes. This is reflected in the low rate of implemented
          cooperation, as identified through CASCR-Rs.

     •    There are structural reasons for the low levels of cooperation at the country
          strategy level: (i) IFC’s business is determined by the market demand for its
          products, which is inherently difficult to plan ahead; (ii) there are concerns for
          conflicts of interest; (iii) IFC’s strategist/economist resources are extremely
          limited; and (iv) staff incentives may need to be tailored to encourage
          cooperation.

     •    Selective Bank-IFC cooperation has the potential to improve the effectiveness and
          efficiency of WBG operations, and improve its development impact in client
          countries, while the lack of cooperation can hinder or reduce potential benefits to
          clients, lead to duplication of activities and ultimately raise operating costs.

     •    Truly joint CAS teams have led to better coordination and helped define the
          respective roles of the two institutions. Professional relationships between the
          staff members of the Bank and IFC have facilitated knowledge exchange and

13
  “Development Results in Middle Income Countries, an Evaluation of World Bank’s Support, (2007).” Cooperation Case Review In
15 countries—Angola, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Brazil, China, Egypt, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Mexico, Morocco, the Philippines, Russia,
South Africa, Ukraine, and Uruguay—IEG conducted field-based studies to assess cooperation between the Bank and IFC,
interviewing IFC and Bank staff and clients. The cases compared areas in which cooperation was proposed in CASs with what
occurred in practice. It also explored the drivers and inhibitors of cooperation among Bank and IFC staff and country teams.
                                            16


       readiness to work together. However, the Bank-IFC cooperation has been ad hoc
       under the CAS framework.

   •   Cooperation between the Bank and IFC is not always necessary or productive for
       every sector in a country. Elevating cooperation, which is an instrument, to the
       level of a goal on its own, may generate unnecessary processes, hence
       inefficiency. Benefits of cooperation depend on the sector and the stage of its
       development in a country. Since the cost of cooperation may sometimes outweigh
       the benefits of such cooperation, the careful analysis on the cost and benefit of the
       Bank-IFC cooperation is warranted at the early stage of new WBG country
       strategy formation.


5. Prospects and Challenges of Cooperation under the
New Framework
Overall, the experience with coordination between the Bank and IFC has been mixed. In
spite of some encouraging examples, synergies among and within WBG do not seem to
be explored systematically. The latest FY13 RAP concludes that cooperation between the
Bank and IFC has not been the standard way of doing business. The staff incentive
framework was not conducive to collaboration.

The new CPF process has the potential to define, guide and improve Bank-IFC
cooperation in selective areas of engagement. Not surprisingly, the previous efforts to
reduce the cultural divide between the Bank and IFC have not been very successful. The
CAS which, for internal purposes, was a budget document for the Bank, lacked the
necessary incentives for full IFC involvement. IFC has been striving to achieve the
WBG’s goals of eliminating extreme poverty and increasing shared prosperity by
focusing on providing access to finance (e.g. SME and micro-finance, support for
emerging managers through venture funds), financing infrastructure investments,
increasing competition (e.g. support for second-tier companies), and promoting
sectors/companies with a higher employment potential, also responding to market
demand and achieving acceptable returns for its investments.

WBG senior management intends to strengthen the focus of country programs with
increased emphasis on cooperation. Under CPF, IFC is expected to contribute more on
PSD issues, starting from analytical inputs and consolidating feedback from the private
sector at the initial diagnostic stage of SCD to CLR at the end of CPF exercise.

The SCD offers the potential to build upon the current CAS process by increasing Bank-
IFC dialogue and information sharing at the initial stage of the CPF. The SCD could pave
the way for a more systematic analysis of PSD issues by joint Bank-IFC teams, which has
historically been missing from the majority of CASs. This process may help address the
weaknesses discussed throughout this Note by providing a consistent framework to
define and enable potential synergies that can be generated by the Bank-IFC cooperation
in relevant, selective areas of engagement. However, for the CPF process to reflect the
WBG’s full understanding of the country conditions, IFC’s current and potential clients
should be consulted with both at the diagnostic and implementation stages.
                                                           17


Increased cooperation between the Bank and IFC at the country level should not be, in
itself, the ultimate goal of the new CPF. Instead, staff and management should view the
SCD/CPF process as a valuable opportunity to help establish a foundation for
systematically increasing opportunities for knowledge sharing, relationship building, and
where appropriate, identifying opportunities for Bank-IFC cooperation. Enhanced
monitoring and supervision should provide incentives for the implementation of the CPF.

The challenges facing the new approach are: (i) selecting areas where Bank-IFC
cooperation is most desirable (and conversely, where cooperation may not be necessary,
and/or may lead to inefficiencies or conflicts of interest); (ii) providing incentives for
both institutions to share information and build professional relationships; and (iii)
radically reducing the time and energy spent internally on bureaucratic processes of
developing country strategies. The joint Bank-IFC teams would then be able to appraise
potential areas in which cooperation could add value, reduce duplication, increase
synergies, and ultimately, improve the development impact of WBG operations in client
countries.

Under the new country engagement model, IFC needs the appropriate resources and
incentives. Management should recognize that the new approach will impose significant
staff and resource costs especially for IFC, which must be clearly budgeted for in order to
achieve the CPF's full potential in contributing to effective cooperation between the Bank
and IFC.

Regarding resources, IFC currently has a total of 23 regional strategy officers/analysts
and economists to handle strategy and cooperation at the country level. 14 For example,
only three IFC strategy officers are responsible for the EAP region as a whole. IFC did
have an Economics Department, which was dismantled in FY06. Full participation by
IFC to the CPF process would require a significant increase in the numbers of IFC
regional strategists and economists. The budgetary burden of this requirement can be
partly alleviated if the Bank economists are provided with incentives to work on private
sector issues, and IFC sector economists, results measurement specialists, and the Bank’s
sector specialists with private sector knowledge are incorporated into the new CPF
process. It is still early to reach conclusions, however, some of draft SCD concept notes
indicate that IFC’s involvement for the CFP process would remain relatively small in
terms of staff resources and the budget allocations. 15

Neither the Bank nor IFC has so far provided any explicit incentives for the cooperation.
However, under the new country engagement model, staff and manager performance
reviews may include references to cooperation across WBG institutions. This decision, if
it takes place, has the potential to provide incentives for the staff of the respective
institutions to learn and understand the modus operandi, strengths and limitations of the
other institution, and may eventually lead to effective cooperation. Another option for the

14
   In addition, strategists/economists are also responsible for calculating economic rates of return for a large number of
IFC projects (for example, 582 projects in FY13) and briefing IFC management on economic issues. IFC did have an
Economics Department with a small number of staff, bit it was dismantled in FY06.
15
   The SCD Concept Note for El Salvador estimates IFC’s staff contributions to be 3 weeks out of the total 33 staff
week associated with the preparation for SCD. Botswana SCD Concept Note lists a total of 40 team members for the
preparation of SCD, including TTL and peer reviewers. Two IFC staff are expected to participate in the SCD.
                                                        18


WBG to consider is to encourage staff rotations between the Bank and IFC, so that an
increased number of the WBG staff will have better understanding of the Bank or IFC
operations.

Despite the limitations of the current CAS process, this Note has identified a number of
factors that help drive the cooperation between the Bank and IFC. They include: (i) the
existence of good professional working relationships and knowledge sharing between
Bank and IFC staff (e.g. Rwanda, Uganda, and Kenya), (ii) strong government leadership
or ownership (e.g. Egypt, Russia and China) for Bank-IFC cooperation, (iii) commitment
by senior management to facilitating cooperation and/or well-developed working
relationships between senior Bank and IFC managements (e.g. EAP); and, (iv) close
communication (and co-location, where business conditions permit) between Bank and
IFC country offices (e.g. Egypt). 16

This Note found ample evidence that the current CAS framework, process and
implementation requires substantive reforms in order to deliver more effective WBG
country programs, and that new CPF framework provides an opportunity to enhance
Bank-IFC cooperation to serve the overarching twin goals of the WBG.

IEG will continue to evaluate the new WBG country engagement model under the CPF to
assess whether it is leading to improved WBG cooperation and better development results
at the country level. Moreover, as joint implementation plans formally become part of
the new CPF process, IEG will evaluate whether these management exercises contribute
to more effective WBG’s cooperation at the country level.




16
  Recently, the significance of communications between Bank and IFC country offices has become crucial, as both the
Bank and IFC succeeded in decentralizing their operations to regional hubs and countries. While seemingly elemental,
consistent communications between the Bank and IFC is an important contributor to better understanding and
cooperation between the two institutions at the country level.
                                               19


Appendix A. Country Assistance Strategies
                                 CAS       Date of review   Cooperation   Cooperation
      Country        Region
                                Period         (FY)          Planned       Realized
Bolivia               LCR     (FY10-11)        2012            Yes           Yes
Bosnia and
                     ECA      (FY08-11)        2012            Yes           Yes
Herzegovina
Brazil                LCR     (FY08-11)        2012            Yes           Yes
Colombia              LCR     (FY08-11)        2012            Yes           No
Costa Rica            LCR     (FY09-11)        2012            No            No
Gabon                 AFR     (FY05–09)        2012            No            Yes
Honduras              LCR     (FY07-10)        2012            No            Yes
Jordan               MENA     (FY06-11)        2012            Yes           No
Kazakhstan            ECA     (FY05–11)        2012            No            Yes
Lao People's
                      EAP     (FY05-11)        2012             No            No
Democratic
Mongolia             EAP       (FY05-10)       2012            Yes           No
Mozambique           AFR       (FY08-11)       2012            Yes           Yes
Peru                 LCR       (FY07-11)       2012            Yes           Yes
Russian Federation   ECA       (FY07-11)       2012            Yes           No
Serbia               ECA       (FY08-11)       2012            Yes           Yes
Sri Lanka            SAR       (FY09-12)       2012            Yes           Yes
Turkey               ECA       (FY08-11)       2012            Yes           Yes
Ukraine              ECA       (FY08-11)       2012            Yes           No
Uzbekistan           ECA       (FY08-11)       2012            Yes           No
Vietnam              EAP       (FY07-11)       2012            No            No
Belarus              ECA       (FY08-11)       2013            No            Yes
Benin                AFR       (FY09-12)       2013            No            No
Burundi              AFR       (FY09-12)       2013            Yes           Yes
China                EAP       (FY07-12)       2013            Yes           Yes
Congo, Democrat      AFR       (FY08-11)       2013            Yes           Yes
Congo, Republic      AFR       (FY10-12)       2013            Yes           Yes
Croatia              ECA       (FY09-12)       2013            Yes           No
Ethiopia             AFR       (FY08-12)       2013            NA            NA
Gambia, The          AFR       (FY08-11)       2013            Yes           No
Guatemala            LCR       (FY09-12)       2013            Yes           Yes
India                SAR       (FY09-12)       2013            Yes           Yes
Indonesia            EAP       (FY09-12)       2013            Yes           Yes
Malawi               AFR       (FY07-10)       2013            No            No
Nicaragua            LCR       (FY08-12)       2013            Yes           No
Niger                AFR       (FY08-11)       2013            No            No
Papua New Guinea     EAP       (FY08-12)       2013            Yes           Yes
Senegal              AFR       (FY07-10)       2013            Yes           No
Timor Leste          EAP       (FY06-11)       2013            Yes           No
Zambia               AFR       (FY08-11)       2013            Yes           Yes
Burkina Faso         AFR        FY10-12        2014            Yes           Yes
Ghana                AFR         FY–12         2014            No            No
Guinea               AFR      FY04-FY13        2014            No            No
Kyrgyz Republic      ECA       (FY07-13)       2014            No            No
Liberia              AFR      (FY09–11)        2014            No            No
Mauritania           AFR        FY08-11        2014            No            No
Moldova              ECA        FY09-13        2014            Yes           Yes
Poland               ECA      (FY09–13)        2014            No            No
South Africa         AFR       (FY08-12)       2014            Yes           No
Armenia              ECA      (FY09–13)        2014            Yes           Yes
Mexico               LAC       (FY08-13)       2014            Yes           No
                                                        20


   Appendix B. IEG CASCR Reviews:
                                                                Date of     IEG
                                                  CASCR
        Country           Region   CAS Period                   review    Outcome    IEG Performance Ratings
                                                Review Period
                                                                 (FY)      Rating
                                                                                    Bank       IFC      MIGA
Bolivia                    LCR      (FY10-11)     (FY10-11)     2012       MU       MU         MU        NA
Bosnia and Herzegovina     ECA      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MS        MS        MS         S
Brazil                     LCR      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MS       MU         MS        NA
Colombia                   LCR      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MS        MS        MS        NA
Costa Rica                 LCR      (FY09-11)     (FY09-11)     2012       MS       MU         NA        NA
Gabon                      AFR     (FY05–09)      (FY05–11)     2012       MU        U         NA        NA
Honduras                   LCR      (FY07-10)     (FY07-11)     2012       MU        MS        NR        NA
Jordan                    MENA      (FY06-11)     (FY06-11)     2012       MS         S         S        NA
Kazakhstan                 ECA     (FY05–11)      (FY05–11)     2012       MU       MU         MS        NA
Lao People's Democratic    EAP      (FY05-11)     (FY05-11)     2012        S        MS        NA        NA
Mongolia                   EAP      (FY05-10)    (CY05–11)      2012       MS        MS        MS        MU
Mozambique                 AFR      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MU       MU         MS        MS
Peru                       LCR      (FY07-11)     (FY07-11)     2012       MS        MS         S        MS
Russian Federation         ECA      (FY07-11)     (FY07-11)     2012       MS        MS        MS        NR
Serbia                     ECA      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MU        MS        MS         S
Sri Lanka                  SAR      (FY09-12)     (FY09-12)     2012       MS        MS        MS        NA
Turkey                     ECA      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MS        MS         S         S
Ukraine                    ECA      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MU         S        MS        MS
Uzbekistan                 ECA      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2012       MU       MU         MS        NA
Vietnam                    EAP      (FY07-11)     (FY07-11)     2012       MS        MS         S        NR
Belarus                    ECA      (FY08-11)     (FY08-12)     2013       MU        MS        NA        NA
Benin                      AFR      (FY09-12)     (FY09-12)     2013       MS        MS        NA        NA
Burundi                    AFR      (FY09-12)     (FY09-12)     2013       MS        MS        MU        NA
China                      EAP      (FY07-12)     (FY07-12)     2013        S         S         S        NA
Congo, Democrat            AFR      (FY08-11)     (FY08-12)     2013       MS         S        NA        NA
Congo, Republic            AFR      (FY10-12)     (FY10-12)     2013       MU        MS        NA        NA
Croatia                    ECA      (FY09-12)     (FY09-13)     2013       MS        MS        NA        NA
Ethiopia                   AFR      (FY08-12)     (FY08-12)     2013       MS        MS        NA        NA
Gambia, The                AFR      (FY08-11)     (FY08-12)     2013       MU        MS        NA        NA
Guatemala                  LCR      (FY09-12)     (FY09-12)     2013       MS        MS        MS        NA
India                      SAR      (FY09-12)     (FY09-12)     2013       MS         S        NA        NA
Indonesia                  EAP      (FY09-12)     (FY09-12)     2013       MS        MS        NA        NA
Malawi                     AFR      (FY07-10)     (FY07-12)     2013       MU        MS        NA        NA
Nicaragua                  LCR      (FY08-12)     (FY08-12)     2013       MS         S         S        NA
Niger                      AFR      (FY08-11)     (FY08-11)     2013       MU        MS        NA        NA
Papua New Guinea           EAP      (FY08-12)     (FY08-12)     2013        U       MU          S        NA
Senegal                    AFR      (FY07-10)   (FY07-CY10)     2013       MU        MS        MS        NA
Timor Leste                EAP      (FY06-11)     (FY06-11)     2013       MU       MU         NA        NA
Zambia                     AFR      (FY08-11)     (FY08-12)     2013       MU       MU         NA        NA
Burkina Faso               AFR       FY10-12       FY10-12      2014       MS        MS        NA        NA
Ghana                      AFR        FY–12        FY08–12      2014       MU       MU         NA        NA
Guinea5                    AFR     FY04-FY13     FY04-FY13      2014       NR        NR        NA        NA
Kyrgyz Republic            ECA      (FY07-13)   (FY07-CY12)     2014       MS        MS        NA        NA
Liberia                    AFR     (FY09–11)      (FY09-12)     2014       MS        MS        NA        NA
Mauritania                 AFR       FY08-11       FY07-12      2014        U        U         NA        NA
Moldova                    ECA       FY09-13       FY09-13      2014       MS        MS        NA        NA
Poland                     ECA     (FY09–13)      (FY09-13)     2014       MS         S        NA        NA
South Africa               AFR      (FY08-12)     (FY08-12)     2014        U       MU         NR        NR
Armenia                    ECA     (FY09–13)      (FY09-13)     2014       MS         S        NR        NR
Mexico                     LAC      (FY08-13)     (FY08-13)     2014       MS        MS        NR        NR
Nigeria                    AFR      (FY10-13)     (FY10-13)     2014       MS        MS        NR        NR
Jamaica                    LAC      (FY10-13)     (FY10-13)     2014       MS       Good       NR        NR
                                                  21



Appendix C: IEG Country Program Evaluations
                FY
                         CPE
 Country       Period                                          CPE: Cooperation Details
                         FY
              Reviewed
 Honduras      95-05     2007   No evidence presented
                                CPE provides limited details on cooperation aside from noting that IFC is focused its
Madagascar     95-05     2007   activities on the financial sector, provision of technical assistance and SME development
                                – jointly with IDA.
                                Mali was a pilot country for the joint IDA/IFC micro, small, and medium enterprise
                                (MSME) initiative in Sub-Saharan Africa. Two other investments provided guarantees to
   Mali        95-00     2008
                                microfinance institutions (MFIs) and involved significant IDA-IFC collaboration, though
                                they were later cancelled due to changed market conditions.
                                Bank-IFC collaboration increased from mid-2004, which was underpinned by a shift in
                                government policy to emphasize private sector development, public-private participation,
                                and privatization. Other factors that contributed to improving the country partnership
  Egypt        99-07     2009
                                between IFC and the Bank include increasing Bank activities focused on private sector
                                development and the financial sector; government pressure for a coordinated World
                                Bank Group role; moreover, both the Bank and IFC have offices in Cairo.
                                Through collaboration on country analytical reviews and diagnostics, a consistent WBG
                                approach was maintained in BEE issues including through establishment of the BICF,
Bangladesh     01-08     2009
                                work on special economic zones, and development of a common framework through
                                which to support PPPs in infrastructure.
 Indonesia     99-06     2009   No evidence presented
                                Despite significant joint efforts between IFC and the World Bank, the desired results in
  Uganda       01-07     2009   the energy sector were not realized. A limited impact was seen in SME access to finance
                                and in developing housing finance, despite reforms in these areas.
                                IFC made efforts to coordinate its work with the World Bank, particularly in the power
  Nepal        03-08     2010
                                and financial sectors, and investment climate reform.
                                Given the emphasis on private participation in infrastructure, there was potential for
  Nigeria      98-07     2010   stronger Bank-IFC collaboration. The cooperation that did occur was largely passive in
                                nature; the focus has been on information sharing rather than joint action.
                                WBG engagement in several sectors reflected effective sequencing or complementarities
                                between the Bank and IFC. However, in some areas, greater operational interaction
   Peru        03-09     2010   between IFC and Bank teams may have enhanced the overall contribution of the WBG.
                                Further, while cooperation at the country strategy development level was strong, there
                                was less interaction and cooperation between the Bank and IFC at the operational level.
 Cambodia      99-06     2010   No evidence presented
                                IFC, together with MIGA and IDA, participated in the Mozal project. Moreover, IFC
Mozambique     01-08     2011
                                and IDA recently improved their coordinated efforts to support SME development.
Timor-Leste    02-11     2011   No evidence presented
                                Successful World Bank Group-wide cooperation and effective donor coordination
West-Bank                       proved to have a multiplier effect in ensuring better results. Particularly, Bank analytic
               01-09     2011
and Gaza                        activities were well-sequenced and coordinated with IFC investments to maximize
                                development impact.
                                The Financial Sector Strengthening Project was a joint World Bank and IFC operation,
Afghanistan    02-11     2012   with the World Bank supporting capacity building in DAB to improve off-site banking
                                supervision and IFC focusing on improving the financial infrastructure.
  Liberia      03-11     2012   No evidence presented
                                Both the Bank and IFC have accumulated experience in different aspects of private
                                participation in infrastructure investment, but apart from a few cases in the water sector,
                                very little was done to explore potential synergies. Demonstrating the value of Bank
  Brazil       04-11     2013
                                Group collaboration remains a challenge for the future in Brazil. There have been
                                successful cases of Bank Group collaboration in Brazil, but the efforts to promote intra-
                                Bank Group synergies were not systematic during the evaluation period.
                                The CPE indicates that there was satisfactory cooperation, though few details of this are
  Tunisia      05-13     2014
                                presented.
                                     22



Appendix D: Thematic, Global and Corporate
Evaluations
  -   Results and Performance of the World Bank Group, Independent Evaluation
      Group (IEG), 2013.

  -   Results and Performance of the World Bank Group, IEG 2012.

  -   The World Bank Group and the Global Food Crisis, an Evaluation of the
      World Bank Group Response, IEG 2013.

  -   Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development, an Evaluation of
      World Bank Group Experience, IEG 2013.

  -   Evaluation on Development Results in Middle Income Countries, IEG 2007.
