                                                                                                     95161




                    China and Africa:
    Expanding Economic Ties in an Evolving Global Context
                                     Miria Pigato and Wenxia Tang*

                                                    March 2015

                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Economic growth in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) has averaged roughly 5 percent per year over the
past decade, improving living standards and bolstering human development indicators across the
continent. Stronger public institutions, a supportive, private sector–focused policy environment,
responsible macroeconomic management, and a sustained commitment to structural reforms have
greatly expanded opportunities for countries in SSA to participate in global markets. In recent
years, many countries in the region have benefited from an increasingly favorable external
environment, high commodity prices, and an especially strong demand for natural resources by
emerging economies, particularly China.
China-SSA trade has rapidly intensified since the late 1990s and in 2013 China became SSA’s
largest export and development partner. China now represents about a quarter of SSA’s trade, up
from just 2.3 percent in 1985. About one-third of China’s energy imports come from SSA—a vital
trade link, especially as energy consumption rates in China have grown by more than twice the
global average over the past 10 years. Despite increased efficiency and rising domestic production,
rapid urbanization and heavy industrialization continue to spur robust Chinese demand for coal,
oil, and natural gas. China’s banks, notably the People’s Bank of China, the China Development
Bank, and the Export-Import Bank of China (Exim Bank of China), have supported large-scale
investments in African infrastructure. More than 2,200 Chinese enterprises are currently operating
in SSA, most of them private firms (UNCTAD 2014; Shen 2014). Diplomatic contacts and
bilateral aid and cooperation initiatives have greatly expanded, 1 and the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation, formed in 2000 and convened every three years, has become the primary institutional
vehicle for China’s strategic engagement with SSA.


*
  Miria Pigato, Practice Manager, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, World Bank; Wenxia Tang,
consultant, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice, World Bank. The authors gratefully acknowledge the
financial support of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Trade & Development 2 (MDTF-TD2).

                                                            1
After expanding at an average annual rate of 10 percent through the early 2010s, growth of China’s
annual gross domestic product (GDP) has slowed to 7.5 percent during the past two years. The
doubling of Chinese capital stock between 2005 and 2011 has resulted in excess production
capacity and the rate of return on capital is declining. Meanwhile, average household consumption
remains low by international standards. The Government of China has responded by initiating a
gradual process of economic rebalancing designed to shift the economy toward a more sustainable
model, one in which growth will be driven less by investment and exports and more by domestic
consumption. These policies will be complemented and sustained by the continued implementation
of deep structural reforms to promote a more open and competitive private sector. The rebalancing
of the Chinese economy will not only have profound domestic implications, but will also
permanently alter the pattern of international trade and investment flows, presenting important
challenges and enormous opportunities for developed and developing countries.
China’s lower growth rate and changing demand composition are already affecting commodity
prices, with particularly strong impacts on global mineral markets. At the same time, the tripling
of Chinese labor costs over the past decade has enabled countries with large labor forces and low
wage rates to compete with Chinese producers and even attract investment from Chinese firms.
This report explores the impacts of China’s economic rebalancing on its trade and investment
partners in SSA. The report uses information from the Government of China as well as
international databases and individual case studies to review the latest available information on
China-SSA trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) 2 flows. The objective of the report is to
contribute to an informed policy debate as to how SSA can leverage the complex changes taking
place in the Chinese economy to accelerate growth, enhance development outcomes, and
maximize the benefits of SSA’s increasingly strong ties to one of the world’s most dynamic
economic powers.
Key Findings
Despite China’s slowing economic growth rate, Chinese trade with SSA has continued to expand
at a rapid clip, reaching a total value of US$170 billion in 2013. China has recently overtaken
Europe as SSA’s largest export partner, and regional economies are becoming increasingly
vulnerable to changes in international commodity prices and Chinese demand conditions. The
composition of China-SSA trade is not symmetric, with SSA importing a wide variety of consumer
and capital goods and overwhelmingly exporting primary commodities, especially oil, minerals,
and other natural resources. This pattern has become even more extreme during the past five years;
agricultural goods now represent a mere 5 percent of SSA’s total exports to China.
China’s rapid industrialization has accelerated growth in many countries in SSA, particularly those
rich in natural resources. Because of their widely different export profiles, there is no evidence
that China has displaced exports from SSA in third-country markets such as the European Union
or the United States. Many of China’s and SSA’s exports are highly complementary. Chinese
exports to SSA have benefitted consumers, but they have also put significant pressure on domestic
producers. Firms in SSA have faced significant competition from Chinese imports during the
2000s, partly because of the appreciation of the real exchange rate. The appreciation of the real
exchange rate in SSA countries was the result of the peg of the exchange rate to other currencies
(in particular to the euro), the surge in exports of natural resources and raw materials, and the
amount of financial assistance from international donors, including China.


                                                2
SSA is not fully exploiting its comparative advantage in agriculture to expand its export presence
in the Chinese market. An analysis of the evolution of revealed comparative advantage (RCA)
over the past 10 years shows that Africa has been losing competitiveness in all sectors, with the
only exception being certain non-oil natural resources, mostly ores and metals. SSA manufactures
have the lowest RCA of any export category and the competitiveness of agricultural exports
appears to be eroding over time. These trends likely reflect structural inefficiencies and logistical
constraints in Africa; however, China’s relatively high tariffs on agricultural imports (15.1% in
2014, down from 18.1% in 2002) may have also contributed. .
Chinese FDI in Africa surged during and in the wake of the global financial crisis and continues
to diversify. FDI flows from China to SSA rose from next to nothing a decade ago to US$3.1
billion in 2013, representing 7 percent of global FDI flows to SSA. China has established itself as
a major investor in Africa, a dynamic that runs parallel to China’s growing trade involvement.
China’s FDI stock in SSA reached nearly US$24 billion in 2013, reflecting an annual growth rate
of 50 percent between 2004 and 2013 (MOFCOM 2003-2014; Copley, Maret-Rakotondrazaka,
and Sy 2014). The global economic crisis of 2008–09 marked the beginning of a major expansion
in China’s engagement with SSA, in scope and in scale. While some foreign investors moved out
of Africa, Chinese firms, already well leveraged at home and encouraged by the Chinese
government, expanded their overseas operations. Mergers and acquisitions (M&As) surged and
commercial lending and other financing arrangements set new records. Oil and other extractive
industries remain the sectors of greatest interest to Chinese investors (at 30 percent of total
investment), but Chinese FDI has recently undergone a marked diversification into financial
services, construction, and manufacturing. Geographically, Chinese FDI continues to be
concentrated in Nigeria, South Africa, Sudan, and Zambia, but it now extends across the continent.
Chinese manufacturing firms have invested in countries as diverse as Ethiopia, Nigeria, and
Tanzania. A review of a sample of Chinese greenfield investments in SSA during the past decade
reveals the rising importance of the manufacturing sector and the increasingly significant
contribution of Chinese FDI to job creation in countries across the continent.
Because of different methodologies, official data on Chinese financial flows differ from data from
other sources. . For example, the China Global Investment Tracker (CGIT) puts total Chinese FDI
in Africa at US$61 billion in 2013, more than double the official figure. In 2013, the value of
Chinese contracts, a proxy for committed investment flows, reached a staggering US$82 billion
(CGIT, American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation 2014). China’s financial
involvement in Africa is complex and multifaceted and reliable information is not always easily
accessible. However, Chinese banks appear to have provided some US$52.8 billion in loans to
African countries during 2003–11, equal to 2.8 percent of China’s GDP. Similarly, little
information is available on investment flows from countries in SSA to China. SSA’s investment
in China appears to be increasing, but remains marginal by international standards. South Africa
is the only country in SSA with a significant investment presence in China (leaving aside Mauritius
and Seychelles, which are offshore financial centers). Financial flows from countries in SSA to
China are dominated by trading companies, often subsidiaries of Chinese firms supporting the
business of their parent companies.
Despite the broad diversification of Chinese investment, countries in SSA have attracted limited
attention from large, export-oriented firms. Although there are exceptions—notably the Huajian
shoe factory in Ethiopia and the Yuemei group in Nigeria—Chinese investment has tended to focus
on activities related to extractive industries, such as the processing of mineral ores or the

                                                 3
production of liquid natural gas. Faced with rising domestic labor costs, Chinese firms have started
to relocate some of their low-skilled production lines to other countries. SSA offers abundant,
inexpensive labor and proximity to Europe, but so far only a few Chinese manufacturers have
moved to exploit these advantages. As a result, the percentage of goods produced by Chinese firms
in SSA for export to Western markets is insignificant. Consequently, African firms are not position
themselves within China’s value chains, which limits the impact of Chinese investment on
economic transformation and export diversification in SSA. Several explanations have been
offered for SSA’s weak integration into Chinese and other international production networks,
including the small size of many economies in SSA, the low capacity of critical public institutions,
the absence of complementary private markets, bottlenecks in essential infrastructure, and the lack
of regional integration, all of which can make the establishment of large economies of scale very
difficult to achieve.
The rise of Chinese private investment, particularly in the manufacturing sector, could have a
transformative impact on growth and development. The rise of Chinese private investment in
Africa is a new and relevant phenomenon. Most interestingly, private companies are not creating
establishments in government-sponsored special economic zones (SEZs), which are in fact
struggling to survive. The easing of regulations on outward FDI in the mid-1990s and after the
global economic crisis, coupled with the increasing saturation of the domestic market in China,
are the key drivers of this development. In many countries (e.g., Tanzania), Chinese small private
firms are becoming a significant source of jobs and income and have productivity-enhancing
spillovers, but they are competing with domestic firms in the local market.
Over the longer term, leveraging Chinese investment to support broad-based growth will require
policies designed to boost the competitiveness of sectors in which China’s economic rebalancing
may create a comparative advantage for SSA. To date, few African countries have been able to
benefit from large-scale Chinese investment outside the resource sector. However, as China’s
growth slows and its economy shifts toward a more consumption-driven model, it is likely that
global demand for resource imports will slow as well. Countries with the most heavily
concentrated export mix, particularly in the mineral and oil sectors, are the most vulnerable to
China’s economic rebalancing and should be ready to adopt measures to mitigate the impact of
negative terms-of-trade shocks. By contrast, as wage rates in China continue to rise and firms
refocus their attention on domestic demand, countries in SSA will be well positioned to exploit
emerging opportunities for investment in export-oriented manufacturing. Ethiopia provides an
instructive example, as its inexpensive yet relatively skilled labor force, coupled with the
government’s proactive efforts to court Chinese investors, have enabled Ethiopia to attract
substantial investments in labor-intensive industries. Infrastructure enhancement, workforce
development, and good-governance reforms offer a promising strategy for many countries in the
region. Although the establishment of industrial zones has yielded mixed results, several salient
success stories warrant careful attention. This report discusses how Africa could take advantage of
the untapped opportunities offered by China’s progressively intensifying investment and trade ties
with SSA. It is hoped that this analysis will enrich the ongoing dialogue between policy makers,
private firms, and civil society regarding China’s increasingly important role in the growth and
development of Sub-Saharan Africa.




                                                 4
                                  1. CHINESE TRADE WITH SSA

Trade flows between China and SSA have expanded dramatically during the past decade and show
no signs of slowing in the foreseeable future. China-SSA trade has grown by a remarkable 26
percent per year since 1995, reaching a total value of US$170 billion in 2013. China now accounts
for roughly 24 percent of SSA’s total trade, up dramatically from a mere 2.3 percent in 1995. Yet
despite China’s enormous and rapidly increasing importance in the region, its economic
relationship with SSA is not symmetric: in 2013, SSA’s share in Chinese trade reached just 3
percent (Figure 1).
                                  Figure 1 Trade between China and SSA

       a. Relative trade shares                         b. Imports, exports, and trade balance




SSA’s exports to China have grown faster than its imports, generating a large, positive trade
balance. SSA’s exports are concentrated in primary commodities, especially extractable resources
such as oil, uranium, aluminum, zinc, phosphates, copper, nickel, and gold, as well as renewable
resources and agricultural commodities such as timber, rubber, coffee, cotton, cocoa, fish, and
cashew nuts. While SSA’s export mix is narrowly focused on the primary sector, Africa’s imports
from China are extremely diversified. Consumer goods represent the largest share, particularly
         Figure 2 SSA’s Imports from China     textiles and clothing, footwear, and consumer
                                                 electronics, but capital goods such as
                                                 machinery, commercial electronics, and
                                                 transportation equipment are also well
                                                 represented (Figure 2). Chinese products are
                                                 often less expensive than similar products
                                                 imported from the European Union or the
                                                 United States, which makes the products
                                                 attractive to firms and individual consumers
                                                 alike. In addition, Chinese capital goods imports
                                                 are boosted in the presence of large Chinese-
                                                 financed infrastructure projects, which
                                                 frequently        include       country-of-origin
                                                 procurement rules.


                                                   5
For decades, SSA exports were overwhelmingly oriented toward Western markets, but the region’s
trade relationships are shifting; in 2013, China became SSA’s most important export partner. China
now accounts for 27 percent of SSA’s exports, compared with 23 percent for the European Union
and 21 percent for the United States. While India accounts for just 9 percent, the growth rate of
SSA’s exports to India is second only to that of China.
                                Figure 3 Trade Flows: SSA and Selected Partners

       a. Trade volume (Base year 1997 = 100)               b. Destination of SSA’s exports




                                                          Figure 4 Sector Distribution of SSA’s Exports to China
SSA’s exports to China continue to be
dominated      by     renewable      and
nonrenewable natural resources (annex
3). Moreover, the share of natural
resources in the export mix has been
increasing over time. Resource exports
accounted for about 84 percent of all
SSA’s exports to China between 2008
and 2013, up from about 79 percent
between 2002 and 2007. Manufactures
have remained roughly stable over time,
but agricultural exports have essentially
collapsed (Figure 4). SSA is currently
exporting a very small percentage of
agricultural      products,      despite
indications that demand for these
commodities is likely to increase in the
future.




                                                      6
Evolution of China-SSA Trade

SSA’s exports to China can be grouped under four major categories: agricultural goods, oil, non-
oil natural resources, and manufactures. SSA has a revealed comparative advantage3 (RCA) in the
first three categories and a comparative disadvantage in the fourth. SSA’s largest comparative
advantage is in oil production, although its RCA has declined since the early 2000s. By contrast,
SSA’s competitiveness in non-oil natural resources, which include non-oil energy products and
minerals, has increased over time. Manufactures have the lowest RCA and the competitiveness of
agricultural exports has decreased significantly since the early 2000s (Table 1).
                             Table 1 SSA’s Exports to China and Revealed Comparative Advantages
                                             Share of total exports to                        Compound annual
                                                                            SSA’s RCA
                                                   China (%)                                   growth rate (%)
                                               2003           2013       2003       2013          2003–13
        Agricultural goods                     12.25           5.53      2.18       1.3             5.82
        Oil                                    62.64          55.62      3.58       2.93           15.75
        Non-oil natural resources              10.44          25.04      1.6        1.73           15.04
        Manufactures                           14.67          13.81      0.54       0.39            6.28
                                                                                    4
       Source: World Integrated Trade Solution data, World Bank; mirror data .
       Note: RCA = revealed comparative advantage; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.

SSA’s agricultural exports to China have the lowest compound annual growth rate of any trade
category. Although production volumes and logistical constraints in SSA are driving this trend,
significant trade protections in the Chinese market also play an important role. China’s average
most-favored-nation tariffs on agricultural goods are relatively high; they increased from 15.9
percent in the mid-2000s to 22.5 percent in 2014.

Overall, SSA has benefitted from China’s increasing demand for SSA’s exports of oil, minerals,
and metals (Roache 2012; Broadman 2007). Exporters in SSA have faced very limited
competition from Chinese exports in third markets, as many of SSA’s export products are
unrelated, or even complementary, to Chinese products in key markets such as the European Union
and the United States. However, there is evidence that imports from China have had a negative
effect on SSA’s exports within the African regional market, and local producers and traders have
faced serious competition from Chinese imports throughout SSA (Figure 5).

During 2000–11, almost 70 percent of African countries saw their real exchange rate
appreciating—the result of pegging their currency to other currencies (in particular to the euro);
the surge in exports of natural resources and raw materials; and the amount of financial assistance
from international donors, including China. In a recent paper, Guillaumont Jeanneney and Hua
(2014) show that although Africa’s exports to China have contributed to SSA’s economic
growth, China’s strong import penetration has negatively affected the manufacturing sector and
may prevent Africa from diversifying its own industry. The countries most affected were those
pegging their currency to the euro. Since the renimbi was de facto pegged to the dollar and the
dollar was undervalued relative to the euro, these African countries were handicapped in
competing against China’s manufactured goods. In a study of 44 South African manufacturing
industries during 1992–2010, Edwards and Jenkins (2014) show that labor‐intensive industries
were particularly badly affected by Chinese imports and the negative impact on employment was

                                                                7
more than proportional to the output displacement. Moreover, exports of manufactures to China
did not add significantly to industrial growth in South Africa. But Edwards and Jenkins also find
evidence that Chinese imports contributed toward lower producer price inflation in South Africa,
which in turn contributed to a moderation in consumer price increases.
                        Figure 5 Price Gap between Chinese and African Producer Prices




There is no question that low prices for imported Chinese goods have benefitted African
consumers, as well as producers who rely on imported inputs and capital goods. Figure 5 shows
the gap between SSA’s producer prices5 and the prices of Chinese imports in SSA. The comparison
reveals a considerable price gap between China’s and SSA’s products of about 50 percent.

More troubling, African firms do not appear to be positioning themselves within Chinese value
chains; as a consequence, trade with China is having a limited impact on economic transformation
and export diversification. Imports of inputs and components for processing and assembly have
been a major channel for technology transfer in many countries in Asia, particularly China. In the
standard model, a firm from a developed country would export inputs or components to a less
developed country with lower wage rates, where a local subsidiary would use those inputs to create
a finished product for export to one or more third-country markets or even back to the original
developed country. For many countries, this pattern of trade has had highly positive economic
impacts by facilitating technology transfer and catalyzing the development of dynamic
comparative advantage. Input exports from China to SSA for processing and subsequent re-export
to the U.S. consumer market have increased in recent years but remain extremely small as a share
of total trade (Pigato and Gourdon 2014). Consequently, there is very little evidence that China is
using Africa as a platform for its global exports or integrating African firms into its international
value chains.




                                                      8
                             2. CHINESE FDI IN AFRICA, 2000–13
Global FDI Trends, 2000–13

Following a contraction in           Figure 6 FDI Flows, Global and by Developmental Group, 2000–13
2012, global FDI flows began                                   (US$ billions)

growing again in 2013 to reach
US$1.45 trillion, still below their
2007 peak just before the global
financial crisis (UNCTAD
2014). Since 2009, FDI flows to
developed economies 6 have
fluctuated substantially, while
transition    and       developing
economies have experienced a
steady increase in investment. In
2012, for the first time ever, the
share of FDI received by
developing economies exceeded
the share received by developed economies. In 2013, developing economies widened this lead,
hitting a new high of US$778 billion or 54 percent of global FDI (Figure 6).

Global FDI flows to SSA increased by 9.2 percent in 2013 to reach US$45 billion, slightly faster
than the global FDI growth rate. Meanwhile, SSA’s share of global FDI inflows increased from an
average of 1.8 percent between 2000 and 2009 to 3.1 percent in 2013. The region’s main sources
of investment are the European Union and the United States, which in 2012 accounted for 26
percent and 9 percent of total FDI inflows, respectively. South Africa is also a major investor in
SSA’s market, representing 4 percent of total investment, followed by China, India, Singapore,
and Japan (Copley, Maret-Rakotondrazaka, and Sy 2014; UNCTAD 2014).

Chinese FDI in SSA

Data on outbound Chinese FDI flows, as reported by the Ministry of Commerce of the People’s
Republic of China (MOFCOM),7 do not conform to the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) definition of FDI (see annex 2), which only takes private investment
into account. By contrast, the MOFCOM definition includes private and public financial flows
(e.g., from state-owned enterprises) from the mainland China; it does not include Chinese owned-
FDI passing through offshore finance centers (e.g., Hong Kong SAR, China; the Cayman Islands;
Luxembourg; etc.). Anecdotal evidence also suggests that many companies, although required by
law to register with government agencies, choose not to go through the time-consuming
registration process (Shen 2013).




                                                9
Data from MOFCOM (2014)                         Figure 7 Chinese FDI Flows to SSA, 2003–13
                                                              (US$, millions)
indicate that Chinese FDI flows
to SSA reached US$3.1 billion
in 2013, which would
represent 7 percent of global
investment in the region
(Figure 7), a share that is
rapidly approaching that of the
United States (7.3 percent).
Moreover, the total stock of
Chinese FDI in SSA was
recorded at almost US$24
billion, about 5 percent of
SSA’s total FDI stock. These
figures would imply that the
presence       of      Chinese
investment in SSA remains limited. For example, the ratio of Chinese FDI to SSA’s aggregate
GDP was just 1.5 percent in 2012, albeit up sharply from 0.1 percent in 2003. Meanwhile, the
share of Chinese FDI in SSA’s aggregate gross fixed capital stock would appear to have grown
quite modestly, from 0.37 percent in 2003 to 0.78 percent in 2012. However, when considering
these figures, the caveats about data quality and completeness noted above should be borne in
mind.

Although modest in relative terms, the volume of Chinese FDI in SSA has increased substantially
over the past decade. 8 A dramatic spike in FDI in 2008 was largely attributable to a single
transaction, the US$5.6 billion purchase of a 20 percent share in South Africa’s Standard Bank by
the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC) (The New York Times 2007). The deal was
approved in 2007 and completed in March 2008; it was a major operation for ICBC, one of China’s
largest state-owned commercial banks. This acquisition reflects a relatively new strategy for
Chinese investment in Africa in which Chinese investors purchase shares in reputable and
experienced firms (although without holding a controlling interest) and then work in partnership
to explore new business opportunities. Through its alliance with Standard Bank, ICBC now has
access to an extensive financial network in SSA that will greatly facilitate the provision of financial
services to Chinese investors in the region. If this deal is excluded, the data would show Chinese
FDI in Africa remaining constant during 2008–09 and then gradually increasing from 2010
onward.

Chinese FDI in SSA Is Becoming Increasingly Diversified

The scope of Chinese investment in SSA is extensive. Chinese FDI reaches almost all African
countries, even those that do not have a formal diplomatic relation with China (e.g., São Tomé and
Príncipe). However, the bulk of Chinese investment is focused on a few resource-rich countries.
South Africa is the top destination, followed by Zambia, Nigeria, Angola, and Zimbabwe (Figure
8a; MOFCOM 2014). At the sector level, however, the most recent data reveal a growing
diversification in investment targets. At 30 percent, extractive industries still account for the largest
share,9 but finance, construction, and manufacturing now make up half of total FDI.

                                                   10
Investment in these sectors is particularly strong in countries that have benefitted from more recent
FDI, such as Ethiopia. Other important sectors include commercial services (5 percent); scientific
research, technology and geological prospecting (4.1 percent); wholesale and retail commerce (2.7
percent); agriculture (2.5 percent); and real estate (1.1 percent) (Figure 8b; State Council of China
2013).
                                      Figure 8 Chinese FDI in SSA, by Country and Sector
    a. Chinese FDI in SSA, by country (US$, millions)               b. Chinese FDI in SSA, by sector (percent)




Factor Intensity and Job Creation

Very little is known about the relative factor intensity of Chinese investment in SSA and its
contribution to job creation. However, a database produced by fDi Intelligence, a division of The
Financial Times specialized in tracking FDI investment projects around the world, 10 allows for
some limited analysis of these dynamics. This database only includes greenfield projects by
Chinese investors in SSA. Between January 2003 and June 2014, a total of 156 projects were
recorded, a small sample even compared with the MOFCOM statistics, but one that provides
important information on the relationship between investment and job creation.
                                                 Table 2 FDI Trends by Sector
          Business activity                         No. of         Jobs created            Capital investment
                                                   projects
                                                                Total    Average   Total ($USm)         Average
          Manufacturing                               77        39,343      510     13,283.90           ($USm)
                                                                                                         172.50
          Sales, marketing, and support               23         350        15        148.70              6.50
          Extraction                                  14        14,897     1,064     8,726.10            623.30
          Education and training                       8         606        75        73.00               9.10
          Business services                            8         142        17        84.00               10.50
          Construction                                 4        5,661      1,415     4,649.70           1,162.40
          Electricity                                  4         264        66       1,351.00            337.80
          Retail                                       4         154        38        32.10               8.00
          ICT and Internet infrastructure              4        1,290       322      1,850.00            462.50
          Logistics, distribution, and                 3         400        133       146.80              48.90
          transportation
          Other business activities                   7         1,094       156      149.60               21.40
          Total                                      156        64,201      411     30,494.90            195.50
       Source: fDi Intelligence, The Financial Times Ltd.
       Note: FDI = foreign direct investment; ICT = information and communications technology.




                                                              11
Of the 156 projects recorded in the database, manufacturing projects have generated the highest
number of total jobs at about 39,000, as indicated in Table 2. Manufacturing projects represent
more than half of all jobs created by the entire sample, although their average capital investment
is smaller than that of projects in other sectors. This suggests that the relocation of Chinese
manufacturing firms to SSA could have a substantial impact on employment. Extractive industries
and the construction sector averaged the largest project size in investment and job creation.
Government-led projects tended to be much larger than private projects and created more jobs
(Table 3).
                                       Table 3 FDI Trends for Public and Private Projects
          Type of FDI                            Jobs created                     Capital investment
                              No. of projects   Total    Average       Total ($USm)                    Average ($USm)
         Government-led             93          46262     497            21509.46                       231.28
         Private-led                56          16032     286            6079.94                        108.57
       Source: fDi Intelligence, The Financial Times Ltd.

The 10 Chinese companies with the highest-value investment projects in the sample account for
38 percent of total job creation and 39 percent of total capital investment. Among these firms,
Beiqi Foton Motor, a state-owned automotive manufacturing company, created the most jobs on
average (Table 4).
                            Table 4 Top 10 Chinese Firms by Job Creation and Capital Investment
     Company name                                               Jobs created                       Capital investment
                                                        Total     Average per project     Total ($USm)         Average ($USm)
     Huawei Technologies                                2,188            198                 1,626.60              147.90
     China Nonferrous Metals Mining                     6,064            606                 2,011.80              201.20
     ZTE                                                2,404            240                  406.70                40.70
     China Central Television                            241              30                  85.90                 10.70
     China National Petroleum                           1,071            153                 6,773.00              967.60
     Powerway Renewable Energy                          1,347            269                  133.30                26.70
     Beiqi Foton Motor                                  9,407           2,351                 663.50               165.90
     The China-Africa Development Fund                   76               19                  44.00                 11.00
     ZTS International Industrial (G-Tide)               656             218                  71.00                 23.70
     GAIG Stock (Guangzhou Automobile)                  1,008            336                  128.20                42.70
       Source: fDi Intelligence from The Financial Times Ltd
       Note: ZTE = Zhongxing Telecommunication Equipment Corporation; ZTS = Zhong Trading Solutions


Comparing Official Chinese FDI Data with Alternative Sources

 A number of research institutions and international agencies have begun to specialize in tracking
information on Chinese FDI from other sources, including corporate websites and news reports.
The China Global Investment Tracker (CGIT), a joint initiative of the Heritage Foundation and
the American Enterprise Institute, is a publicly available database that identifies and records
Chinese FDI projects over US$100 million. Its coverage is wider than that of the MOFCOM
database, and it includes projects that are implemented through offshore financial centers.
However, CGIT does not include projects below US$100 million, a very high threshold that many
Chinese investors do not reach. In addition, the data are based on publicly stated commitments,
which often differ from actual investment flows.




                                                                12
Comparing Chinese FDI in SSA as              Figure 9 Total Chinese FDI in SSA, CGIT, and MOFCOM Estimates
recorded by MOFCOM/UNCTAD                                              (US$ billions)
with the figures in CGIT reveals a
remarkable difference between the two
data sets (Figure 9). The CGIT
estimate is US$61 billion, more than
2.5 times the MOFCOM estimate of
US$24 billion. However, although the
total values differ significantly
between the two databases, the
direction and trend of Chinese
investment in SSA appear to be
similar.

Contracts record investment commitments, not actual investment flows. Nevertheless, contracts
may be treated as a reliable indicator of future investment values. By 2013, the value of Chinese
contracts in SSA had reached US$82
billion, after increasing by an average of              Figure 10 Chinese Contracts in SSA
US$13.5 billion per year since 2009                    (US$  value and % of total contracts)
(Figure 10). Moreover, SSA accounted
for about 35 percent of the total value of
Chinese contracts worldwide. The
majority of these investment contracts
were in the energy sector, particularly
hydropower, and in the transportation
sector, including roads, seaports, and
aviation         projects.      Inadequate
infrastructure is a major constraint on
economic growth across SSA. Thus,
China’s involvement in infrastructure
projects may help African firms to
improve integration into regional and
international markets.

SSA’s FDI in China Remains Marginal

Despite the intensifying economic ties between China and SSA, investment overwhelmingly flows
in one direction. FDI from SSA to China amounted to US$1.4 billion in 2012, just 1.2 percent of
the total FDI that China received that year. Most SSA-to-China FDI originates from Mauritius,
Nigeria, Seychelles, and South Africa. It includes investments in the petrochemicals,
manufacturing, and wholesale and retail industries, among other sectors.
Mauritius is not only the largest African investor in China, but ranks 15th among all investors in
China. This is largely the result of a “double taxation” agreement between Mauritius and China
and Mauritius’ status as an offshore financial center.11 However, even this amount is insignificant
as a percentage of China’s total inbound FDI (0.92 percent in 2011) and Mauritius’s total outbound
FDI (2.09 percent in 2011) (MOFCOM 2013).


                                                13
MOFCOM’s “Annual Cooperative Audit Online of National Foreign Investment Enterprises” in
2012 indicates that Mauritius has the largest number of investment projects in China of any country
in SSA. 12 Mauritius is followed by Seychelles, another offshore financial center, with South Africa
and Nigeria ranking third and fourth, respectively (Table 5).
                    Table 5 Top 10 Countries in SSA by Number of Investment Projects in China
                Country                Number of projects       Share of SSA’s total projects in China
                                                                                (%)
                Mauritius                    1,657                             54.76
                Seychelles                    877                              28.98
                South Africa                  201                               6.64
                Nigeria                       67                                2.21
                Liberia                       20                                0.66
                Angola                        17                                0.56
                Zambia                        15                                0.50
                Madagascar                    11                                0.36
                Sudan                         11                                0.36
                Ghana                         10                                0.33
                Namibia                       10                                0.33
               Source: MOFCOM 2012.

South Africa invested more than half a billion dollars in China between 2002 and 2012. Several
well-known South African multinationals operate in China, including SAB Miller and Sasol, an
energy conglomerate that has invested in China’s coal mining sector (Zafar 2007). However, the
overall number of South African investment projects has been declining steadily, from 92 projects
in 2003 to just 19 in 2012 (MOFCOM 2013).

Nigeria is the fourth largest African investor in China. Very little is known about these
investments, although limited firm-level details are available in the MOFCOM audit described
above. Trading companies represent 42 percent of all Nigerian firms in China, followed by
companies that produce business consulting (14 percent); equipment and machinery (9 percent);
textiles, apparel, and footwear (9 percent); chemicals (5 percent); and metal products (5 percent).
Trading companies play an essential role in exporting Chinese goods worldwide. In 2005, an
estimated 22 percent of Chinese exports passed through trading intermediaries (Ahn, Khandelwal,
and Wei 2010). Nigerian trading firms specialize in exporting Chinese products to Africa and
importing African products to China. Some Nigerian trading firms are subsidiaries of a Chinese
parent company, often in the manufacturing sector. These subsidiaries are usually registered in
China with a small amount of capital. Their primary mission is to support and facilitate the
operations of the Chinese parent firm in Nigeria or other countries in SSA.


                3. CHINESE FDI IN SSA DURING THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS
The 2008–09 global financial crisis had only a limited impact on SSA, in part because African
financial markets were small and relatively insulated from global volatility. And despite the
ensuing drop in commodity prices and export volumes, many African countries had sufficient
resources to pursue fiscal stabilization policies. Much of Africa’s impressive resilience during this
turbulent period was the result of sustained macroeconomic reforms undertaken during the
previous decade, including measures to liberalize trade, improve the business environment,
privatize many state-owned enterprises, and strengthen critical infrastructure such as power grids

                                                        14
and road networks. However, the effect of the crisis on commodity prices had a strong negative
impact on extractive industries worldwide and many firms operating in SSA were forced to close.

China reacted vigorously to the crisis, launching a set of policy measures designed to boost demand
and stimulate the economy. The benchmark lending rate was repeatedly lowered and the
government initiated a large-scale investment program. Important tax reforms were also
introduced, including a significant move toward a value-added tax system. As demand in Western
economies stagnated, Chinese exporters looked to alternative markets, particularly in Africa. The
Chinese government supported this shift by further easing requirements and decentralizing
regulatory procedures for FDI and broadening financing channels for firms to operate overseas
(Rosen and Hanemann 2009). Anecdotal evidence suggests that while many Western private
investors were withdrawing from Africa, Chinese state-owned enterprises with access to
subsidized credit from their policy banks, including the Exim Bank of China and the China
Development Bank, were able to expand their operations not only in SSA but worldwide, as
evidenced by a surge in acquisitions. For example, in June 2009, China Petrochemical Corporation
(Sinopec), a state-owned oil company, bought Addax Petroleum Corporation, a Swiss oil
exploration firm, for US$7.24 billion to secure oil reserves in West Africa and Iraqi Kurdistan
(Bloomberg 2009). China’s total outbound FDI more than doubled in 2008, even as global FDI
flows fell by 15 percent, and in 2009, while global FDI plummeted, Chinese outbound FDI still
managed to grow by 1 percent (Salidjanova 2011). Ultimately, the global financial crisis
accelerated a process of outbound investment liberalization that China had initiated in the early
2000s. This was also reflected in the surge in Chinese financing for overseas infrastructure
projects, as Chinese infrastructure financing commitments rose from US$3.5 billion in 2007 to
US$5.1 billion in 2009 (Chen 2013).
Many local governments in China introduced new preferential loan programs designed to support
export-oriented companies during the crisis. For example, in December 2008, the Exim Bank of
China’s Zhejiang Branch established a fund of RMB100 million (roughly US$16.3 million) to
provide loans to export-oriented firms in Ningbo with a view to expanding their operations. 13 In
April 2009, CITIC Bank’s Wenzhou Branch, supported by the Wenzhou Municipal Bureau of
Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation, provided RMB3 billion (just under US$500 million) in
loans to 100 export-oriented local enterprises; half of this amount was devoted to helping local
firms explore new opportunities in Figure 11 Chinese Outbound M&A in the Mining Sector, from
international markets. In addition to these          2003 to the First Half of 2010 (number of operations)
credit programs, CITIC Bank also created a
comprehensive package of preferential
measures designed to lower the operating costs
of local firms (Wenzhou Daily 2009).

An analysis of Chinese M&As during the crisis
confirms the conclusion that many Chinese
firms viewed the financial crisis as an
opportunity to increase their presence in global
markets. For instance, Chinese M&As in the
mining sector increased throughout the 2000s,
reaching their peak in 2009 (Figure 11; Deloitte



                                                   15
and Mergermarket Group 2010b), even as many international competitors faltered.14

Chinese M&As are expected to increase in the coming years, with Africa as their primary focus.
In a 2010 survey of mining corporations based in Mainland China, 76 percent of the industry
experts interviewed believed Africa to be the most important region for future Chinese M&As
(Figure 12; Deloitte and Mergermarket Group 2010a).15 According to the Mergermarket Group’s
comprehensive review of African M&As in 2013, two of the top 10 M&As in Africa were between
Chinese companies and partner firms in SSA. China National Petroleum Corporation’s acquisition
of a 28 percent stake in ENI East Africa SpA from Eni SpA was the single largest deal, valued at
US$4.2 billion. In addition, Sinopec Group acquired a 10 percent stake in Marathon Oil
Corporation’s Angolan offshore oil and gas field block 31, valued at US$1.5 billion (Mergermarket
Group 2013).
                 Figure 12 Focus of Future Chinese Mining Sector FDI, Industry Expert Survey, 2010




                     3. RISE OF CHINESE PRIVATE INVESTMENT IN SSA
The traditional focus of government-led FDI in Africa has been on natural resources16 and related
infrastructure, with Chinese companies building the pipelines, power stations, roads, railways, and
seaports necessary for the extraction and transportation of oil, minerals, and other natural
resources. As in the rest of the world, China’s engagement in Africa has involved a tight link
between trade, investment, and finance. In what has become known as the “Angola model,” this
relationship starts with the Exim Bank of China providing a line of credit, often at concessional
rates, to the government of a resource-rich country. This credit line is secured by a long-term
agreement on resource rights. Chinese firms then compete for the various large infrastructure
projects that will undergird the development of the country’s resource sector (e.g., oilfields, mines,
processing facilities, transportation networks, etc.) and will be paid directly by the Exim Bank of
China.
While the natural resource sector remains an important focus of Chinese FDI, manufacturing
investment in SSA has increased significantly in recent years, reaching 15.3 percent of total
Chinese FDI in SSA in 2012. China developed its domestic manufacturing industry by
concentrating its cheap labor and abundant capital in SEZs and industrial parks. Within these
zones, land and infrastructure bottlenecks were relieved and a competitive business environment

                                                        16
was established. This approach to industrialization has been so successful that variations on the
model have been adopted in other countries, such as Cambodia, Mauritius, and Vietnam. However,
China’s original set of competitive advantages has been shifting over time; among other key
changes, manufacturing wages have risen from US$150 per month in 2005 to US$500 in 2012,
reaching more than US$600 in coastal regions (Dinh et al. 2012).

Faced with increasing labor costs, many Chinese manufacturing firms have begun relocating to
countries with lower wage rates, including several in SSA. China has facilitated this outsourcing
process by officially sponsoring the construction of five SEZs in African countries (see table A4.6
in annex 4) to attract public and private investors. Although these SEZs were set up five to seven
years ago, all are still in their initial development phase. Four of the five SEZs currently have fewer
than 10 tenant companies operating in them (Mauritius’ Jinfei Zone had no companies operating
in it prior to July 2013). Many firms have signed memoranda of understanding but have not yet
begun to invest. However, those companies that have started operating in the SEZs typically
employ a large number of African workers: Zambia Chambishi currently employs 7,973 workers,
Nigeria Ogun employs 1,619, and Ethiopia Eastern employs 1,600 (Bräutigam and Tang 2011).

Although government-led SEZs have thus far achieved only mixed results in SSA, the rise of
Chinese private investment has been spectacular. In 2002, only four of the 21 Chinese FDI projects
in Africa recorded by MOFCOM were privately owned; by 2013, 1,217 of 2,282 projects were
private, or 53 percent of the total (Shen 2014). With regard to value, private investment made up
about 45 percent of total Chinese FDI in SSA. This remarkable increase in private investment is
largely due to a set of measures adopted since 2004 aimed at promoting Chinese investment
overseas.17 In addition, a number of funds were set up to support investment in overseas processing
activities, for example the Central Foreign Trade Development Fund of RMB2.3 billion (around
US$375 million). In 2006, the MOFCOM and the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce
published a draft document calling on the government to recognize the international significance
of Chinese private enterprise and establish policies to support Chinese firms in “going global”18
(Cheng and Ma 2007; MOFCOM and All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce 2006).
Finally, China began offering tariff-free entry to more than 400 products (mostly manufactured
goods) produced in Africa’s low-income countries, further incentivizing Chinese firms to relocate
to SSA. The number of Chinese manufacturing projects in SSA rose from just seven in 2004 to 75
in 2013. During 2009, at the height of the global financial crisis, some 70 Chinese manufacturing
projects were underway in Africa and 66 of these projects were privately owned (Shen 2014).

Impact of Chinese FDI in SSA: Case Studies

Rigorous economic research on the impact of Chinese FDI in Africa is limited. Fu and Buckley
(2014) claim that during 2004–10, Chinese FDI had a positive and significant impact on the long-
run economic growth of recipient economies. Overall, Chinese FDI appears to have contributed
positively to economic growth in Africa, even more than it has in Asia. Moreover, Chinese FDI
has become a significant source of job creation in several developing economies. Weisbrod and
Whalley (2011) focus their analysis on the period from 2005 to 2007, just before the global
financial crisis. During this period, GDP growth in SSA averaged 6 percent and Chinese FDI flows
accounted for up to 10 percent of total inbound FDI in several African countries. Weisbrod and
Whalley use growth accounting to determine how much of this growth can be attributed to Chinese
FDI. In addition, they run counterfactual growth accounting experiments for 13 countries in SSA,

                                                  17
excluding Chinese FDI, for 2005–07 and 2003–09. Overall, they find that Chinese FDI contributed
an additional 0.5 percentage points or more to GDP growth, confirming the economic importance
of Chinese investment.

Even less is known about the specific economic impact of Chinese private FDI in Africa, although
some important insights can be gleaned from an analysis of individual cases. A closer look at
several major investment projects of Chinese private firms in Tanzania, Nigeria, and Ethiopia is
presented below.

Tanzania. Tanzania has been a major recipient of Chinese investment, the total stock of which
had surged to US$541 million by 2012.19 Moreover, a rising share of this investment has originated
from the private sector. Between 2002 and 2013, the number of Chinese private firms operating in
the country increased from 30 to about 300, with much of the increase recorded in the past couple
years (Figure 13a).

According to estimates from the Chinese Business Chamber of Tanzania, Chinese private
companies have created more than 150,000 jobs, although more conservative estimates put the
number at 80,000 jobs. By contrast, Tanzania’s SEZ, the Export Processing Zone Authority, has
only created 15,100 jobs. Many Chinese firms provide on-the-job training to local workers and
some also send Tanzanian managerial staff to China for training programs lasting from three
months to one year. Most Chinese private firms are involved in low-tech, labor-intensive industries,
such as light manufacturing and assembly, and many compete with domestic companies in
Tanzania (Figure 13b). In several instances, local workers have started their own enterprises after
leaving Chinese firms.
The distribution of firms by sector shows that the majority of Chinese companies produce for the
local market rather than for export. Over 90 percent of Chinese firms are located in the country’s
largest city, Dar es Salaam. Interview respondents reported that the key reasons for this include its
substantial market, its large labor force, and Dar es Salaam’s status as a major commercial center.
                          Figure 13 Chinese Firms in Tanzania and Distribution by Sector
       a. Chinese firms in Tanzania                 b. Distribution of Chinese firms in Tanzania, by sector




Nigeria. The story of the Yuemei Group and its textile-focused industrial park in Nigeria provides
an interesting example of the opportunities that African markets offer to Chinese firms. The
Zhejiang-based Yuemei Group, a private textile manufacturer, currently owns 10 clothing factories

                                                       18
and sales offices in Cameroon, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, and Togo (Yuemei Group
2014a). However, between 1992 and 2009, it was solely an exporter shipping its products to
Nigeria through Hong Kong SAR, China, trading companies. In 2000, Zhiming Xu, the CEO of
Yuemei, decided to eliminate its intermediaries and set up its own sales office, China-Nigeria
Textile Co., Ltd, in Lagos. The move gave Yuemei direct access to Nigeria’s huge textile market
and its profit margin increased from 5 to 40 percent in a single year (Shen and Zhang 2009). In
2004, concerned that competition with China could wipe out its domestic textile industry, Nigeria
adopted strict regulations on textile imports. Yuemei responded by investing US$1.2 million to
establish a domestic manufacturing subsidiary, Jinmei (Nigeria) Textile Co., Ltd, in Nigeria’s
Calabar Free Trade Zone (Yuemei Group 2014b). In 2006, the company set up a second overseas
textile factory in Senegal through an initial investment of US$5 million (Shen and Zhang 2009).

In 2007, the Yuemei Group invested more than US$50 million to construct the Yuemei-Nigeria
Textile Industry Park, China’s first overseas textile industrial park, with a complete production
chain of spinning, weaving, embroidery, knitting, and garment making (Nan 2012). By 2009, five
textile firms had moved into the park and employed an estimated 1,000 local workers (FOCAC
2010). During the global financial crisis, Yuemei Group was able to increase its production and its
sales continued to grow. The company’s CEO said that he “does not feel the influence of the
financial crisis very much,” because “the average profit margin for domestic textile enterprises in
China is 5 percent, and they surely cannot afford to lower the price. However, my margin is still
25 percent in Africa, providing a much larger space [to buffer its effects]” (Xinhua 2009).

Ethiopia. The experience of the Huajian Group in Ethiopia is among the most well-known Chinese
success stories in SSA. Huajian, one of China’s largest shoe manufacturers, invested about US$10
million in an Ethiopian factory to manufacture shoes for export to Europe and North America.
Based on the achieved success, Huajian plans to further cooperate with the Government of Ethiopia
and construct a dedicated industrial park with an estimated investment of US$2 billion. Ethiopia
has many advantages as a manufacturing center, including a large pool of educated workers, very
low wage rates, a strategic geographical location, and a government determined to transform its
economy by attracting foreign investors. During an interview, the chairman of Huajian Group
emphasized the importance of the Ethiopian government’s investment policy: “We told the
Ethiopian Prime Minister that we want nothing but a piece of land and good policy, and with that
we will create a large number of exports within a decade” (FOCAC 2011). Before starting the
operation, Huajian sent more than 90 Ethiopian workers to China for training to improve their
technical skills (Huajian Group 2012). The Huajian factory opened in January 2012 and,
remarkably, turned a profit in its very first year. In 2013, its 3,500 workers produced two million
pairs of shoes (Hamlin, Gridneff, and Davison 2014).

China’s Economic Rebalancing and Its Implications for SSA

In the past, one of the key motivations for Chinese manufacturing firms to invest in Africa was to
circumvent U.S. and EU trade restrictions on Chinese products and gain access to Western markets
under preferential trade agreements with countries in SSA. This is no longer the case. In 2007–08,
Gu (2009) interviewed 80 Chinese private firms located in Ghana, Madagascar, and Nigeria. The
respondents indicated that the top reasons for investing in Africa were to gain access to largely
untapped local consumer markets and avoid competition in an increasingly saturated Chinese
market.

                                                19
More recent surveys by the China Council for the Promotion of International Trade (CCPIT) in
2012 confirm and expand on these findings. Respondents identified the saturation of the Chinese
domestic market (28 percent of the respondents) and access to lower production costs (16 percent)
as the primary incentives for Chinese firms to move to Africa (Figure 14). As low-cost investment
opportunities become increasingly scarce in China, many firms are moving abroad in search of
new opportunities. This is particularly true in the labor-intensive manufacturing sector, as real
wages for semi-skilled Chinese workers have been rising at a rate of 15 percent per year since
2008, while wage rate increases in most developing countries have remained in the low single
digits. It is expected that China will ultimately outsource much of its labor-intensive manufacturing
sector to lower-cost countries (Lin and Wang 2014), thus opening opportunities for many countries
in SSA.

                    Figure 14 Chinese Firms’ Reported Motives for Investing in Africa, 2008–12




Following its explosive growth over the past two decades, China is now an upper-middle-income
country and rivals the United States for the title of world’s largest economy. However, China’s
growth rate is slowing as the economy transforms, “rebalancing” from an intensive focus on
production and exports to a more service-oriented, consumption-based model. Meanwhile, the
government continues to pursue important structural reforms to give a greater role to the private
sector, improve efficiency, and spur innovation (Dollar 2014). As this process of rebalancing
continues, it will entail positive and negative effects for China’s trade and investment partners in
SSA.

On the one hand, lower Chinese growth rates will decrease global demand for oil, minerals, and
other natural resources and reduce international prices for these commodities, which are among
the chief exports of many countries in SSA. Given that China has accounted for almost the entire
increase in global demand for minerals and metals (e.g., copper, iron, lead, nickel, tin, and zinc)
over the past 20 years, slowing growth in China will have a major impact on world commodity
markets (Figure A4.1). Recent work by the International Monetary Fund (Drummond and Liu
2013) has shown that a 1 percentage point decrease in China’s real domestic fixed investment
growth rate would lower SSA’s aggregate export growth rate by 0.6 percentage points. As one
might expect, this effect appears to be larger for resource-rich countries and the countries in SSA
that are likely to be most severely impacted are exporters of mining products, including the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Guinea, South Africa, and Zambia. However, China’s rebalancing
also presents new export opportunities in the agricultural and manufacturing sectors. Countries in

                                                       20
SSA that have sound investment frameworks, stable governance, and a healthy investment climate
will be well positioned to leverage these opportunities.


                        4. CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
China’s rebalancing has the potential to bring great benefits to countries throughout SSA, but it
also comes with considerable challenges. During the past two decades, China’s growth has driven
most of the global increases in the demand for commodities such as oil, aluminum, copper, and
iron ore. As China moves toward a more consumption-driven growth model, the demand for and
price of these commodities are expected to be significantly lower than in the past. This will have
a direct, negative impact on the commodity producers in Africa; but it will also offer new
opportunities to restructure and transform African economies. Countries that have become
excessively reliant on natural resource exports will need to step up efforts to diversify their
industrial and agricultural sectors, while a decline in fiscal revenues from the resource sector may
force difficult choices in public spending. Policy measures to help raise the competitiveness of
sectors that are suffering from import competition from China may also help SSA to respond well
to the expected changes.

The window of opportunity created by China’s rebalancing will not remain open indefinitely, but
a pragmatic reform agenda designed to increase productivity in the tradable sector and enhance
cooperation with the Chinese public and private sectors could greatly accelerate growth and
enhance livelihoods in countries throughout SSA. In many countries, this will require a clear shift
in policy and institutions toward a pro-growth environment. The specific reforms may not be those
that China undertook, but they should be comprehensive enough to demonstrate commitment to a
pro-growth strategy despite political changes and exogenous shocks.

Africa can become more competitive. Historically, China’s competitiveness was built on a number
of factors including low unit-labor costs, an abundance of subsidized credit, and an undervalued
exchange rate. In addition, China’s accession into the WTO in 2001, together with a series of
reformative approaches, has brought about enhancement in total factor productivity (TFP), which
has also strengthened China’s competitiveness. The recent rise in labor costs and appreciation of
the renminbi will reduce China’s export competitiveness, at least in the near term, and benefit low-
cost developing countries. African countries have a unique opportunity to attract strategic, job-
creating investments from foreign investors, including China. For this to happen, countries in SSA
need to develop a supportive policy framework to (a) lower transport costs, (b) eliminate formal
and informal barriers that undermine investments in regional processing activity, (c) increase the
flexibility of labor markets, and (d) ensure effective competition policies.

There is a need to build on successful experiences. Many African governments are building
effective partnerships with China. A well-known example—although not the only one—is the
success of the Huajian Group shoe manufacturer in Ethiopia. It required the commitment of the
country’s top leadership to help reduce transaction costs for investors, the development of an
industrial park, and a vision that combined Ethiopia’s comparative advantages—high-quality
leather and low-cost labor—with China’s financial investment and knowledge transfer.


                                                21
China’s activities in Africa should be compatible with Africa’s needs, particularly for
transformation and diversification. For example, it may be time to move away from the traditional
model of infrastructural investment through resource-backed loans and tied aid, to ensuring that
investment in infrastructure (from China and elsewhere) closely reflects Africa’s development
needs. Reciprocal agreements to lower tariffs on imports of specific products (e.g., in agriculture)
and the establishment of joint ventures in sectors of mutual interest, including services, may
contribute to strengthening the economic links between China and Africa.

The rise of Chinese private investment may contribute to Africa’s transformation and job creation.
Private investment is likely to grow exponentially, in line with the Chinese government’s efforts
to encourage local companies to go global and explore international markets. African
counterparties should make the most of these new developments. Local governments have a
chance to attract a large share of this investment and should learn to interact productively with
private investors, ensuring joint benefits in growth, local employment, technology transfer, and
training.

A final recommendation has to do with data and information. The lack of data on Chinese FDI in
Africa limits research and sound analysis to support policy making. In particular, official FDI data
collected by China’s MOFCOM underestimate actual investment flows. An improvement in the
availability of FDI data would significantly enhance policy makers’ knowledge and contribute to
a better policy dialogue. The Chinese government should improve the registration system for firms
investing abroad and capture a larger number of investing entities, in particular small-scale
manufacturing and commerce projects. Moreover, regular follow-up surveys with firms operating
outside China could help clarify their final investment destinations (especially those that claim to
invest in Mauritius and Seychelles) and the investment amount should be adjusted if there are any
second-stage investments.

1 For example, on May 22, 2014, the African Development Bank and the People’s Bank of China established a US$2 billion co -
financing fund, the “Africa Growing Together Fund,” which will finance a range of development projects in SSA (AfDB 2014).
2 According to the OECD definition (see annex 2), FDI includes only private financial flows. However, in China’s case this

definition is inadequate. “Outward direct investment” (as defined in MOFCOM’s annual Statistical Bulletin of China), which also
includes overseas investment by state-owned companies, is a more appropriate measure. Consequently, this report uses “FDI” to
describe all Chinese outward direct investment, public and private.
3 This report uses Balassa’s (1965) definition of RCA, which is the region's share of world exports of a given good divided by its

share of total world exports. The computed values indicate whether the region has a comparative advantage or disadvantage in each
category. Scores greater than 1 reflect a comparative advantage, while scores lower than 1 reflect a comparative disadvantage.
4 Mirror data refers to data reported by trading partners (UN 2010).
5 Using the trade unit–value database at the HS 6 digit level, we compare each African good’s FOB exp ort price with the CIF

import price of a similar good from China. This yields a set of comparable African producer prices and Chinese import prices, for
which we then compute an average difference by HS section.
6 Countries are grouped according to the following definitions (UNCTAD 2014): “Developed countries include the member states

of the OECD (with the exception of Chile, Mexico, the Republic of Korea and Turkey), plus new European Union member countries
that are not OECD members (Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta and Romania), plus Andorra, Bermuda,
Liechtenstein, Monaco and San Marino. Transition economies include Southeastern Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent
States and Georgia. Developing economies include all economies not specified above. For statistical purposes the data for China
do not include the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Hong Kong SAR), Macao Special Administrative Region (Macao
SAR) or Taiwan Province of China.”
7 See the discussions in MOFCOM (2003 –2014) and annex 3.
8 Despite Africa’s increasing importance as a trade partner, Chinese FDI to the region represents only a small share of China’s total

FDI portfolio. In 2013, SSA accounted for only 4 percent of China’s outbound FDI stock, a level that has be en virtually unchanged
since the mid-2000s.

                                                                22
9 In Figure 8, we have modified the sector names from the English edition of State Council of China (2013) based on the original
Mandarin version of the report. Thus, 采矿业 is tranlated as “extractive industry” (different from the original translation, “mining”),
金融业 is “finance”, 建筑业 is “construction,” and 制造业 is “manufacturing.” Other translations include “commercial services”
( 租赁和商务服务业 ), “scientific research, technology, and geological prospecting” ( 科学研究、技术服务和地质勘查业 ),
“wholesale and retail commerce” (批发和零售业), “agriculture” (农林牧渔业), “real estate” (房地产业), and “other” (其他).
10 All project data are based on public information.
11 Mauritian offshore banking laws permit 100 percent foreign ownership, include no minimum foreign capital requirement, provide

for a flat corporate and income tax rate of 15 percent, impose no tax on dividends, and allow free repatriation of profits, dividends,
and capital, among other incentives. Investors in Mauritius-based foreign enterprises, which in turn invest in China, enjoy all of
these financial benefits (U.S. Department of Commerce 2014; Shinn and Eisenman 2012).
12 This is an online audit and it is therefore possible that the actual number of projects is greater than these figures indicated.
13 The Exim Bank of China signed a memorandum of understanding with the Ningbo Municipal Bureau of Foreign Trade and

Economic Cooperation and Yinzhou Bank to support local export-oriented companies (Ningbo News 2008).
14 For example, in March 2009, Songshan Mining Co. Ltd entered into an option agreement with Tanzanian Royalty Exploration

Corporation to acquire Tanzanian Royalty’s interest in the Kabanga nickel mining licenses in northwestern Tanzania. During an
interview, Li Songshan, the chairman of Songshan Mining Co. Ltd, said that he decided to initiate another round of negotiations,
which eventually resulted in a successful deal, after noticing that many Western investors were leaving the industry ( China
Industrial Economy News 2010; Bloomberg 2009).
15One reason for the increasing popularity of Africa among Chinese mining companies is the proposed Resource Super-Profits Tax

(RSPT) on mining company profits in Australia, the traditional destination country for mining-related investments from China. The
RSPT was proposed in 2010 and constitutes a 40 percent tax on windfall profits from the exploration of Australia’s nonrenewable
resources. The current Australian government is in the process of repealing this tax (Sanyal and Darby 2010 –2011; Taylor 2014).
16 The Chinese government has strongly encouraged overseas investments in the natural resource sector. In October 2004, the

National Development and Reform Commission and the Exim Bank of China jointly issued a circular to promote overseas
investment in four specific areas, the first of which was “resource exploration projects to mitigate the domestic shortage of natural
resources” (Salidjanova 2011; NDRC 2004). Africa, with its abundant natural resources and inexpensive investment opportunitie s,
particularly during the global financial crisis, has received considerable attention from large state-owned firms and small- and
medium-size private companies.
17 For example, provincial governments were delegated to vet and approve investment deals totaling US$30 million or less for

natural resource–related projects or US$10 million or less for non-resource–related projects, which greatly simplified the
investment approval process, particularly for small- and medium-size private firms. In addition, the project proposal and feasibility
study no longer required government approval (NDRC 2004; Cheng and Ma 2007). NDRC later raised the provincial government
approval threshold to US$1 billion (NDRC 2014) for all projects that do not involve “sensitive countries or regions” or “sens itive
industries.” “Sensitive countries or regions” refers to those states with which China does not have formal diplomatic relations,
states that have been subjected to international sanctions, or conflict areas. “Sensitive industries” refers to basic telecommunication
networks, cross-border water projects, large-scale land development projects, electricity transmission lines, power grids, and media
projects, among others.
18 “Going global” and “going out” are translations of 走出去战略 (zou chu qu). This refers to the Chinese government’s strategy
of encouraging overseas investment by Chinese firms.
19 See Lu and Kweka (2013).




                                                                 23
Annex 1 FDI, ODA, and Other Financial Flows

China’s financial flows to Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) encompass several dimensions in addition
to foreign direct investment (FDI), such as official development assistance (ODA) and other
official flows (OOF), as shown in Figure A1.1. ODA includes grants (scholarships, medical
support, technical assistance, and training programs), interest-free loans, and concessional
loans. OOF 2 includes export credits, natural resource–backed credit lines, subsidies for private
investment, and so-called mixed credits, which combine concessional and market rate loans.
China’s export credits and other OOF are larger than its total ODA, which is larger than its total
FDI in SSA. The proportion of these three types of financial flows has changed along with the
Chinese government’s policies over the years.
                                        Figure A1.1 Chinese Financial Flows to SSA




Source: Adapted from a chart in Strange et al. 2013.
                                                    Figure A1.2 Geographical Distribution of China’s ODA
Grants and interest-free loans                                          (Percent)
represented the majority of
Chinese foreign aid before
2009 (41 and 30 percent,
respectively),            while
concessional loans represented
only 29 percent (State Council
of China 2011). According to
the 2014 Foreign Aid White
Paper by the State Council of
China, during 2010–12, nearly
56 percent of China’s aid was in
the form of concessional loans.
The official objective of these
loans, mostly delivered by the
2Many donors distinguish between OOF and ODA because of concerns about the conditions that are frequently attached to OOF
arrangements, such as tying the funds to the use of specific products and services from the donor country.

                                                           24
Exim Bank of China, was to “promote economic development and improve living standards in
developing countries,” and “boost economic cooperation between developing countries and China.”
The White Paper emphasizes mutual economic benefits, which are offered as the justification for
the requirement that projects financed by Chinese concessional loans use at least 50 percent
Chinese goods or services (Bräutigam 2011a).
The geographical distribution of China’s foreign aid has not changed significantly in recent years.
Compared with Asia, Latin America, and other regions, Africa has continued to receive the highest
amount of Chinese aid, as indicated in Figure A1.2.

FDI is a relatively small part of the picture. As shown in Table A1.1, the stock of Chinese FDI in
SSA in 2013 was approximately US$24 billion (MOFCOM 2014). By comparison, the value of
Chinese loan-backed financing activities in SSA, which represent the bulk of OOF, was US$52.8
billion between 2003 and 2011 (Bräutigam 2014). These are commercial loans issued by Chinese
policy banks, such as the Exim Bank of China, and state-owned commercial banks, such as the
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China.
                                       Table A1.1 Chinese ODA, OOF, and FDI in SSA
             Type of Chinese financing flows                                Time period          Amount ($US,
                                                                                                 billions)
             ODA (including North Africa)                                     By the end of            24.60
                                                                                  2012
             Chinese bank financing (part of OOF, including North Africa)       2003–11                  52.8
             Chinese FDI stock in SSA                                             2013                    24
            Source: Bräutigam and Gallagher 2014; Xinhua 2011, 2014; MOFCOM 2014.

The patterns of Chinese financing in SSA and Latin America are similar, as indicated in Table
A1.2. China’s total FDI stock represented less than 1 percent of the GDP of the two regions in
2011. Chinese banks provided more loans to Latin America (US$79.8 billion) than to Africa
(US$52.8 billion) in 2003–11, but these loans made up a larger percentage of Africa’s GDP (2.8
percent) than that of Latin America’s (1.6 percent). The average loan size for Latin America was
more than five times larger than that of Africa, and Chinese banks usually offered lower minimal
interest rates and longer payment periods for African loans. Similarly, more than half of these
loans were commodity-backed in both regions, but the commodities differed: Latin American
loans were exclusively secured by oil, whereas African loans were back by agricultural products
(palm oil, cocoa, tobacco) and natural resources (oil, platinum, copper, diamonds) (Bräutigam and
Gallagher 2014).
                       Table A1.2 Financing by Chinese Banks in SSA and Latin America ($US, millions)
                                                                             SSA              Latin America
             Chinese bank financing, 2003–11 (including North Africa)       52,818                79,799
             % GDP (2011)                                                    2.80                 1.60
             Commodity-backed, 2003–11 (including North Africa)             29,555               47,000
             % total                                                          56                   54
             Average size                                                    906                  5,222
             China's FDI stock in 2011 (SSA only)                            14.6               55 billion
                                                                            billion
             % GDP (2011)                                                   0.85%                0.96%
            Source: Bräutigam and Gallagher 2014.



                                                              25
Annex 2 Definitions of FDI, ODA, and OOF

OECD and Chinese Definitions of FDI

According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD’s) Glossary
of Foreign Direct Investment Terms and Definitions, foreign direct investment (FDI) is a category
of investment that reflects the objective of establishing a lasting interest by a resident firm in one
economy (direct investor) in an enterprise in another economy (direct investment). Lasting interest
implies the existence of a long-term relationship between the investor and the investment and a
significant degree of influence over the management of the latter. The direct or indirect ownership
of 10 percent or more of the voting power of an enterprise resident in one economy by an investor
resident in another economy is evidence of such a relationship. In some cases, an ownership stake
of as little as 10 percent of the voting power may not lead to the exercise of any significant
influence; in other cases, an investor may own less than 10 percent but have an effective voice in
the management. Nevertheless, the recommended methodology does not allow any qualification
of the 10 percent threshold and recommends its strict application to ensure statistical consistency
across countries.

FDI is often referred to as private investment and therefore is distinguished from government-led
investment. In practice, however, the Chinese FDI data reported by the Ministry of Commerce of
the People’s Republic of China also include investment from state-owned enterprises.

OECD Definitions of ODA and OOF

The OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) defines official development assistance
(ODA) as grants or loans to countries and territories on the DAC List of ODA
Recipients (developing countries) and to multilateral agencies, which are: (a) undertaken by the
public sector; (b) with the promotion of economic development and general welfare as their main
objective; and (c) at concessional financing terms, if a loan, having a grant element of at least 25
percent. In addition to financial flows, technical cooperation is included in aid. Grants, loans, and
credits for military purposes are excluded. Transfer payments to private individuals (e.g., pensions,
reparations, or insurance payouts) are generally not counted.

Other official flows (OOF) are public sector transactions that do not meet the ODA criteria, such
as: (a) grants to developing countries for representational or essentially commercial purposes; (b)
official bilateral transactions intended to promote development but having a grant element of less
than 25 percent; (c) official bilateral transactions, whatever their grant element, that are primarily
export facilitating in purpose, including by definition export credits extended directly to an aid
recipient by an official agency or institution (official direct export credits); (d) the net acquisition
by governments and central monetary institutions of securities issued by multilateral development
banks at market terms; (e) subsidies (grants) to the private sector to expand credit access in
developing countries; and (f) funds in support of private investment.




                                                  26
Annex 3 Sector Coding of Harmonized Commodity Descriptions and Coding Systems (HS
1996)

This annex corresponds to figure 4. To identify the sector trends of SSA’s exports to China, all
commodities listed in HS 1996 are categorized into four major types: agricultural products, oil,
non-oil natural resources, and manufactured products. For example, raw sugar products (1701:
cane or beet sugar) are grouped into agricultural products, whereas other sugar products in code
17 (sugars and sugar confectionery) are grouped into manufactured products. The detailed
classification of the codes is listed below:3

Agricultural products: animal (1–05); vegetable (6–15); sugar (1701); unmanufactured tobacco
(2401); natural rubber (4001); raw hides and skin (41); raw fur skins (4301); wood in the rough
(4403); natural cork (4501); silk (5001, 5002, 5003); wool (5101–5105); cotton (5201–5203);
other textile fibers (5301–5305); bird feather (6701); pearls (7101).

Oil: 2709–2715.

Non-oil natural resources: salt and sulfur (25); ores (26); mineral fuels (2701–2708); inorganic
chemicals (28); organic chemicals (29); copper (7401, 7402); nickel (7501, 7502); aluminum
(7601); zinc (7901); tin (8001); other base metals (81).

Manufactured products: food products (16–24, excluding 1701, 2401); chemicals (30–38); plastic
or rubber (39–40, excluding 4001); processed hides and skins (42, 43, excluding 4301); wood (44–
49, excluding 4403, 4501); textiles and clothing (50–63, excluding 5001–5003, 5101–5105, 5301–
5305); footwear (64–67, excluding 6701); stone and glass (68–71, excluding 7101); processed
metals (72–83, excluding 7401, 7402, 7501, 7502, 7601, 7901, 8001, 81); machinery and
electronics (84–85); transportation (86–89); miscellaneous (90–97).




3
    HS 99 (commodities not elsewhere specified) is not included in the sector distribution.




                                                                  27
Annex 4 Data Tables
                                   Table A4.1 FDI Flows from the United States, Japan, China, and EU Countries to Africa, 2001–12
                                                                              ($US, millions)
                           2001         2002       2003        2004        2005        2006           2007        2008        2009        2010        2011        2012
   United States           2439         -578       2697        1612        2564        5157           4490        3837        9447        9281        5127        3706
   Japan                   -183          227        120         382          44         926           1147        1541        -229        -314         522         115
   China               -            -                76         298         292         417           1359        5416        1100        1883        2932        2158
   European Union          3570         4955       9407       17359       17127        7384          17365       23150       15704       18612        6904       12562
   - France                1791          855       1096        1346        4639        3115           4653       16311       -3049        4643        2010        2096
   - United Kingdom        1658         3291       5639       10735       10624        -432           9456        1620       10266       12086       -5105        7450
   - Germany               -260         -328       -319        1367        -625         267           2470        1018        1247        1163        1870         258
   - Belgium           -                 -31       -169        1545        -112         193           -323         297        3258       -1172        1279        -590
   - Austria                   4          10         10         -77          67         119            -44        -110        -292          89         238         128
   - Bulgaria          -            -          -          -           -           -                      1           1   -                  -3           1           2
   - Croatia           -            -          -          -           -                     -8           2   -                  1            2   -           -
   - Cyprus                    1          25        40            7           1            268           1         11          60           73        652           13
   - Czech Republic    -            -          -          -           -           -              -           -                  1           -1   -                   1
   - Denmark                23            25        50          197         345            -8         -313         117        261          480        242          -35
   - Estonia           -            -          -          -           -                     1            2           1   -           -           -           -
   - Finland                   4          16        -35           7          9             16           16          26         -25         27          44           25
   - Greece            -            -                11           1         69             17           15          44           2          6    -                 -21
   - Hungary           -            -          -          -                  1    -                     -5           2                      3          -1           -5
   - Ireland                21      -          -                 41   -                 -29            -75         324         -68   -                106          -15
   - Italy                  48            42        51          111         139        1657            166        1780        1723        1508       3919         3564
   - Latvia            -            -          -          -           -           -              -           -           -           -           -           -
   - Lithuania         -            -          -          -           -           -              -           -           -           -           -           -
   - Luxembourg        -                 152         -6         269         133            438        1087        1039        1837         83         345          10
   - Malta             -            -          -          -           -           -              -           -           -           -           -           -
   - Netherlands           657          1101       858          869   -           -              -           -           -           -           -           -
   - Poland                 15             1        -7           24          26             31           6          16          -8         -19         44           25
   - Portugal              140          -608        -3          110         249            309       -1070        -883       -1128         149        302          272
   - Romania           -            -          -          -                   1   -                      1          16           7          11          8            8
   - Slovakia          -            -          -                  7           1   -              -           -           -           -           -           -
   - Slovenia                 1           -3          3          19          29          18             32          88         19           46         20           40
   - Spain                 -529          429       2156         755        1006        1571           1163        1856        661         -449        503         -637
   - Sweden                  -4          -22         32          26         525        -159            114        -424        931         -113        427          -27
        Source: UNCTAD 2014.




                                                                                      28
                           Table A4.2 FDI Stock from the United States, Japan, China, and EU Countries to Africa, 2001–12
                                                                         ($US, millions)
                         2001        2002         2003        2004        2005         2006         2007         2008         2009         2010         2011         2012
United States           15574       16040        19835       20356       22756        28158        32607        36746        43924        54799        57213        61366
Japan                     623        1227         2049        1623        1326         2700         3865         7287         5738         6149         8065         6874
China                       -            -         491         900        1595         2557         4462         7804         9332        13042        16244        21730
European Union          31653       44821        60339       64448       69856        76466       104134       111388       150024       158694       161810       175288
- France                 6235        8372        11407       12760       16104        23112        35385        39126        50837        55792        53036        57984
- United Kingdom        12978       21785        30410       33510       35874        29651        37095        30765        47853        47189        47694        58937
- Germany                3768        4441         5576        6842        6697         7585         9293         8694        11391        13521        13067         8576
- Belgium           -           -            -           -           -            -           -                  4765         8651         6958         7563         7192
- Austria                   7          46          267         365         316          119         110           -88         -337          866          929         1024
- Bulgaria          -           -            -                   1   -            -                   1             2            2            2            3            4
- Croatia                 228         254          274         309         263          314         529           477          500          535          540          501
- Cyprus            -                  70          128         146         127          423         474           458          115          160          738          730
- Czech Republic    -           -                    3   -           -            -           -            -                     1   -            -            -
- Denmark                 534         822          818        1212        1116         1320         1222         1211         1522         1977         2280         2898
- Estonia           -           -            -           -           -                    5            7           24           26           13   -            -
- Finland                 91           76          37          32          29            40           79           99           83          119         138          171
- Greece                  35           44          31          49          65            70           67           71          731           80          77           82
- Hungary                  2            2           3    -           -            -           -                     1            4            7           2            4
- Ireland           -           -            -           -           -            -                  233          438          454                      283          289
- Italy             -           -            -           -           -            -                 4866         6652         9594       10349        13200        15845
- Latvia            -           -            -           -           -            -           -            -            -            -            -            -
- Lithuania         -           -            -           -           -            -           -            -            -            -            -            -
- Luxembourg        -           -            -           -           -            -           -                  1602         1932         2536         1999
- Malta             -           -            -           -           -            -           -            -            -            -            -            -
- Netherland             5017        6620         5926        3103        2107         2589         3432         3360         2931         3165         2797         3123
- Poland                   77          38           40          65          90          124          131           13            5          197          201          227
- Portugal               1720        1097         1284        1356        1469         1810         2411         5162         3868         4868         5744         6846
- Romania           -           -            -           -           -            -           -            -            -            -            -            -
- Slovakia          -           -            -           -           -            -           -            -            -            -            -            -
- Slovenia                24           21           26          45          71           86          127          211          233          280          292          292
- Spain             -           -                 2301        2536        3015         6304         6177         6168         7099         6205         6871         6258
- Sweden                  937        1133         1808        2117        2513         2914         2495         2177         2529         3875         4356         4305
   Source: UNCTAD 2014.




                                                                                 29
                                    Table A4.3 2013 Statistical Bulletin of China's Outward FDI Stock by Country and Region, 2003–13
                                                                            ($US, millions)
                           2003        2004       2005         2006         2007         2008         2009         2010          2011       2012       2013
North Africa               26.72       59.98      266.81       407.29       629.54       753.38       1130.07      1364.55       1626.17    1930.62    2233.98
Algeria                    5.7         34.49      171.21       247.37       393.89       508.82       751.26       937.26        1059.45    1305.33    1497.21
Egypt, Arab Rep.           14.29       14.28      39.8         100.43       131.6        131.35       285.07       336.72        403.17     459.19     511.13
Libya                      0.86        0.87       33.06        28.57        70.83        81.58        42.69        32.19         67.78      65.19      108.82
Morocco                    4.31        9.06       20.59        27.01        29.65        28.06        48.78        55.85         89.48      95.22      102.96
Tunisia                    1.56        1.28       2.15         3.91         3.57         3.57         2.27         2.53          6.29       5.69       13.86
Sub-Saharan Africa         464.51      839.58     1328.42      2149.53      3832.29      7050.46      8202.2       11677.57      14618.15   19799.09   23951.79
Angola                     0.3         0.47       8.79         37.23        78.46        68.89        195.54       351.77        400.59     1245.1     1634.74
Benin                      7.71        20.51      19           22.12        35.6         53.15        54.01        39.33         40.03      47.6       49.91
Botswana                   2.1         3.8        18.12        25.52        43.39        65.26        119.25       178.52        200.38     220.15     230.9
Burkina Faso               -           -          -            -            -            -            -            -             -          -          4.34
Burundi                    -           0.02       -            1.65         1.65         1.65         4.64         6.51          7.2        8.7        9.79
Cameroon                   5.73        6.98       7.87         16.46        18.51        20.34        25.05        59.61         61.54      79.5       148.4
Cape Verde                 -           0.01       0.6          1.65         4.65         5.13         5.04         4.58          4.58       11.6       15.23
Central African Republic   -           -          2            3.98         3.98         3.98         16.71        46.54         51.02      51.02      60.38
Chad                       -           -          2.71         12.78        13.53        25.36        76.57        80            108.12     194.12     321.26
Comoros                    -           0.01       0.01         4.05         4.05         4.05         4.05         4.04          4.04       4.54       4.54
Congo, Rep.                -           5.65       13.32        62.9         65.4         75.42        115.17       135.88        142.4      504.9      695.43
Congo, Dem. Rep.           0.24        15.69      25.11        37.61        104.4        134.14       397.43       630.92        709.26     970.49     1091.76
Côte d'lvoire              8.05        14.1       29.11        25.04        28.18        21.16        37.65        32.99         34.67      40.04      35
Djibouti                   -           0.4        0.4          0.6          1.6          1.6          7.03         12.47         18.13      17.99      30.55
Equatorial Guinea          8.64        10.21      16.56        30.44        44.63        40.62        61.5         86.25         98.68      404.64     260.85
Eritrea                    1.88        0.12       0.12         6.63         7.22         6.73         9.6          12.54         14.31      103.78     104.55
Ethiopia                   4.78        7.87       29.82        95.6         108.88       126.45       283.44       368.06        426.79     606.55     771.84
Gabon                      24.05       31.27      35.36        51.28        55.59        88.14        100.05       125.34        127.1      128.47     168.48
Gambia                     0.04        0.2        1.19         1.19         1.19         1.19         1.19         1.19          1.19       1.19       1.19
Ghana                      6.6         6.31       7.33         8.09         41.87        58.02        185.04       202           270.15     505.27     834.84
Guinea                     14.34       25.77      44.22        54.63        69.97        96.37        129.32       136.41        168.43     234.67     338.58
Guinea Bissau              -           -          -            -            -            -            27           27            27         27         27
Kenya                      25.53       28.46      58.25        46.23        55.13        78.36        120.36       221.58        308.83     402.73     635.9
Lesotho                    0.24        0.03       0.6          7.6          7.6          8.22         8.32         8.88          8.91       9.13       9.13
Liberia                    5.8         6.38       15.95        29.51        29.78        37.36        56.39        81.67         114.74     154.37     196.1
Madagascar                 28.13       40.63      49.94        54.34        76.01        146.52       196.22       229.87        253.63     274.55     286.1
Malawi                     0.72        0.72       0.73         0.96         1.16         6.59         14.54        32.4          30.07      49.3       253.82
Mali                       12.09       13.16      13.28        19.83        32.22        30.95        44.72        47.77         160.06     211.43     316.67
Mauritania                 1.82        2.13       2.4          20.12        15.14        24.76        31.29        45.88         74.71      106.15     108.28
Mauritius                  12.59       12.63      26.81        51.16        115.9        230.07       242.84       283.29        605.94     700.8      849.59
Mozambique                 2.42        5.6        14.68        14.68        34.24        43           74.96        75.24         98.07      336.91     508.09
Namibia                    0.72        2.21       2.36         6.43         7.24         19.95        46.18        47.11         60.21      94.53      349.45


                                                                                  30
Niger                   12.5    14.03    20.44    32.99    134.53    136.5     184.2     379.36    429.57    125.33    241.87
Nigeria                 31.98   75.61    94.11    215.94   630.32    795.91    1025.96   1210.85   1415.61   1949.87   2146.07
Rwanda                  3.3     3.3      4.72     7.71     7.3       20.18     28.8      41.63     58.52     63.54     73.33
São Tomé and Príncipe   -       -        -        -        -         -         0         0.31      0.31      0.38      0.38
Senegal                 2.51    2.58     2.35     4.15     4.39      10.61     26.07     45.03     45.2      102.22    83.25
Seychelles              0.42    0.42     4.19     6.46     6.55      6.6       7         19.36     23.8      77.19     103.47
Sierra Leone            -       5.74     18.45    14.89    32.28     43.7      51.23     41.48     52.23     57.71     108.36
Somalia                 -                -        -        -         -         -         -         -         -         -
South Africa            44.77   58.87    112.28   167.62   702.37    3048.62   2306.86   4152.98   4059.73   4775.07   4400.4
South Sudan                              -        -        -         -         -         -         0.05      10.9      26.47
Sudan                   0.55    171.61   351.53   497.13   574.85    528.25    563.89    613.36    1525.64   1236.6    1507.04
Swaziland                                -        -        -         -         -         -         -         -         -
Tanzania                7.46    53.8     62.02    111.93   110.92    190.22    281.79    307.51    407.07    540.8     716.46
Togo                    4.73    6.24     4.78     11.72    14.42     23.12     33.02     58.11     67.15     98.38     123.09
Uganda                  1.33    0.23     4.97     14.67    18.68     11.98     58.56     113.68    126.21    141.1     383.76
Zambia                  143.7   147.75   160.31   267.86   429.36    651.33    843.97    943.73    1199.84   1998.11   2164.32
Zimbabwe                36.74   38.06    41.63    46.15    59.15     60.01     99.75     134.54    576.44    874.67    1520.83
 Source: MOFCOM 2014.




                                                                31
                                   Table A4.4 2013 Statistical Bulletin of China's Outward FDI Flows by Country and Region, 2003–12
                                                                           ($US, millions)
                           2003        2004        2005      2006          2007         2008        2009         2010            2011     2012      2013
North Africa               4.86        19.01       99.28     102.78        215.46       74.24       339.19       228.61          241.54   359.01    229.77
Algeria                    2.47        11.21       84.87     98.93         145.92       42.25       228.76       186             114.34   245.88    191.3
Egypt, Arab Rep.           2.1         5.72        13.31     8.85          24.98        14.57       133.86       51.65           66.45    119.41    23.22
Libya                      0.1         0.06        0.25      -8.51         42.26        10.54       -38.55       -10.5           47.88    -6.68     0.45
Morocco                    0.19        1.8         0.85      1.78          2.64         6.88        16.42        1.75            9.11     1.05      7.74
Tunisia                                0.22                  1.73          -0.34                    -1.3         -0.29           3.76     -0.65     7.06
Sub-Saharan Africa         75.89       298.42      292.4     417.08        1358.85      5416.32     1099.68      1883.38         2931.6   2157.65   3140.87
Angola                     0.19        0.18        0.47      22.39         41.19        -9.57       8.31         101.11          72.72    392.08    224.05
Benin                      2.09        13.77       1.31      -             6.32         14.56       0.09         1.76            0.75     5.06      8.44
Botswana                   0.8         0.27        3.69      2.76          1.87         14.06       18.44        43.85           21.86    21.1      10.19
Burkina Faso               -           -           -         -             -            -           -            -               -        -         4.34
Burundi                    -           -           -         -             -            -           0.69         -               -        1.5       1.09
Cameroon                   0.28        0.37        0.19      0.73          2.05         1.69        0.82         14.88           1.87     17.65     57.2
Cape Verde                 -           -           0.32      0.23          0.09         0.48        -            -0.46           -        -         0.13
Central African Republic   -           -           -         -             -            -           -            25.81           2.48     -         1.3
Chad                       -           -           2.71      1.61          0.75         9.47        51.21        2.13            -12.48   80.68     120.95
Comoros                    -           -           -         -             -            -           -            -0.01           -        0.5       -
Congo, Rep.                -           0.51        8.11      13.24         2.5          9.79        28.07        34.38           6.81     98.8      109.94
Congo, Dem. Rep.           6           11.91       5.07      36.73         57.27        23.99       227.16       236.19          75.18    344.17    121.27
Côte d'lvoire              0.62        6.75        8.74      -2.91         1.74         -7.02       1.51         -5.02           0.87     3.61      -4.79
Djibouti                   -           -           -         -             1            -           3.4          4.23            5.66     -         2
Equatorial Guinea          0.48        1.69        6.35      10.19         12.82        -4.86       20.88        22.08           12.47    138.84    22.41
Eritrea                    -           -           -         0.01          0.45         -0.49       0.23         2.94            3.3      1.96      0.9
Ethiopia                   0.98        0.43        4.93      23.95         13.28        9.71        74.29        58.53           72.3     121.56    102.46
Gabon                      -           5.6         2.08      5.53          3.31         32.05       11.88        23.44           1.93     30.69     32.1
Gambia                     0.04        -           -         -             -            -           -            -               -        -         -
Ghana                      2.89        0.34        2.57      0.5           1.85         10.99       49.35        55.98           40.07    208.49    122.51
Guinea                     1.2         14.44       16.34     0.75          13.2         8.32        26.98        9.74            24.55    64.44     100.13
Guinea-Bissau              -           -           -         -             -            -           -            -               -        -         -
Kenya                      0.74        2.68        2.05      0.18          8.9          23.23       28.12        101.22          68.17    78.73     230.54
Lesotho                    -           0.03        0.6       -             -            0.62        0.1          0.56            0.03     0.21      -
Liberia                    0.4         0.58        8.65      -7.03         -            2.56        1.12         29.89           21.09    12        30.34
Madagascar                 0.68        13.64       0.14      1.17          13.24        61.16       42.56        33.58           23.1     8.43      15.51
Malawi                     -           -           -         -             0.2          5.44        -            9.86            1.2      10.33     8.25
Mali                       5.41        -           -         2.6           6.72         -1.28       7.99         3.05            47.58    44.42     108.01
Mauritania                 1.7         0.09        0.36      4.78          -4.98        -0.65       6.53         5.77            19.69    30.87     15.27
Mauritius                  10.27       0.44        2.04      16.59         15.58        34.44       14.12        22.01           419.46   57.83     61.07
Mozambique                 -           0.66        2.88      -             10.03        5.85        15.85        0.28            20.26    230.52    131.89
Namibia                    0.62        -           0.18      0.85          0.91         7.59        11.62        5.51            5.04     25.12     7.05


                                                                                 32
Niger                           -        1.53     5.76           7.94        100.83            -0.01       39.87        196.25            51.63         -195.94    116.54
Nigeria                         24.4     45.52    53.3           67.79       390.35            162.56      171.86       184.89            197.42        333.05     209.13
Rwanda                          -        -        1.42           2.99        -0.41             12.88       8.62         12.72             9.69          5.02       -5.94
São Tomé and Príncipe           -        -        -              -           -                 -           -            0.02              -             0.07       -
Senegal                         0.65     -        -              -           0.24              3.6         11.04        18.96             0.19          4.47       10.44
Seychelles                      -        -        0.05           0.06        0.09              0.05        0.36         12.28             4.34          53.4       17.69
Sierra Leone                    -        5.92     0.49           3.71        2.85              11.42       0.9          -                 10.75         7.69       40.03
Somalia                         -        -        -              -           -                 -           -            -                 -             -          -
South Africa                    8.86     17.81    47.47          40.74       454.41            4807.86     41.59        411.17            -14.17        -814.91    -89.19
South Sudan                     -        -        -              -           -                 -           -            -                 0.05          7.8        11.49
Sudan                           -        146.7    91.13          50.79       65.4              -63.14      19.3         30.96             911.86        -1.69      140.91
Swaziland                       -        -        -              -           -                 -           -            -                 -             -          -
Tanzania                        -        1.62     0.96           12.54       -3.82             18.22       21.58        25.72             53.12         119.7      150.64
Togo                            0.03     1.85     0.31           4.58        2.7               4.2         8.91         11.77             9.04          20.59      23.59
Uganda                          1        0.15     0.17           0.23        4.01              -6.7        1.29         26.5              9.91          9.79       60.6
Zambia                          5.53     2.23     10.09          87.44       119.34            213.97      111.8        75.05             291.78        291.55     292.86
Zimbabwe                        0.03     0.71     1.47           3.42        12.57             -0.72       11.24        33.8              440.03        287.47     517.53
 Source: MOFCOM 2014.


                                                 Table A4.5 FDI Inflows, Global and by Group of Economies, 2000–13
                                                                                  ($US, billions)
                  Economic group                 2000     2001     2002    2003      2004    2005   2006   2007     2008    2009   2010     2011    2012    2013
                  World                           1415     838       629    604       738     997   1482    2002     1819   1222   1422      1700    1330   1452
                  Developing economies             267     226       172    197       285     341    433     591      669    533    648       725     729    778
                  Transition economies               6       8        10     18        29      32     60      88      118     71     71        95      84    108
                  Developed economies             1142     603       446    389       424     623    988    1323     1032    619    703       880     517    566
                  - Africa                          10      20        15     18        17      31     36      51       59     56     47        48      55     57
                  - Sub-Saharan Africa               7      15        11     14        12      21     16      30       39     40     33        42      41     45
                        Source: UNCTAD 2014.




                                                                                       33
                                         Table A4.6 China’s Five Officially Approved Special Economic Zones in SSA, Circa July 2013
Country     Country &   Location      Tender    Original lead      Initial zone   Constr.   No. of      No. of       Tenant        Tenant       Tenants:       Tenants:
            zone name                 year      Chinese            focus/later    start     tenant      tenant       company       company      approx. # of   approx. # of
                                                developer/later    focus          date      companies   companies    commitments   actual       Chinese        African
                                                lead developer                              (signed)    (in          to invest     investment   workers        workers
                                                                                                        operation)   ($USm)        ($USm)
Ethiopia    Ethiopia    Dukem,        2007      Yonggang           Steel          2010      12          6            129.5         n/a          300            1,600
            Eastern     Addis Ababa             /Qiyuan            products,
                                                Investment Group   construction
                                                                   materials
Mauritius   Mauritius   Terre Rouge   2006      Tianli/Three       Industrial     2009      n/a         0            n/a           n/a          n/a            n/a
            Jinfei                              Shanxi companies   and real
                                                                   estate
Nigeria     Nigeria     Lagos State   2007      CCECC              Industrial     2007      26          6            700           76           n/a            n/a
            Lekki                                                  estate
Nigeria     Nigeria     Ogun State    2006      Guangdong          Industrial     2009      34          7            150           58           177            1,619
            Ogun-                               XinGuang           estate
            Guangdong
Zambia      Zambia      Chambishi/L   2006      China Nonferrous   Mineral        2004      36          26           1,000         322          1,372          7,973
            Zambia–     usaka                   Metals             processing
            China                               Corporation
Source: Bräutigam and Tang 2011.




                                                                                     34
                               Figure A4.1 World Bank Commodity Price Forecasts: Agricultural Products and Oil and Metals
                                                                     (nominal US$)




Source: World Bank commodities price forecast (October 16, 2014).




                                                                          35
References
AfDB (African Development Bank Group). 2014. “AfDB Announces US $2 Billion Fund with
      China.” African Development Bank Group, Abidjan. http://www.afdb.org/en/news-and-
      events/article/afdb-announces-us-2-billion-fund-with-china-13165/.
Ahn, JaeBin, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2010. “The Role of Intermediaries in
       Facilitating Trade.” NBER Working Paper No. 15706. National Bureau of Economic
       Research, Cambridge, MA.
American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation. 2014. “China Global Investment
      Tracker.” Database. http://www.heritage.org/research/projects/china-global-investment-
      tracker-interactive-map.
Anberbir, Yohannes. 2014. “Ethiopia: Huajian Group to Build Its Own Industry Zone.
      http://allafrica.com/stories/201407281303.html.
Balassa, B. 1965. “Trade Liberalization and Revealed Comparative Advantage.”
       Manchester School 33: 99–123.
Bloomberg. 2009. “Tanzanian Royalty and Songshan Mining Co. Ltd. of Inner Mongolia, China
       Conclude 30-Year 3% Royalty Option Agreement on Kabanga Nickel Properties in
       Tanzania.” Bloomberg, March 10.
       http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=amjjd9nV3UA0.
Brant, Philippa. 2014. “China’s Aid White Paper: What’s Changed?” The Interpreter.
        http://www.lowyinterpreter.org/post/2014/07/11/China-aid-white-paper-whats-
        changed.aspx?COLLCC=2642841331&.
Bräutigam, Deborah. 2011a. “Aid ‘With Chinese Characteristics’: Chinese Foreign Aid and
        Development Finance Meet the OECD-DAC Aid Regime.” Journal of International
        Development 23(5): 752–64.
———. 2011b. “Chinese Development Aid in Africa: What, Where, Why, and How Much?”
   In Rising China: Global Challenges and Opportunities, edited by Jane Golley and Ligang
   Song, 203–23. Canberra: Australia National University Press.
Bräutigam, Deborah, and Kevin P. Gallagher. 2014. “Bartering Globalization: China’s
       Commodity-Backed Finance in Africa and Latin America.” Global Policy 5 (3): 346–52.
Bräutigam, Deborah, Thomas Farole, and Xiaoyang Tang. 2010. “China’s Investment in African
       Special Economic Zones: Prospects, Challenges, and Opportunities.” World Bank,
       Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/10202.
Bräutigam, Deborah, and Xiaoyang Tang. 2011. “China’s Investment in Special Economic
       Zones in Africa.” In Special Economic Zones: Progress, Emerging Challenges, and
       Future Directions, edited by Thomas Farole and Gokhan Akinci. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.
———. 2013. “‘Going Global in Groups’: Structural Transformation and China’s Special
   Economic Zones Overseas.” World Development 63: 78–91.
Broadman, H. 2007. Africa’s Silk Road: China and India’s New Economic Frontier. Washington,
      DC: World Bank.



                                             36
Chen, C. 2013. “South-South Co-operation in Infrastructure in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Working
       Paper, United Nations Economic and Social Council, New York.
Cheng, Leonard K., and Zihui Ma. 2007. “China’s Outward Foreign Direct Investment.” In
       China’s Growing Role in World Trade, edited by Robert C. Feenstra and Shang-Jin Wei,
       545–78. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
CCPIT (China Council for the Promotion of International Trade). 2012. “The Survey on Chinese
      Enterprises’ Status and Intentions of Investing Abroad 2008–2012.”
      http://aaa.ccpit.org/Category7/Asset/2013/Mar/06/onlineeditimages/file71362560003965.
      cn.pdf.
China Industrial Economy News. 2010. “Developing African Resources: Giving Careful
       Consideration to Non-Economic Factors.” June 7.
       http://www.cien.com.cn/html/Home/report/13407-1.htm.
Copley, Amy, Fenohasina Maret-Rakotondrazaka, and Amadou Sy. 2014. “The US-Africa
      Leaders Summit: A Focus on Foreign Direct Investment.” Brookings, Washington, DC.
      http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/africa-in-focus/posts/2014/07/11-foreign-direct-
      investment-us-africa-leaders-summit.
Deloitte and Mergermarket Group. 2010a. “Mining for Growth: A Review of Outbound Mining
       M&A Activity from China.
       http://www.mergermarket.com/PDF/Deloitte_MINING_English.pdf.
———. 2010b. “Rising Sun: A New Chapter in China’s Overseas Mergers and Acquisitions” (in
       Mandarin: 崛起的曙光：中国海外并购新篇章).
Dinh, Hinh T., Vincent Palmade, Vandana Chandra, and Frances Cossar. 2012. “Light
       Manufacturing in Africa.” Africa Development Forum, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Dollar, David. 2014. “China’s Rebalancing: Implications for African Economies.” Paper
        presented at the conference “China in the World Economy: Building a New Partnership
        with Africa,” World Bank, Washington, DC, May 20.
Drummond, Paulo, and Estelle Xue Liu. 2013. “Africa’s Rising Exposure to China: How Large
     Are Spillovers Through Trade?” IMF Working Paper WP/13/250, Washington DC.
Duce, John, and Stephen Cunningham. 2009. “Sinopec Group Agrees to Buy Addax for $7.3
       Billion (Update2).” Bloomberg, June 24.
       http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?pid=newsarchive&sid=aIRoJNEX00t8.
Edwards, Lawrence, and Rhys Jenkins. 2014. “The Competitive Effect of China on the South
      African Manufacturing Sector.” Presentation at the Jobs Knowledge Platform “China in
      Africa” Symposium, World Bank, Washington, DC, November 2014.
FOCAC (Forum on China-Africa Cooperation). 2010. “China-Africa Cooperation Pushing
     Africa’s Economic Development.” FOCAC, Addis Ababa.
     http://www.focac.org/eng/jlydh/xzhd/t712157.htm.
———. 2011. “The Largest Private Shoe-Manufacturing Enterprise in Dongguan Makes
   Investment in Ethiopia.” FOCAC, Addis Ababa.
   http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/zflt/chn/zfgx/zfgxjmhz/t886616.htm.


                                             37
Fu, Xiaolan, and Peter Buckley. 2014. “Direct Investment from China and Economic Growth in
       Developing Countries.” Paper presented at the conference “International Symposium on
       New Structural Economics and Development in Africa,” National School of
       Development, Peking University, June 16–17.
Grimm, Sven, Rachel Rank, Matthew McDonald, and Elizabeth Schickerling. 2011.
     “Transparency of Chinese Aid: An Analysis of the Published Information on Chinese
     External Financial Flows.” Center for Chinese Studies, University of Stellenbosch,
     Stellenbosch, South Africa.
Gu, Jing. 2009. “China’s Private Enterprises in Africa and the Implications for African
       Development.” European Journal of Development Research Special Issues 21: 570–87.
Guillaumont Jeannenay, Sylviane, and Ping Hua. 2014. “China’s African Financial Engagement,
       Real Exchange Rates and Trade between China and Africa.” CERDI - UMR 6587,
       Université d’Auvergne, Ecole d’économie, National Center for Scientific Research, Paris.
Hamlin, Kevin, Ilya Gridneff, and William Davison. 2014. “Ethiopia Becomes China’s China in
      Global Search for Cheap Labor.” Bloomberg, July 22.
      http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-07-22/ethiopia-becomes-china-s-china-in-search-
      for-cheap-labor.html.
Huajian Group. 2012. “Become a Harmonious and Friendship Enterprise between China and
       Africa, Gain Glory for Our Home Country.” Huajian Group, January 29.
       http://www.huajian.com/news/shownews.asp?id=469.
Lin, Justin Yifu, and Yan Wang. 2014. “China-Africa Co-operation in Structural
        Transformation: Ideas, Opportunities, and Finances.” UNU-WIDER Working Paper
        2014/046. UNU-WIDER, Helsinki.
Lu, Yiye, and Josaphat Kweka. 2013. “Chinese Private Investments in Tanzania: Where to or
       Where From?” Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Africa Region, World
       Bank, Washington, DC.
Mergermarket Group. 2013. “Deal Drivers Africa—A Comprehensive Review of Africa M&A
      2013. Mergermarket Group, New York.
MOFCOM (Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China). 2012. “Annual
    Cooperative Audit Online of National Foreign Investment Enterprises.” MOFCOM,
    Beijing. http://www.fdi.gov.cn/1800000121_10000029_8.html.
———. 2013. “Report on Foreign Investment in China.” MOFCOM, Beijing.
   http://www.fdi.gov.cn/1800000121_35_166_0_7.html.
———. 2003–2014. Statistical Bulletin of China's Outward FDI. MOFCOM, Beijing.
MOFCOM (Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China) and All-China Federation
    of Industry and Commerce. 2006. Letter seeking comments on the draft version of
    “Several Suggested Measures on Encouraging and Supporting Private Enterprises to ‘Go
    Out.’” http://www.mofcom.gov.cn/aarticle/b/g/200604/20060401829430.html.
Nan, Yu. 2012. “Cottoning On to Textile Trade.” CHINAFRICA 4 (July).
      http://www.chinafrica.cn/english/business/txt/2012-07/01/content_464089.htm.



                                              38
NDRC (National Development and Reform Commission). 2004. “No. 21 Order of NDRC.” NDRC,
     Beijing.<http://www.sdpc.gov.cn/fzgggz/gdzctz/tzfg/200510/t20051010_44897.html.
———. 2014. “No. 9 Order of NDRC.” NDRC, Beijing.
http://www.sdpc.gov.cn/zcfb/zcfbl/201404/t20140410_606600.html.
NDRC (National Development and Reform Commission) and Exim Bank of China. 2004.
     “Notification on Giving Credit and Policy Support to Encourage Overseas Investment in
     Key Projects.” NDRC and Exim Bank of China, Beijing.
     http://www.sdpc.gov.cn/fzgggz/wzly/jwtz/jwtzzn/200507/t20050714_35633.html.
Ningbo News. 2008. “Supporting the Development of Export-Oriented Enterprises in Ningbo—
      Ningbo Exim Bank Launched 100 Million Yuan for Preferential Loans.” Ningbo News,
      December 4. http://news.cnnb.com.cn/system/2008/12/04/005902037.shtml.
Pigato, Miria, and Jullien Gourdon. 2014. “The Impact of Rising Chinese Trade and
        Development Assistance in West Africa.” Africa Trade Practice Working Paper Series
        Number 4, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Roache, Shaun K. 2012. “China’s Impact on World Commodity Markets.” IMF Working Paper
      WP/12/115, Washington DC.
Rosen, Daniel H., and Thilo Hanemann. 2009. “China’s Changing Outbound Foreign Direct
       Investment Profile: Drivers and Policy Implications.” Policy Brief Number PB09-14,
       Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC.
Salidjanova, Nargiza. 2011. “Going Out: An Overview of China’s Outward Foreign Direct
       Investment.” Staff Research Report, U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
       Commission, Washington, DC.
Sanyal, Kali, and Paige Darby. 2011–2012. “Budget 2010–11: Taxation—Resource Super Profits
       Tax.” Parliament of Australia, Canberra.
       http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Li
       brary/pubs/rp/BudgetReview201011/TaxationRSPTax.
Shen, Xiaofang. 2013. “Private Chinese Investment in Africa: Myths and Realities.” Policy
       Research Working Paper 6311, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2014. “Chinese Manufacturers Moving to Africa—Who? What? Where? Does Africa
   Benefit?” Paper presented at the conference “China in the World Economy: Building a
   New Partnership with Africa.” World Bank, Washington, DC, May 20.
Shen, Xiquan, and Ran Zhang. 2009. “Implications for the African Market from the Yuemei
       Group (Zhejiang).” NetEase, April 3.
       http://money.163.com/09/0403/16/5606INJO002524SD.html.
Shinn, David H., and Joshua Eisenman. 2012. China and Africa: A Century of Engagement, 142–
       43. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
State Council of China. 2011. “China-Africa Economic and Trade Cooperation.” Information
       Office, State Council of China, Beijing.
———. 2013. “China-Africa Economic and Trade Cooperation.” Information Office, State
   Council of China, Beijing.


                                              39
Strange, Austin, Bradley C. Parks, Michael J. Tierney, Andreas Fuchs, Axel Dreher, and Vijaya
       Ramachandran. 2013. “China’s Development Finance to Africa: A Media-Based Approach
       to Data Collection.” Working Paper 323, Center for Global Development, London.
Taylor, Rob. 2014. “Australia Repeals Mining Tax—Australia Mining Tax: Repeal Hands
       Political Victory to Prime Minister Tony Abbott.” The Wall Street Journal, September 2.
       http://online.wsj.com/articles/australia-mining-tax-government-to-end-30-levy-on-
       profits-1409631975.
The New York Times. 2007. “ICBC to Buy $5.6 Billion Stake in South African Bank.” The New
      York Times, October 25.
      http://www.nytimes.com/2007/10/26/business/worldbusiness/26iht-
      26icbc.8062473.html?_r=0.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2014. World Investment
    Report 2014: Investing in the SDGs: An Action Plan. Geneva: United Nations.
United Nations International Trade Statistics Knowledge. 2010. “Mirror Statistics.” UN
       Comtrade (UN Common format for Transient Data Exchange for power systems).
U.S. Department of Commerce. 2014. Doing Business in Mauritius: 2014 Country Commercial
       Guide for U.S. Companies. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of State.
Weisbrod, Aaron, and John Whalley. 2011. “The Contribution of Chinese FDI to Africa’s Pre
      Crisis Growth Surge.” NBER Working Paper No. 17544, National Bureau of Economic
      Research, Cambridge, MA.
Wenzhou Daily. 2009. “One Hundred Export-Oriented Enterprises Were Offered Credit Loans of
      3 Billion Yuan.” Wenzhou Daily, April 9.
      http://www.wzrb.com.cn/system/2009/04/09/101187103.shtml.
World Bank. 2014. “Gross Fixed Capital Formation Database.” World Development Indicators.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.
      http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NE.GDI.FTOT.CD.
Xinhua. 2009. “Implications from Yuemei Group as a Pioneer in Exploring African Markets.”
      Xinhua, Beijing, April 3. http://news.xinhuanet.com/newscenter/2009-
      04/03/content_11127076.htm.
Xinhua. 2011. “China’s Foreign Aid.” Xinhua, Beijing, April 21.
      http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-04/21/c_13839683.htm.
———. 2014. “China’s Foreign Aid.” Xinhua, Beijing, July 10.
   http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2014-07/10/c_133474011_2.htm.
Yuemei Group. 2014a. “Yuemei Group Overseas Investment.” (In Mandarin.)
     http://www.chinayuemei.com/porductsinfo.aspx?id=87.
———. 2014b. “Yuemei Group Overseas Investment.” (In English.)
   http://www.chinayuemei.com/en/porductsinfo.aspx?id=189.
Zafar, Ali. 2007. “The Growing Relationship between China and Sub-Saharan Africa:
       Macroeconomic, Trade, Investment, and Aid Links.” World Bank Research Observer 22
       (1): 103–30.



                                             40
