                     95392




  Paraguay


National Financial
Inclusion Strategy
    2014-2018




               December 2014
                                           Acknowledgements
The National Financial Inclusion Strategy was produced for the Government of Paraguay
with the technical assistance of the World Bank and financial support of the FIRST Trust
Fund Initiative. Dave Grace worked under the supervision of Jane Hwang with overall
guidance provided by Alfonso Garcia Mora (Practice Manager, Finance & Markets Global
Practice, Latin America and the Caribbean, World Bank).

The team thanks Yoko Doi, Celina Lee, Maria Cristina Heisecke Paredes, Mariana Paredes,
and Doug Randall for their substantive comments during various stages of this project.
Three Technical Notes: i) the Demand Side (Paraguay’s 2013 Financial Inclusion Survey)
ii)Supply Side Assessment of Financial Inclusion in Paraguay and iii) an assessment of the
Legal and Regulatory Framework of Paraguay for Financial Inclusion as well as a Consumer
Protection Financial Literacy Diagnostic conducted by the World Bank with financial support
from the SECO Trust Fund extensively informed the National Strategy. Gunhild Berg, Leyla
Castillo, Dante Mossi, Korotoumou Ouattara, and Javier Suarez also provided invaluable
insights to this strategy.

The Paraguayan authorities: the Banco Central (BCP), Ministerio de Hacienda (MH),
Instituto Nacional de Cooperativismo (INCOOP), Secretaría Técnica de Planificación del
Desarrollo Económico y Social (STP), and the Executive Secretary for the National Financial
Inclusion Committee led the Strategy drafting process with substantial input and guidance
based on the consultative process with the Paraguayan financial sector community. We
would like to particularly note the work of Isidro Chávez, Hernán Colmán, Zulma Espinola,
Paola Giménez, Cynthia Godoy, Ángel González Elizabeth Guerrero, Bernardo Navarro, and
Santiago Peña from BCP; Humberto Colmán, Carmen Marín, Laura Morínigo and Pedro
Peña from MH; Daniel Escauriza, María Echague, Edgar Gómez, Clara Invernizzi from STP
and Vanesa Carrera, Regis Gamarra, María Mercedes Ortega, and Norma Ortellado from
INCOOP.




                                                National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 2
                                             Table of Contents
Acknowledgements............................................................................................................................................ 2


Table of Contents ............................................................................................................................................ 3

National Financial Inclusion Strategy ...................................................................................................... 4
   1.        Executive Summary .............................................................................................................................. 4


   2.        Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 6
        A. Financial Inclusion Definition and Vision..................................................................................... 6
        B.      Rationale and Principles ................................................................................................................... 6


   3. Current State of Financial Inclusion in Paraguay – Where are we? .................................................. 8
        A. Financial Inclusion Environment ................................................................................................... 8
        B.      Savings ..............................................................................................................................................12
        C. Credit.................................................................................................................................................14
        D. Payments...........................................................................................................................................15
        E. Insurance ..........................................................................................................................................15
        F.      Financial Education ........................................................................................................................16
        G. Consumer Protection......................................................................................................................16


   4.        National Strategy for Financial Inclusion - Where do we want to get to by 2018.....................17
        A. Objectives of the ENIF .................................................................................................................18
        B.      Gap Analysis and Segmentation by Income Per Capita ............................................................19
        C. Key Performance Indicators, Working Groups and Action Plan ............................................23
        D. Governance Framework ................................................................................................................35
        E. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework ......................................................................................37


   5.        The Action Plan - How do we get there? ........................................................................................38
   Annex 1 .........................................................................................................................................................39




                                                                                       National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 3
      National Financial Inclusion Strategy


      Vision: Quality and affordable financial services for all people in Paraguay who
               want them through a diverse and competitive marketplace.



       1. Executive Summary


In support of the National Development Plan and in recognition of its commitment to
the Maya Declaration process for financial inclusion the Central Bank of Paraguay
(BCP), Ministry of Finance (MH), Secretary of Planning (STP), and National Institute of
Cooperativism (INCOOP) put forward this National Financial Inclusion Strategy (ENIF
for the Spanish name of Estrategia Nacional de Inclusión Financiera). The ultimate
goal of this financial inclusion strategy is to reduce poverty and promote economic growth in
Paraguay. This can best be accomplished by leveraging the combined power of the private,
non-profit, public sectors and civil society to identify realistic targets and work together in a
coordinated fashion to achieve them.

An inclusive financial system can help reduce poverty and promote shared
prosperity. The availability of affordable credit and holding of liquid savings can lead to
greater household and business income security which can help increase
consumer/business confidence. This leads to greater consumption and investments and
therein economic growth that can move Paraguay from lower-middle income to middle
income country status. More importantly, poor and financially vulnerable families can benefit
greatly from affordable and secure savings, payment and insurance services.1 Expanded
access to credit may benefit individuals and firms that are not over indebted and have the
capacity to productively leverage loans and repay them.

The ENIF encompasses holistic and logical sequence of activities derived from a
strong diagnostic base of evidence. Specifically, each thematic area has an associated
key performance indicator (KPI), each KPI has a visible and high-impact “quick win” activity
that people will be able to see and feel directly. Additional policy actions, 60 in total, are
designed to support the changes in these thematic areas and contribute in some part toward
achieving the key performance indicators. Figure 1 provides a summary matrix of the ENIF.
This is described throughout the strategy in more detail by identifying policy actions
attributed to each thematic area and working group. A consolidated list of all policy actions
is provided at the end of the document.




1   Global Financial Development Report: Financial Inclusion 2014. World Bank.

                                                                    National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 4
                      FIGURE 1: Matrix of National Financial Inclusion Strategy

Vision                  Quality and affordable financial services for all people in Paraguay who want them through a diverse and
                                                                 competitive marketplace

                    1) Reduce the financial vulnerabilities of families at the base of the pyramid.
Objectives          2) Promote outreach of financial services in a competitive and secure market place.
                    3) Aid economic development and growth through MSME and large firm access to financial products.
                    4) Promote financial inclusion while maintaining a balance with financial sector stability, integrity and the
                    education/protection of consumers.

Thematic Area       Savings          Credit             Insurance       Payments          Financial Ed.        Consumer             Vulnerable
                                                                                                               Protection           Populations
Key Indicator       Increase         Increase           Increase        Decrease           Increase the        All institutions     Extend via
                                                  2
To Achieve by       saving           responsible        insurance       usage of          percentage of        that provide         cost effective
2018                account          credit to          coverage        cash/check        adults (15+) who     regulated and        channels
(percentages        ownership        MSMEs from         from 26         for salary and    reported having      non-regulated        financial
are for             from 29          30 percent to      percent to 36   wage              received some        financial            services to all
individuals         percent to       40 percent and     percent of      payments          training / advice    services have        69 financially
except where        50 percent       increase the       adults.         from 76           or support on        and publicize        excluded and
noted)              of the adult     share of                           percent to 20     how to manage        arrangements         more
                    population       responsible                        percent.          personal             for customer         populated
                    and usage        borrowing at                                         finances and         complaints           districts in the
                    from 14          formal financial                                     administration       and queries          country with
                    percent of       institutions                                         money from 10%       that take into       an emphasis
                    population       from 23 to 28                                        to 20%.              account the          on the 17
                    saving           percent of                                                                realities of all     vulnerable
                    formally to      adults.                                                                   income               priority
                    30 percent                                                                                 groups,              districts that
                                                                                                               including the        are part of
                                                                                                               financial            government’s
                                                                                                               vulnerable.          plan to end
                                                                                                                                    extreme
                                                                                                                                    poverty.
Supporting          Issue clear       Ensure BCP’s       Explore the    Convert 80          Develop            Improve the           Leverage the
Quick Win           guidance on      and INCOOP’s       possibilities   percent of all    financial            regulation on        widespread
                    what is and      credit risk        of              central           education tools,     transparency         use of mobile
                    is not           information        implementing    government’s      guidelines and       of interest          phones and
                    needed to        systems            agricultural    payments to       content for          rates and fees       coverage of
                    open a           communicate        insurance for   consumers to      educational          via a total          mobile
                    regular          with each          small and       an electronic     institutions,        financial cost       network
                    savings          other. (FI, R)     medium          means and         social service       initially for        operators to
                    account. (FI,                       producers.      make 100          agencies and         credit and for       further
                    R)*                                 (FI)            percent of all    financial            all lenders.         expansion of
                                                                        new central       institutions, with   (CP, R)              savings
                                                                        government        an emphasis on                            among
                                                                        vendor            vulnerable                                vulnerable
                                                                        payments via      populations and                           populations.
                                                                        electronic        their                                     (FI – VP).
                                                                        means via         characteristics
                                                                        any institution   (topics may
                                                                        authorized for    include credit
                                                                        the purpose.      cards, what are
                                                                        (FI, R)           interest
                                                                                          payments, loans,
                                                                                          savings and
                                                                                          insurance).(FE,
                                                                                          VP)

             *Indicates supporting policy action themes: Financial Innovation (FI), Regulation (R) , Financial Education (FE),
             Consumer Protection (CP), Vulnerable Population(VP)


             2
              The term “responsible credit” is used to refer to practices related to assessing a consumer’s ability to pay,
             operating transparently, ethically and in a manner that respects client’s privacy and their right to recourse
             mechanisms.

                                                                            National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 5
      2. Introduction

      A. Financial Inclusion Definition and Vision

  The consensus definition for the BCP, MH, STP and INCOOP for financial inclusion is:

         The access to and usage of a range of quality, timely, convenient and informed
         financial services at affordable prices. These services are under appropriate
         regulation that guarantee consumer protection and promote financial education to
         improve financial capabilities and rational decision-making by all segments of the
         population.

      With this as the agreed upon definition, the vision of financial inclusion for Paraguay is:
      Quality and affordable financial services for all people in Paraguay who want them
      through a diverse and competitive marketplace.

  For this vision to become a reality it will be essential for the private, non-profit, public and
  civil society sectors to work together in a coordinated way. This can best be achieved if all
  parties understand the broader context and rationale for why financial inclusion is critical to
  Paraguay’s growth, how it can reduce poverty and the action plan that will contribute to this.
  Figure 2 outlines the sequential and logical steps utilized in developing the ENIF.


          Figure 2: Framework of the National Financial Inclusion Strategy



  Vision                                       Key                     Quick Win
Principles          Gap Analysis           Performance                                            Action Plan
                                                                        Actions
Objectives                                  Indicators


      B. Rationale and Principles

  In 2010 the Group of 20 (G20) countries established a financial inclusion action plan
  because they recognized the importance of financial services for improving the livelihoods of
  poor households and supporting micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) which are
  often the engines of employment and economic growth.

  As part of Paraguay’s National Development Plan there is a clear understanding that
  financial inclusion is one of three necessary components to achieve an inclusive society in
  Paraguay, the other two components are social and economic inclusions. In this context,
  social inclusion is the ability of Paraguayan society to meet the basic human needs of its
  citizens and communities. Economic inclusion requires inclusive growth that creates
  economic opportunities, promotes employment and equal access while maintaining
  macroeconomic stability, ensuring competition, freedom of entrepreneurship, and the
  rational use of resources.




                                                     National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 6
While initially started by the G20, its financial inclusion principles and work of the Global
Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI)3 have been significantly influenced by the work of
policy makers in developing countries. For financial inclusion to become a reality in
Paraguay, the ENIF seeks to adhere to the following principles for financial inclusion that
have been endorsed by the G20.

1. Leadership
Cultivate a broad-based government commitment to financial inclusion to help alleviate
poverty.

2. Diversity
Implement policy approaches that promote competition and provide market‑based
incentives for delivery of sustainable financial access and usage of a broad range of
affordable services (savings, credit, payments and transfers, insurance) as well as a
diversity of service providers.

3. Innovation
Promote technological and institutional innovation as a means to expand financial system
access and usage by addressing infrastructure weaknesses.

4. Protection
Encourage a comprehensive approach to consumer protection that recognizes the roles of
government, providers and consumers.

5. Empowerment
Develop financial literacy and financial capability.

6. Cooperation
Create an institutional environment with clear lines of accountability and coordination within
government; and also encourage partnerships and direct consultation across government,
business and other stakeholders.

7. Knowledge
Utilize improved data to make evidence-based policy, measure progress, and consider an
incremental “test and learn” approach acceptable to both regulators and service providers.

8. Proportionality
Build a policy and regulatory framework that is proportionate with the risks and benefits
involved in such innovative products and services and is based on an understanding of the
gaps and barriers in the existing regulation.

9. Framework
Consider the following in the regulatory framework: reflection of international standards,
national circumstances and support for a competitive landscape; an appropriate, flexible, risk
‑based Anti‑Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT)
regime; conditions for the use of agents as a customer interface; a clear regulatory regime
for electronically stored value; and market‑based incentives to achieve the long‑term goal of
broad interoperability and interconnection.




3
    To learn more about the GPFI see http://www.gpfi.org/

                                                            National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 7
3. Current State of Financial Inclusion in Paraguay – Where are we?

In 2013, the Government of Paraguay started working towards the development of a
National Financial Inclusion Strategy first in a initiative of the Central Bank of Paraguay
requesting the support of the World Bank and next, forming an interagency technical team
that helped draft the financial inclusion survey implemented in Paraguay at the end of that
year and promote measures to strengthen the commitment to financial inclusion. In mid-
2014 intensive diagnostics, analysis and activity mapping were conducted under the
direction of the Financial Inclusion Technical Team.4 A high-level recap of the financial
inclusion environment and major product areas from the National Financial Inclusion Survey
2013 (i.e., demand side), Supply-Side Assessment of Financial Inclusion in Paraguay,
Financial Regulation for Financial Inclusion and the Diagnostic Review of Consumer
Protection and Financial Literacy in Paraguay is provided below. The intention of this
section is to describe the current state of financial inclusion in Paraguay before later
determining where we want to get to and how to get there.5



    A. Financial Inclusion Environment

        The National Financial Inclusion Survey (Encuesta de Inclusion Financiera6 or
        EIF in Spanish) indicates 58 percent of adults in Paraguay use some sort of
        formal or commercial financial product to manage their day-to-day finances.
        This number is largely driven by the strong presence of cooperatives and mobile
        money providers in Paraguay, which together reach 40 percent of the population. Yet
        42 percent of adults remain almost totally excluded from using the financial system.
        These adults do not have an account at, or borrow, from a formal financial institution,
        do not have an ATM or credit card, do not use mobile money, do not have insurance,
        and receive wages and remittances in cash only. These adults – the ‘totally
        excluded’ – are disproportionately poor, have a primary education or less, and are
        unemployed or out of the workforce.

        Rural areas of the country have limited access to formal financial services.
        Bank presence in rural low-access areas has the opportunity to increase rapidly
        through the use of bank agents, electronic money, and mobile financial services. In
        addition, 30 percent or 69 of the 224 districts in the country with more than 2,000
        inhabitants do not have any bank presence whether through branches, bank agents
        or ATMs. There are no bank or cooperative branches where 17 percent of the
        population lives. This describes both the current state of play and the potential for
        digital financial services and agent banking to reduce the costs associated with
        serving sparsely populated areas. The lack of bank branches in rural areas is a
        reflection of the financial challenges of maintaining offices that are less productive in
        generating loan or savings volumes.

4
  The Technical Team is comprised of representatives from BCP, INCOOP, STP, MH and led by the Executive
Secretary.
5
  For a full discussion of these topics please reference the complete technical documents.
6
  The EIF was conducted in November 2013 and consisted of 1,000 nationally representative face-to-face
interviews, based on population density, and randomly selected interviewees. The interviews were conducted
with person over the age of 15 in 133 sites in Spanish and Guarani languages.

                                                          National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 8
        Paraguay is one of the most profitable markets in the world for banking.7 The
        average return on asset (ROA) of the banks at the end of 2013 was 2.40 percent and
        return of equity (ROE) 30.07 percent.8 The average interest rate spread of banks and
        finance companies in 2013 was 13.2 percent.9 In comparison the ROE for all US
        banks in 2013 was 9.8 percent.10 This large interest rate spread, low operating costs
        (2.4 percent of assets), and moderate non-performing loans (i.e. 2.5 percent of total
        loans as of June 2013) have been the drivers of these high profits.         These high
        levels of profitability were achieved despite liquid assets representing 46.7 percent of
        deposits in June 2013.11 Relative to other countries there is not excessive
        concentration of banking sector assets among a few banks and cooperatives and
        public banks have 20 percent combined market share. This information suggests
        there is competition within the banking sector. However, in practice there is little
        variation in terms of business approaches and there does not appear to be any
        significant player(s) that has chosen to differentiate itself on either total costs of
        service or outreach to the unbanked. As such, Paraguay remains a high price and
        high profit market for retail banking compared to the region and globally.         New
        incentive structures may be required to change this dynamic.

        There are 15 private banks and 12 finance companies registered in Paraguay
        and regulated by the Superintendence of Banks. Of these, three are foreign
        banks with branches in Paraguay, four foreign-owned banks operating in Paraguay
        and eight local banks. There are four public financial institutions including Banco
        Nacional de Fomento, Crédito Agrícola de Habilitación, Fondo Ganadero and
        Agencia Financiera de Desarrollo. There are 330 cooperatives that intermediate
        funds as a primary activity and are regulated by INCOOP.

        Paraguay has one of the largest financial cooperative systems in the region in
        terms of the percentage of the population served12; cooperatives seem to have
        more accounts than the banking system. Figure 4 shows a comparison of banks
        and cooperatives involved in financial intermediation. Although the extent of overlap
        is not known, there likely are many individuals that hold accounts at multiple banks
        and/or cooperatives. While much smaller average loan and savings balances at the
        cooperatives suggests they are serving people of more modest means they do not
        appear to be serving large number of very low income residents.

        Figure 3 provides a summary of financial services providers in Paraguay and how
        they are structured, regulated, the services provided and footprint.




7
  McKinsey & Company. Second Annual Review on the Banking Industry. October 2012.
8
  BCP reported to the World Bank 2014
9
  http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/FR.INR.LNDP
10
   Federal Reserve Economic Data. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/series/USNIM
11
   BCP Financial Stability Report 2013. https://www.bcp.gov.py/informe-fsap-i152
12
   Financial cooperatives in Paraguay serve 15.7% of the adult population compared to a regional average of
7.2%. 2013 Statistics Report. World Council.

                                                            National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 9
            Figure 3: Supply of Financial Services and the Associated Legal Framework

Financial            Ownership          Regulatory        Range of financial          Number          Outreach
                                                                                                                13
provider                                status            services allowed            of             Indicators
                                                                                      provider
                                                                                      s
First and second     Private sector     Regulated         Checking accounts,          First tier     Avg Deposit
                                                                                              14
tier banks           and public         and licensed      savings, term               banks :       Gs 61.3 million
                                                                                         15
(76% market          sector             by BCP.           deposits, issue             16
share of banking     ownership          Supervised        securities loans,                         Gs 56 trillion in
sector assets)                          by SIB.           leasing, factoring,         Second            loans
                                                          payments,                   tier
                                                                                           16
                                                          investments in              banks :         Number of
                                                                                        17
                                                          securities and shares,      1               Accounts
                                                          manage trust funds,                          993,411
                                                          foreign exchange            Other
                                                          operations and loan         public           Branches
                                                          securitization, money       financial           394
                                                          transfers                   providers:
                                                                                        18
                                                                                      2
Finance              Private sector     Regulated         Savings, term               12            112 branches
companies            and public         and licensed      deposits, issue                           See bank data
(4% market           sector             by BCP.           securities loans,                            above
share of banking     ownership          Supervised        leasing, factoring,
sector assets)                          by SIB.           payments,
                                                          investments in
                                                          securities and shares,
                                                          manage trust funds,
                                                          foreign exchange
                                                          operations, money
                                                          transfers
Insurance            Private sector     Regulated         Insurance of individual     35
companies            and public         and licensed      risks and assets.                           US$342.4
                     sector             by BCP.                                                        million in
                     ownership          Supervised                                                   Premiums in
                                        by SIS.                                                          2013
                                                                                            20
Saving and loan      Members            Regulated         Savings and loans to        330           For all types of
cooperatives                            and               members in local                           cooperatives
(15% market                             supervised        currency, investments
share of banking                        by INCOOP         in securities, leasing,
sector assets)                                            factoring, payments,
                                                          money transfers, credit
Type A: assets                                            cards. Provision of
over US$11                                                non-financial services.                    Avg Deposit
                                                                              19
million.                                                  Only for members .                         Gs 5.1 million


  13
     Bank and finance company data is combined under banking section and from 2014.
  14
     First tier banks are commercial banks that provide financial services for individuals and enterprises.
  15
     Includes 15 private banks and 1 public bank (Banco Nacional de Fomento)
  16
     Second tier banks are agencies that only lend to other banks, finance companies and cooperatives using funds
  from loans provided by multilaterals with state’s guarantee, donations, or bonds.
  17
     Agencia Financiera de Desarrollo (AFD)
  18
     Credito Agricola de Habilitacion and Fondo Ganadero are public financial institutions that provide public
  specialized credit. These institutions have their own organic laws and are also subject to the Financial Sector
  Law.
  19
     Services to non-members can be implemented with approval of exception from INCOOP.
  20
     This number refers to cooperatives whose primary business is financial services according to the Supply Side
  Technical Note.

                                                             National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 10
Type B: assets       Members            Regulated         Savings and loans to                       Gs10 trillion in
between US$1                            and               members in local                              loans
million to US$11                        supervised        currency, investments
million.                                by INCOOP         in securities, leasing,                      Number of
                                                          factoring, payments,                          Accounts
                                                                                                                 21
                                                          credit cards. Provision                      1,390,113
                                                          of non-financial
                                                          services.
                                                          Only for members.                          Branches 490

Type C: assets       Members            Regulated         Savings and loans to
under US$1                              and               members in local
million.                                supervised        currency, investments
                                        by INCOOP         in securities, leasing,
                                                          factoring, payments.
                                                          Specific prior
                                                          authorization for:
                                                          payments and
                                                          transfers; credit line
                                                          intermediation. Credit
                                                          cards must be issued
                                                          by Types A or B.
                                                          Using ATM with Types
                                                          A or B backup.
                                                          Provision of non-
                                                          financial services.
                                                          Only for members.
                                                                                             22
E-payment            Private sector     Regulated,        E-money operations          N.A.
providers            and public         licensed and      and non-banks e-
(EMPEs)              sector             supervised        transfers
                     ownership          by BCP
Casas de bolsa       Private sector     Regulated,        Buying and selling          7
                     and public         inscription in    debt and equity-
                     sector             registry          backed securities
                     ownership          required at
                                        CNV
Non-profit           Private sector     No regulation     Loans and non-              2
microfinance         individuals or     and no            financial services
institutions         entities           supervision
(MFIs)/NGOs
Casas de crédito     Private sector     No regulation     Loans                       N.A.
                     individuals or     and no
                     entities           supervision
Casas                Private sector     No regulation     Selling of goods and        N.A.
comerciales          individuals or     and no            services on credit.
                     entities           supervision
Pawn-shops           Private sector     Regulated by      Loans with pledge on        N.A
                     entities or        Ministry of       assets
                     individuals        Finance.
                                        Licensed and
                                        inspected by
                                        local
                                        municipality.
Medicina             Private sector     Regulated         Coverage over future        65            500,000
Prepaga / Pre-       individuals or     and               health problems                           beneficiaries
paid medicine        entities           supervised

  21
    For cooperatives this figure is the number of members, not accounts.
  22
    BCP is currently in process of analyzing 2 operators that have requested an extension to adjust to the new
  requirements.

                                                             National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 11
companies                                   by the
                                            Superintende
                                            nce of Health
                                            under the
                                            Ministry of
                                            Health
Payment service        Private sector       No regulation       Payment collection             N.A
providers and          entities             and no              services and sending
remittances                                 supervision,        and receiving
providers                                   exceptions          remittances
                                            being
                                            AML/CFT
                                            regulations
                                            issued by
                                            SEPRELAD

  Source: Based on laws and regulations for the financial services and insurance in Paraguay, and findings from Supply-Side and
                       Financial Regulation for Financial Inclusion Technical Notes for additional details.




           The BCP is in charge of licensing and prudential oversight of banks, finance
           and insurance companies, and to a limited extent e-money issuers. INCOOP is
           the regulatory body of all cooperatives. The Secretary for Consumer Protection
           (SEDECO) is an umbrella consumer protection regulator whose remit covers all
           sectors including the financial sector. Neither BCP nor INCOOP has explicit
           mandate to also include supervision and enforcement of the Consumer
           Protection Law for their supervised entities.

      B. Savings

           Only 29 percent of adults in Paraguay report having an account at a formal
           financial institution -- a commonly used global metric for financial inclusion.
           Relative to other lower-middle income countries in Latin America financial inclusion in
           Paraguay is moderately more advanced. However, compared to Latin America and
           the Caribbean (39 percent), Paraguay is lagging. Regression analysis from the
           demand side EIF suggests that the largest gaps are across income (17 percent gap),
           education lines (21 percent gap) and employment categories (20 percent between
           unemployed and fully employed). The gender gap (females are 2 percent more
           likely than men to have an account) and urban/rural (urban residents are 4 percent
           more likely to hold an account) also exist but are not statically significant. Figure 4
           highlights the percent of people that have an account with a cooperative, bank and
           combined.




                                                                    National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 12
           Figure 4: Account Ownership in Paraguay




                                             29%                           19%
                                                                           1                            12%


                                  ADULTS WITH AN ACCOUNT AT A    ADULTS WITH AN ACCOUNT AT A   ADULTS WITH AN ACCOUNT AT
                                  FORMAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTION           COOPERATIVE                     A BANK




           Cooperatives play a key role in providing formal financial services to adults in
           Paraguay. Cooperatives have the broadest reach in providing basic saving and
           payment services within the formal financial system. Nineteen percent of adults in
           Paraguay report having an account at a cooperative, as compared to 12 percent for
           banks.

           For the 71 percent of Paraguayan adults – approximately 3.2 million people –
           who lack a formal account, the main barriers to access are a lack of money (51
           percent) and documentation (24 percent). Paraguay has a large informal market
           and the requirements to show proof of income and employment are significant
           barriers to financial inclusion as are bureaucracy and excessive costs. Each of these
           last two reasons is reported by about one in five unbanked Paraguayans. In addition,
           analysis from the financial inclusion supply side technical note indicates a median
           minimum balance to open an ordinary savings account (ahorros a la vista) at a
           sample of 20 of the 27 financial entities is 750,000 Gs. which is 42% of the monthly
           minimum wage set in Paraguay.23

           Thirty-nine percent of adults in Paraguay have set aside money or saved, either
           formally or informally. Just 14 percent of all adults report having saved at a
           formal financial institution. As in many countries, the vast majority of savers in
           Paraguay choose to store their money at home: 62 percent of savers – or 24 percent
           of all adults - report having saved at home in the past 12 months. Those who report
           having confidence in financial institutions are more than twice as likely to save in
           formal institutions as those who do not. Approximately one-third of adults have
           borrowed money in the past 12 months, which is above the regional average of 25
           percent.

           Access to savings products is low. Because of high minimum balances, service
           fees, and documentation barriers such as proof of income, employment and utility
           bills low-income people who wish to save do not have many opportunities to do so
           through formal financial institutions.




23
     The minimum wage in Paraguay since March 2014 is around 1.8 million Gs or $411 USD per month

                                                                          National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 13
           Basic accounts could potentially tap into this gap in the savings market.
           However, adoption by the financial institutions of the basic account (cuentas basicas)
           has been slow. Six banks have submitted their account disclosures to BCP and
           received approval to offer basic accounts. Of those offering the product, training and
           promotion in branches is lagging in part because of fee and business model
           limitations with the basic accounts.

           Together with finance companies, banks hold only 42 percent of the deposit accounts
           in the country, but 89 percent of deposits in volume. Cooperatives hold 58 percent of
           the formal deposit accounts in the country, but only 11 percent of the deposits by
           value thus indicative of their focus on consumer finances.

           Deposit insurance exists for bank and finance companies up to 75 times
           monthly wages (i.e., US$30,000). A deposit insurance scheme to protect members
           of savings and credit cooperatives against a potential loss of their savings in case of
           the cooperative’s bankruptcy is not yet in place. In November 2013 INCOOP
           introduced new regulatory requirements on capital, liquidity and deposit
           concentration limits for cooperatives that have savings and credit as their primary
           activity. These new rules are proportional in nature and improve some of the
           regulatory gaps that existed. Despite having more deposit accounts than the banks
           and finance companies, cooperatives still do not have deposit insurance. As
           INCOOP’s new regulations are implemented over the next 18 months and the sector
           is strengthened a separate deposit insurance scheme from banks is planned for
           cooperatives.

       C. Credit

           Overall, 34 percent of Paraguayan adults report some type of borrowing in the
           past year. Cooperatives are also the most widely reported source of consumer
           credit. Thirteen percent of adults report having borrowed from a cooperative in the
           past year compared to 8 percent from banks.

           Approximately 30 percent of SMEs have borrowed money to finance their
           operations. According to the National Economic Census 2011, only 27 percent
           of microenterprises in the country have formal credit. This is in part due to the
           documentation requirements and on-site supervision techniques that focus on
           documentation as opposed to cash flow analysis and repayment methodologies.
           When looking at only rural agriculture microenterprises, or family farms, 24 this
           number falls to only 15.9 percent.

           Of those that do not have a loan approximately half of such businesses would like to
           borrow money for their businesses.25 This suggests 64 percent of 1.1 million
           businesses have a demand for loans. Banks and finance companies also hold 84
           percent of the loans in value and cooperatives hold 16 percent.

           One in ten adults report having borrowed in the past year for health purposes,
           more than any other reason listed. These results suggest that considerable work

24
     Family farms are classified by the Ministry of Agriculture as farms with less than 20 hectares.
25
     See http://www.dgeec.gov.py/censo/index.php

                                                                National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 14
  remains to be done in expanding access to products and services that help people
  smooth consumption, manage risk, and weather economic shocks.

  Most formal and semi-formal lenders ask for a national ID, a utility bill, proof of
  employment and a personal reference (this is used as an alternative means for
  locating the borrower). The critical documentation that the majority of the
  population cannot provide is proof of employment. Anecdotal evidence indicates that
  there are segments of the population which are over-indebted and during the past
  decade credit in the banking sector as a percentage of GDP has grown from 12
  percent to 39 percent. That said, other national-level indicators such as the low rate
  of non-performing loans (NPLs) (2.5 percent in banks) and that only 4 percent of
  borrowers are obtaining loans from more than one source, suggests there is not
  systemic over-indebtedness affecting large segments of the market. Moving forward
  better measurements of over-indebtedness and consumers/MSMEs debt loads,
  capacity and management will be needed.

D. Payments

  With a population of 6.6 million people, there are 7 million cellular lines in
  Paraguay. Twenty eight percent of adults in Paraguay report having used
  mobile money in the past 12 months. Mobile money is the most popular way to
  send money or receive money from family or friends living elsewhere in Paraguay.

  Over the past decade government and the national pension system have begun
  making electronic salary and pension payments. Uptake is slow but the potential
  is significant if beneficiaries were to be required to have an account (or payment
  card). Beyond domestic remittances, digital payments can be expanded to improve
  the efficiency and security of wage and government-to-person payments. The
  distribution of wages and salaries in Paraguay remains mostly cash-based. Of the 34
  percent of Paraguayan adults who report having received money as salary or wages
  from an employer in the past 12 months, 76 percent report having received this
  payment in cash. This could be due to the low level of account ownership and legacy
  issues related to requirements to have an account at a particular bank that an
  employer designates.

  Banks could potentially benefit from the robust agent networks already
  developed by other types of financial service providers such as payment
  processing companies and mobile network operators. For example, Tigo has
  310 agents or less than 1 percent of its total 33,000 agent network which are
  approved to perform banking operations; Personal agents extend financial services
  to 58 districts (26% of all districts in the country) that banks do not serve (no branch
  or agents)

E. Insurance

  Insurance coverage in the country is low. There is potential to expand coverage
  with micro-insurance products, agricultural insurance, and medical insurance.
  Coverage is especially low in rural areas and among low-income populations. There
  are 35 insurance companies in Paraguay. Competition in the insurance industry

                                            National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 15
        should be revisited to see if variation of business models can be induced to promote
        competition.

        Twenty six percent of adults have some form of insurance. Health insurance (25
        percent) is the primary form of insurance held by people that have insurance
        coverage.26 Paraguay is the only country in South America where auto insurance is
        not mandatory. While the reasons for the low levels of insurance coverage were not
        specifically identified in the EIF, the survey did indicate that this financial service had
        larger gaps in terms of uptake among various groups than savings, credit and
        payments. Specifically the elderly, better educated, higher income and urban
        populations were the most likely to have insurance. The low levels of personal assets
        to insure, the voluntary nature of insurance (especially for health, home and auto),
        and low levels of insurance product awareness are likely contributors to these low
        levels of usage.

     F. Financial Education

        There is significant scope to expand the availability of financial education
        programs in Paraguay. One in ten adults report that they, or someone in their
        household, have received personal finance or money management lessons.
        Evidence from randomized-controlled trials has shown well-designed financial
        education programs can equip people with the knowledge and skills to take
        advantage of appropriate financial services to save, borrow, make payments and
        manage risk.

     G. Consumer Protection27

        The Consumer Protection Law and Civil Code set the legal basis for consumer
        protection in Paraguay, although most of the provisions are broad in nature
        and may need further regulations to be realistically enforceable. The BCP
        introduced over the last few years a number of regulations for banks and finance
        companies, which aim to enhance comparability of prices and commissions, and
        improve the general disclosure of information. For insurance companies, no clear
        legal framework for consumer protection exists. BCP also issued Resolution 1, Act
        70, 2011 on the use of agents, and Resolution 6, Act 18, 2014 on E-money issuers,
        both of which contemplate provisions on consumer protection-related issues,
        including business practices, transparency, provider liability and complaints handling.
        Provisions to protect clients from non-transparent bundling of products and abusive
        debt collection practices are not yet in place. In addition, the supervisor of
        cooperatives, INCOOP, lacks a dedicated unit responsible for financial consumer
        protection and financial education.

        The legal and regulatory framework does not require banks, finance companies
        or cooperatives to have internal complaint handling processes in place. No
        public institution has a clear legal mandate or dedicated funding for providing

26
  World Bank, National Financial Inclusion Survey Paraguay 2013
27
  In June 2014 the World Bank conducted a detailed consumer protection and financial literacy diagnostic in
Paraguay. Information in this strategy on these areas draws heavily on the findings from this diagnostic.


                                                           National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 16
             financial education and coordinating efforts amongst the various stakeholders.


   4. National Strategy for Financial Inclusion - Where do we want to get to
      by 2018

   This National Financial Inclusion Strategy (ENIF) is a crucial component of the
   government’s larger national development plan and establishes interim financial
   inclusion goals for 2018. The Government of Paraguay has laid out within its National
   Development Plan a series of objectives and development goals for 2030. Included within
   this broader National Development Plan is a goal of universal financial inclusion by 2030.
   The ENIF sets out nearer term objectives and goals for 2018 to work towards this ambitious
   goal of universal access by 2030 set out in the National Development Plan.

   Engaging local stakeholders and the research derived from the technical notes on the
   demand, supply, legal/regulatory and consumer protection environments of financial
   services in Paraguay were critical inputs for developing this strategy. Taken together
   these inputs allow for evidence-based targets to be developed within the ENIF. These
   targets are meant to support the government’s high-level goal of reducing poverty. As
   indicated below in Figure 5, this strategy depends heavily on an iterative process and inputs.



   Figure 5: ENIF Implementation Process




                                                    Stakeholder                  Finalize
     Diagnostics           Draft Strategy           Engagement                   Strategy               Implement
   Nov `13-June `14        Jun `14 - Sept `14                                 Nov `14 - Dec            Jan `15 - Dec `18
                                                    Oct `14-Nov `14
                                                                                   `14



• Demand                • Vision                                          • Formal Adoption by     • Public/private
• Supply                • Objectives            • Private Sector            Government               partnerships and
• Legal/Reg.            • Gap Analysis          • Other Govt Entities                                working groups
• Consumer Protection   • KPIs                  • Civil Society
                        • Action Plan




   Including more people at the base of the pyramid in the formal economy and financial
   sector will reduce inequality and promote shared prosperity. The first step in the
   strategy is establishing the high-level objectives for financial inclusion. Next, a gap analysis
   of the current financial profiles versus financial needs of the five primary income groups in
   Paraguay is conducted. Following the gap analysis, key performance indicators and quick
   win actions are identified to close the gap in needs and to meet the objectives of the
   strategy. Lastly, the ENIF provides a governance framework, monitoring process, and
   detailed action plan to aid implementation of the strategy.



                                                            National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 17
        A. Objectives of the ENIF

        The ENIF will encourage the development of financial products according to the
        needs of all people, but focusing on financial inclusion for vulnerable populations.
        The ENIF establishes the following objectives for an inclusive financial sector:

        Objective 1: Reduce the financial vulnerabilities of families at the base of the
        pyramid. There is increasing awareness and recognition of the impacts that
        financial vulnerability has on households and child well-being.28 The 2013 Paraguay
        Financial Inclusion Survey indicates that approximately 20 percent of adults
        sometimes or always run out of money to buy food and other necessities. Families
        which have some savings, regardless of how meager, micro-insurance, and/or
        access to credit or quick remittances will be better protected against economic
        shocks.

        Objective 2: Promote outreach of financial services in a competitive and secure
        marketplace. The banking sector in Latin America has the highest return on equity
        levels in the world 29 and Paraguay has one of the most profitable banking systems in
        Latin America. These high levels of profits and the relative stability in bank profits30
        provide ample opportunity for serving a population with low levels of banking access.
        This ENIF identifies policy actions that can be taken to make Paraguay an attractive
        market for business models to deepen outreach in a sustainable, well-regulated and
        profitable way.

        Objective 3: Aid economic development and growth through MSMEs and large
        firms access to financial products. Paraguay’s 2011 Censo Economico Nacional
        indicated that only 35 percent of firms had obtained financing or loans for their
        businesses and approximately half of those that did not have access needed access
        to financing. However, one fifth of such firms needing loans have not even applied
        because they anticipate outright rejection. Even among medium and large firms, the
        2011 Economic Census indicates that nearly one out of every six firms don’t seek
        credit because of anticipated rejection. In addition, 12 percent of large firms and over
        50 percent of medium sized firms do not have a bank account. Ensuring creditworthy
        MSMEs and large firms have sufficient access to financial services will enable their
        growth and therein serve as the engines for employment to aid in reducing poverty.

        Objective 4: Promote financial inclusion while maintaining a balance with
        financial sector stability, integrity and the education/protection of consumers.
        The government will seek to identify actions which aid stability, integrity, consumer
        protection, and financial inclusion. Such areas may include improving the scope of
        institutions served by deposit insurance, credit bureaus, lender of last resort facilities,
        expanding usage of formal savings and insurance. Ultimately it is a stable financial
        sector that will best aid the citizens of Paraguay going forward.


28
   Nicola Jones, Impact of Economic Crisis on Child-Well Being. Overseas Development Institute. 2011
29
   McKinsey & Company. Second Annual Review on the Banking Industry. October 2012.
30
   Thorsten Beck. Bank Competition and Stability. August 3, 2011.
http://blogs.worldbank.org//allaboutfinance/bank-competition-and-stability-cross-country-heterogeneity

                                                           National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 18
        B. Gap Analysis and Segmentation by Income Per Capita31

        According to the Financial Inclusion Survey (EIF) a person’s income and
        working status are key drivers of whether or not he/she is likely to have, and
        use, an account at a formal financial institution. As such, a segmentation
        strategy based on income groups is a useful way to develop strategies to improve
        usage of financial services. However, a fixation on income as opposed to the
        consideration of social and economic inclusion, can stunt progress. Ample research
        indicates that many families move out of and slip back into an income group multiple
        times over a lifetime.32

        The gap analysis overlays the findings from the EIF with the data from the
        Dirección General de Estadística, Encuestas y Censos (DGEEC) 2013
        Permanent Household Survey’s Principal Results on Income. Using these two
        sources of data this segmentation provides a comprehensive picture of individuals’
        demographic and financial profiles specific to Paraguay.

        Given the structure of incomes in Paraguay and data from the EIF, the gap
        analysis reviews the financial profile and needs of five income groups (i.e.,
        extreme poor which are 10 percent of the population; the poor, but not
        extreme, which are 11 percent of the population; middle income which are 56
        percent of the population; upper middle income which are 13 percent of the
        population; and those within the top 10 percent of incomes). Although separate
        financial services needs are identified across the five groups, in practice the needs
        are not as static or homogenous as portrayed below and there are many needs (i.e.,
        improving financial capability) that are nearly universal. It is important to recognize
        that the figures in this analysis are based on per capita household incomes not
        individual wages or total household income33.

        The purpose of segmenting the adult population into these five groups is to
        ground the strategy, its policy actions and any new products/services that
        emanate from it in the realities and needs of potential customers. With the
        overall focus of the ENIF on reducing poverty, there is a specific focus on the
        extreme poor, poor but not extreme, and those that are above the poverty line34 but
        are not paid the minimum wage.


31
   The Gap Analysis compares the current situation to the estimated needs and draws on data from the EIF 2013
and the Permanent Household Survey 2013, Dirección General de Estadistica, Encuestas y Censos (DGEEC).
The income groupings are also based on the DGEEC’s Permanent Household Survey 2013 and are based on
per capita household incomes in the 2013 Principal Results on Poverty and Income Distributions bulletin.
http://www.dgeec.gov.py/Publicaciones/Biblioteca/eph_2013/Boletin%20de%20pobreza%202013.pdf
32
   Deepa Narayan, L. Pritchett and S. Kapoor, Moving Out of Poverty: Success from the Bottom Up. World Bank.
2009
33
   To illustrate the difference, the national average income per worker in 2013 was Gs 4,295,000, whereas, the
per capita household income in 2013 was Gs 735,565. The difference being children, elderly, etc. which are part
of the per capita calculation but are not working. Throughout this document per capita data is used based on
DGEEC’s Permanent Household Survey 2013.
34
   The poverty and extreme poverty lines are calculated using the cost of a basic food basket (BFB) and the cost
of a total basic basket (TBB). These costs are compared with the per capita family income obtained in the
household permanent survey. If per capita income is below the value of the BFB, households are considered
living in extreme poverty. If that value is higher than the BFB, but lower than the TBB, the household is
considered poor.

                                                           National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 19
             At the surface, the financial inclusion needs of the professional class may not
             seem important for raising prospects for the poor. However, if this group and
             those with upper incomes are not using local institutions to save and borrow, markets
             will not have enough depth and institutions may not be able to sustainably serve
             poorer segments. To expand financial services to poorer individuals in a sustainable
             manner it’s important to also include the large middle and upper income groups in the
             ENIF especially since as depicted in Figure 6, 58 percent of people in the top quintile
             also do not have an account at a formal financial institution. Figure 6 also shows the
             account penetration by income level in Paraguay and compares this on a summary
             level with the rest of Latin America.


             Figure 6: Account Penetration and Income Distribution

Account penetration among the poorest quintiles                                                                   Account penetration by within-economy income quintile
Adults in the poorest quintile (bottom 40%) with an account at a formal                                           Adults with an account at a formal financial institution (%)
financial institution (%)


  41
                                                                                                                    RICHEST                         42


       35
                                                                                                                         Q4                         32
             31



                  26                                                     Regional average: 25
                       24
                            23   22
                                                                                                                         Q3                         32
                                      21

                                           17   17
                                                     15
                                                          13
                                                                                                                         Q2                         21
                                                               13   12
                                                                          11

                                                                                 8
                                                                                       6        6     5            POOREST                          20

 BRA   CRI   VEN CHL ECU ARG DOM PRY BOL PAN COL GTM HND MEX URY PER SLV                        NIC   HTI




             Group 1: Extreme Poor – 10 percent of the Population

             Demographic Population Profile: Monthly per capita household income below the
             extreme poverty line of Gs 302,285 (US$ 70). Two-thirds of the extreme poor are in
             rural areas. Women and the disabled are disproportionally represented. The
             employment status of these people generally cannot be verified and they are the
             least likely to have national IDs.

             Financial Profile: Very limited income, job opportunity and physical/financial assets.
             Less than 20 percent have an account at a formal financial institution and many are
             totally excluded from the formal financial system. These people frequently or
             sometimes run out of money to buy basic necessities and food. They are the most
             vulnerable to external shocks (i.e., economic down turn, personal or family illness or
             death).

             Financial Service Needs: Very low cost mechanism that will help them absorb the
             frequent shocks they experience. Simplified documentation requirements to open
             savings accounts and low cost mechanisms to receive government or private money
             transfers (e.g., via mobile money). These services are needed at very low costs


                                                                                                            National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 20
        which could include being performed via nearby banking agents. Channeling
        government transfer payments via the formal financial sector helps introduce these
        people to the formal sector.

        Group 2: Poor, But Not Extreme – 11 percent of Population35

        Demographic Profile: Monthly per capita household income below the poverty line
        Gs 474,775 (US$ 109) but above the per capita level of extreme poverty of Gs
        302,285 (US$ 70). This category tracks the overall distribution of the population
        between rural (40 percent) and urban (60 percent) areas with a bit greater
        concentration in rural areas (48 percent) compared to urban (52 percent) relative to
        the national population distribution.

        Financial Profile: For these individuals work is inconsistent and occurs in the informal
        sector. Approximately 20 percent have an account at a formal financial institution
        and 26 percent are saving regularly. Savings occurs via informal (43 percent) means
        much more often than via formal institutions (8 percent). Health insurance is held by
        15 percent of people and life (2 percent) or home/vehicle (1 percent each) insurance
        is nearly non-existent. Twenty-two percent have borrowed money in the past year.
        This group and the extreme poor are the most reliant on remittances from family
        within and outside of the country.

        Financial Service Needs: Simplified documentation requirements to open an account
        are needed. These individuals need basic savings accounts that are safe and can be
        leveraged to obtain microenterprise loans as well as micro-insurance to help protect
        them and their families from health and burial related costs. Like people in group 1,
        this group relies significantly on remittances and government transfers indicating low
        cost transfer mechanisms are needed. Demand-side data suggests building financial
        and physical assets that can be leverage to secure credit or liquidated in
        emergencies are critical. Affordable health insurance is needed to help people from
        not being able to work because of illnesses.

        Group 3: Middle Income – 56 percent of the population

        Demographic Profile: Households working in the informal and agriculture sectors
        that are above the poverty line of Gs 474,775 (US$ 109) but have a per capita
        monthly income of up to Gs 1,824,055 (US$ 419), which is the equivalent of the
        minimum wage.36

        Financial Profile: Approximately 27 percent have a savings account at a formal
        financial institution, 32 percent have borrowed money in the past 12 months, 21
        percent have health insurance and 20 percent always or sometimes do not have
        enough money to pay for basic needs.



35
   There are some discrepancies in data tables from the Direccion General de Estadisticas, Estudios y Censos.
We have relied on the more detailed as opposed to summary tables.
36
   Although the minimum wage is not based a household per capita figure, unless it’s a household of one, its
common income reference point and as such is used as cut off point for this analysis.

                                                          National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 21
         Financial Services Needs: Affordable and accessible savings accounts and
         commitment savings products to help people build assets and savings for
         emergencies. Out of all income groups these people are most likely to borrow money
         for health related reasons and like other income groups they are approximately five
         times as likely to have health as opposed to life or auto insurance. As such, well-
         targeted health and life related micro-insurance products are needed by people in
         this group. People in this range are less than half as likely to be able to obtain credit
         for their businesses. As many of these businesses are micro and/or small business,
         activities to secure credit for this segment of the market would be beneficial. Lastly,
         wages paid by check are costly (in fees and time) to convert into cash and with cash
         in-hand it’s easier to spend and less safe than in a financial institution. Converting
         these payments to electronic transfers facilitates savings.



         Group 4: Upper Middle Income – 13 percent of the Population

         Demographic Profile: Private and public sector employees.37 Upper income self-
         employed people living in urban and rural areas. This includes households that have
         per capita income above Gs 1,824,055 (US$ 419) but less than Gs 4,740,698 (US$
         1,090) per person per month in a household, which is the entry point for top ten
         percent of households.

         Financial Profile: Approximately 37 percent have access to an account and 51
         percent save actively. They tend to save and borrow (45 percent) in formal
         institutions. They are active users of mobile money (33 percent) and are much more
         likely to have insurance (38 percent) given they have assets to protect. They are
         twice as likely as the poor and upper income to use cooperatives.

         Financial Service Needs: The needs of this segment are: 1) affordable credit for the
         self-employed and others seeking to start a business, 2) savings accounts and
         stronger depositor protections, especially in cooperatives, to grow confidence and
         uptake of formal savings accounts, 3) electronic salary payments to facilitate savings,
         4) broader usage of debit, credit and mobile money to reduce transaction costs, and
         5) health related borrowing and health insurance products (health insurance is 80
         percent38 of the total insurance market). Like individuals in groups 2 and 3, people in
         this group that may have higher incomes but have not been able to accumulate
         assets understand their potential vulnerability for slipping into poverty should they
         deplete all of their assets while not working due to health or other issues.

         Group 5: Upper Income – 10 percent of Population

         Demographic Profile: Plantation owners, employers, highly educated, urban and rural
         professionals. Households with per capita income of at least Gs 4,740,698 (US$
         1,090) per month are part of this upper income group.


37
   Table 7 Average Monthly Income Based on Occupation. Supply and Demand of Rural Microfinance in
Paraguay. Red de Microfinanzas. May 2013.
38
   This is based on the National Financial Inclusion Survey (EIF). In contrast, the supply side data indicates 48
percent of insurance premiums are related to auto insurance.

                                                             National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 22
           Financial Profile: This portion of the population earns approximately 37 percent of the
           income.39 Debit card usage is 30 percent (or three times the rest of the population).
           Although people in the top quintile (data at the top decile is not available) are twice
           as likely to have formal accounts (42 percent of individuals) than the poorest, this is
           still a modest percentage of people with accounts at the highest income level. This
           group is the most active users of insurance.

           Financial Service Needs: With more capacity to absorb short-term shocks, the
           demand-side data suggests longer term products for savings (i.e., pensions and
           investing) and financing (i.e., medium and long-term firm credit and development of
           capital markets as investors and borrowers) are most needed by this group. Ability to
           initiate remittances and salary payments electronically will help reduce their costs
           and crop and livestock insurance products will secure the business interests of those
           in the agriculture sector.


           Translating Financial Services Needs into Action
           The gap analysis indicates that the financial services needs of the five income groups
           revolve around improved savings, credit, insurance, and payments products which
           are operating in a responsible environment where people have the knowledge and
           capacity to use the products and the specific needs of vulnerable people are taken
           into account. To translate these needs into actionable areas key performance
           indicators (KPI) have been identified which are measurable and focus on the usage
           and quality of financial services. To achieve these KPIs an initial set of 60 policy
           actions to complete over the next four years have been identified. These policy
           actions were informed by the recommendations from the recent diagnostic work on
           the demand, supply, consumer protection and legal/regulatory environment for
           financial services in Paraguay. To make progress on these policy actions experts
           from both the private and public sector will work together across seven working
           groups. The actions and timeframe for implementation are provided in the
           subsequent sections of this ENIF.

           C. Key Performance Indicators, Working Groups and Action Plan

           To provide focus to the government’s and private sector’s financial inclusion activities
           key performance indicators (KPIs) are being established for 2018. Several of these
           components refer to migrating activities from informal products that may be riskier,
           more costly, have few consumer protections and less oversight to the formal sector
           where oversight is better and costs over the long-run are often lower.40

           Each KPI and thematic area (i.e., savings, credit, insurance, payments, financial
           education, consumer protection and vulnerable populations) will have a working
           group comprised of public and private sector experts working to achieve the KPIs
           and improve the financial sector. In support of achieving the KPIs, specific policy
           actions have been identified for completion which includes timeframes and

39
     DGEEC Permanent Household Survey 2013.
40
     It is not a foregone conclusion that all informal products have these characteristics.

                                                                National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 23
        responsible working group. For each thematic area one policy action that is
        achievable, visible to consumers and with limited dependencies has been highlighted
        as a “quick win” priority policy action.

        Following is a description of the 7 thematic areas, the KPIs, quick win policy actions
        and the other policy actions identified for the working groups’ completion. As a high
        priority, working groups will be convened in the first quarter 2015 and by March 2015
        working groups will identify an organization(s) responsible for leading the activities
        related to each policy action. Assigned to the Financial Inclusion Technical Team are
        a set of policy actions that are not tied to any thematic area but are important for
        improving the overall financial inclusion environment.



                Savings Group:

                 i. KPI: Increase saving account ownership from 29 percent to 50
                    percent of the adult population and usage from 14 percent of
                    population saving formally to 30 percent. The EIF indicates that many
                    more people (25 percent) save money via informal means than formal (14
                    percent) means. These informal savings are generally at greater risk of
                    loss and keep credit markets unnecessarily shallow. To meet the first
                    objective of this strategy (i.e., reduce the financial vulnerabilities of
                    families at the base of the pyramid) and the needs of people in income
                    groups 1-4, growing the base of people saving money in secure
                    institutions is key. The source of the baseline data is the 2013 EIF. These
                    growth targets were modeled on recent growth trends in Paraguay
                    regarding account ownership and usage.41

                     Supporting Quick Win:
                     Issue clear guidance on what is and is not needed to open a regular
                     savings account.

                     The second highest (24 percent) self-report barrier as to why people do
                     not have formal accounts was due to a lack of documentation (the highest
                     barrier was lack of money). Some of the barriers are a result of AML/CFT
                     requirements and others are imposed by the financial institutions. This
                     item was identified as a quick win because clarifying the guidance is a
                     policy action that BCP and INCOOP can take and these documentation
                     barriers are a major impediment for many people in income groups 1-3
                     when opening accounts. Once more accounts are opened, the next step
                     is promoting usage of the accounts. This will also require striking a
                     balance between inclusion and financial sector integrity as referred to in
                     the fourth objective of this strategy.




41
  Between 2011 and 2013 account ownership grew at 14.8 per year. This same rate of growth suggests account
ownership will be at 50% in 2017.

                                                        National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 24
                      Supporting Policy Actions:

     #   Task                                                                         Priority        Date

         Study and improve the design and business model for financial
                                                                                                      June
     1   institutions offering cuentas básicas. Then re-promote with                    High
                                                                                                      2015
         consumers and financial institutions.
         Introduce a deposit insurance bill for cooperatives and launching of
                                                                                                      June
     2   a fund for all cooperatives primarily engaged in savings and credit            High
                                                                                                      2015
         services.

         To boost confidence and usage of formal savings, raise awareness
                                                                                                   December
     3   of deposit insurance and simplify communication on coverage                  Medium
                                                                                                     2016
         levels.

         Financial institutions (banks, finance companies, cooperatives)
                                                                                                   December
     4   should consider developing innovative savings products, such as              Medium
                                                                                                     2016
         savings programmed for specific objectives.




                   Credit Group:

                 ii. KPI: Increase responsible credit to MSMEs from 30 percent to 40
                     percent and increase the share of responsible borrowing at formal
                     financial institutions from 23 to 28 percent of adults. By some
                     estimates42 MSMEs have a US$2.1 billion dollar demand for credit and
                     about 45 percent of the demand is currently being met. According to the
                     EIF, approximately one-third of individuals have borrowed money in the
                     past year and very few (4 percent) are borrowing across multiple lenders.
                     In addition, saving relative to GDP is growing.43 While systemic over-
                     indebtedness does not appear to be present at this time, there is
                     information about certain employee groups being highly leveraged.
                     Compared to the regional average of 25 percent44 of consumer borrowing
                     in Latin America and the Caribbean in the past 12 months, Paraguay is at
                     the high-end with 34 percent having borrowed in the past 12 months45.
                     While at the surface this appears to be an indicator of over-indebtedness,
                     the data also includes information on micro and small business borrowing
                     which is generally much higher than consumers accessing loans.46




42
   Supply and Demand of Rural Microfinance in Paraguay. Red de Microfinanzas. May 2013.
43
   International Monetary Fund, Financial Sector Assessment Program Update. January 2012.
44
   Global Findex 2011 data for Latin America & Caribbean. http://datatopics.worldbank.org/financialinclusion/
45
   However, the 34 percent for Paraguay is inclusive of MSME borrowing which is usually higher than consumer
borrowing levels.
46
   The LAC regional average for MSME borrowing in 47.5 percent according the Investment Finance
Corporation’s Enterprise Survey.
http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/data/exploreeconomies/2010/paraguay#finance

                                                          National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 25
                         In support of the third objective of this strategy (i.e., aiding economic
                         development and growth through MSME and large firm access to financial
                         products) and entrepreneurs across the income groups, this key indicator
                         focuses on expanding responsible credit to established firms and moving
                         the credit market from a less to more regulated and protected
                         environment.47 Approximately half of all MSMEs that do not have a loan
                         are desirous of a loan to improve their business. Given that these entities
                         are significant contributors to job creation (and therein improved incomes)
                         in Paraguay there is justification to support access to credit for
                         creditworthy MSMEs. MSME business owners are part of income groups
                         2-5 and they often employ people in groups 1-4.

                         This increase in MSME credit will be occurring in an environment where
                         other important policy actions will be improving the broad credit market
                         through activities such as, an integrated credit reference information
                         system, collateral registry, loan guarantees for MSME and loan loss
                         provisioning. The source of the baseline data is the 2011 National
                         Economic Census. Unlike the savings targets, the credit target looks
                         more at regional averages of credit usage in Latin America and current
                         usage in Paraguay so as to establish targets that spur growth but also
                         keep systemic over indebtedness at bay. According to the EIF, while 34
                         percent of adults have borrowed money in the past 12 months only 23
                         percent do so at formal financial institutions. As such, the second part of
                         this KPI seeks to shift credit from the informal to formal market, where
                         consumer protections exist, rather than growth consumer credit.

                         Supporting Quick Win:
                         Ensure BCP’s and INCOOP’s                      credit   risk    information     systems
                         communicate with each other.

                         To facilitate an environment where responsible credit is given and
                         consumers are not over-indebted, the existing and future credit risk
                         information systems should share information to ensure a single view of a
                         consumer’s existing debt and repayment history. An important step in this
                         direction will be communication between the INCOOP and BCP credit
                         information systems.

                         Supporting Policy Actions:




#       Task                                                                  Priority        Date
        Implement targeted demand-side studies to better                                   December
5                                                                             Medium
        understand trends in use of informal financial services.                             2016
        To aid in monitoring over indebtedness, annually receive                           December
6                                                                             Medium
        information at BCP from unsupervised credit providers.                               2015

47
     This is not designed as a program to support high-risk startups.

                                                               National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 26
      Conduct study of causes for high liquidity in banks, potential
                                                                                                            June
7     impact on credit markets and implement changes as                                  Medium
                                                                                                            2015
      appropriate.
      To support secured lending, implement an electronic
                                                                                                            June
8     collateral registry system allowing lender to determine                            Medium
                                                                                                            2016
      existing liens on assets.

      Apply proportional credit definitions and provisioning
                                                                                                        December
9     structure across cooperatives, banks and finance companies                         High
                                                                                                          2016
      if the underlying risks are comparable.

      Refine provisioning methodology to ensure faster                                                  December
10                                                                                       High
      provisioning of microcredit loans.                                                                  2016

      Consolidate and improve credit information systems through
      multiple initiatives including lenders sharing positive                                           December
11                                                                                       High
      information, appropriate use of the credit bureau data and                                          2016
      improved data quality and usage rules.

      Establish accuracy, timeliness, disclosure, and recourse                                          December
12                                                                                       Medium
      standards for all credit bureaus.                                                                   2016

      Implement a process to monitor the level of over
      indebtedness via improved credit bureau information,                                              December
13                                                                                       High
      regulatory agency communication, non-performing loan data                                           2016
      and demand side data analysis.

                                                                                                        December
      Finalize the Guarantee Fund for MSMEs law and issue its
14                                                                                       High
      regulations so that the Fund can be implemented.
                                                                                                            2016

                                                                                                        December
      Explore the possibility of implementing factoring and leasing
15                                                                                       Medium
      products in the market.
                                                                                                            2016



                          Insurance Group:

                    iii. KPI: Increase insurance coverage from 26 percent to 36 percent of
                         adults. The number one reason for individuals borrowing is for health
                         related costs and the number one reason individuals save is for
                         emergencies. This suggests a strong, but latent demand for health
                         insurance. The current low levels of insurance (26 percent for health, life
                         or vehicle insurance combined) suggests consumers have demand and
                         could benefit from insurance products that reduce their risks and helps
                         them avoid catastrophic expenses.48 This KPI is tied to the first objective
                         in this strategy (i.e., to reduce the vulnerabilities of families at the base of
                         the pyramid). The source of the baseline data is the 2013 EIF. These
                         growth targets are based on demographic projections (as more seniors

48
  While outside the scope of this strategy, anecdotal evidence indicates there are structural challenges with the current publicly
provided health care and the availability of health care workers. These are issues that will have to be addressed by the health
sector.

                                                                      National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 27
                        use insurance), increases in automobile ownership, the potential for new
                        agricultural insurance products and growing levels of assets. Borrowing
                        for health and saving for emergencies are key influencers of consumer
                        behavior especially for people in the 2nd through 4th income groups in
                        Paraguay.


                        Supporting Quick Win:

                        Explore the possibilities of implementing agricultural insurance for small
                        and medium producers.

                        For the private sector to develop and offer insurance products in a
                        sustainable manner to small and medium size agricultural producers,
                        there will need to be simplified disclosures and claims processing
                        avenues and space for new product development. For consumers to be
                        able to understand the insurance products and make claims they too will
                        need simplified information and procedures. Agriculture insurance (or
                        crop insurance) makes up only four percent of the insurance market49, but
                        with “climatic phenomenon,” becoming increasingly regular, there seems
                        to be a growing need for this type of insurance yet only two companies in
                        Paraguay offer it for smaller farms. Uptake of agriculture insurance could
                        potentially increase by voluntarily linking it with agriculture loans.


                        Supporting Policy Actions:

     #      Task                                                             Priority        Date
            Increase usage of insurance via new products with a focus
     16     on insurance education and promotion for the most                  High       June 2016
            vulnerable populations.
            The financial aspects of pre-paid medicine schemes should                     December
     17                                                                      Medium
            be prudentially regulated.                                                      2016

            Explore the possibilities of implementing micro-insurance                     December
     18                                                                      Medium
            products in the market.                                                         2016

            Increase delivery channel innovations that balance consumer
                                                                                          December
     19     protections and allow insurance companies to deepen              Medium
                                                                                            2018
            outreach in a profitable manner.

            Develop a regulatory framework for obligatory auto insurance                  December
     20                                                                      Medium
            (SOAT) and supervise accordingly.                                               2016




                        Payments Group:

                   iv. KPI: Decrease usage of cash/check for salary and wage payments
                       from 76 percent to 20 percent. In terms of usage of mobile money
49
     This is based on the Supply Side Technical Note.

                                                        National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 28
                    Paraguay is considered a regional and global leader. However, many of
                    the transactions are currently conducted as over-the-counter (OTC), as
                    opposed to e-wallet transactions and few employers use this for delivering
                    salary payments. As such, most consumers are not utilizing mobile
                    money as a low-cost and accessible mechanism to store value directly on
                    their phone or into saving accounts. In support of the second objective of
                    the strategy (i.e., the outreach of financial services) and using payments
                    as a gateway to other products, potential exists for the more efficient
                    delivery of salaries and wages. The source of the baseline data is the
                    2013 EIF. These reduction targets are based on data projections from
                    other countries that implemented forceful electronic payment initiatives.

                    Supporting Quick Win:
                    Convert 80 percent of all central government’s payments to consumers to
                    an electronic means and make 100 percent of all new central government
                    vendor payments via electronic means via any institution authorized for
                    the purpose.

                    To the extent that these payments are made via electronic means (i.e., via
                    electronic funds transfers into savings accounts, mobile wallets and/or
                    payment cards) it reduces transactions costs for the sender and receiver
                    and facilitates the process of savings in a safer environment. The single
                    largest initiator of payments is the government of Paraguay and as such it
                    can be both a market leader and significantly aid in achieving the KPI.
                    While actions are underway to make salary payments into accounts, more
                    work is needed on payments to vendors and conditional cash transfers to
                    people in income groups 1-3. The new automated transfers system
                    should be leveraged to enable recipients to select any financial institution
                    to receive their payment into.

                    Supporting Policy Actions:

#    Task                                                                Priority       Date
     Promote agent model among banks, finance companies,
     cooperatives and mobile money telcos. Encourage banks,
21   finance companies, cooperatives and telcos to offer account          High       June 2015
     opening or at least facilitate opening accounts through agents
     to broaden the payment infrastructure.

     Issue a directive to allow alternative mechanisms of product
                                                                                     December
22   acceptance and electronic signatures in customer due                 High
                                                                                       2015
     diligence procedures.

     Encourage usage of e-wallets as opposed to OTC transactions                     December
23                                                                        High
     for clients without access.                                                       2015

     Define capital adequacy requirements for e-payment
24                                                                       Medium      June 2015
     companies.




                                                      National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 29
     Consider expanding direct access to the payment system for
     all financial entities that can meet risk and operational                       December
25                                                                       Medium
     management requirements so that individuals can easily and                        2016
     affordably receive electronic payments.

     Evaluate guarantee mechanisms to allow insurance coverage
                                                                                     December
26   to pass through to e-wallet account holders should the financial    Medium
                                                                                       2016
     institution holding the e-float account fail.

     Strongly encourage interoperability of payment systems (e.g.,
                                                                                     December
27   card processors for its services of POS and ATMs, mobile             High
                                                                                       2016
     networks, EMPES and financial institutions).

     Demonstrate the benefits of government's move towards
                                                                                     December
28   electronic payments through cost benefit analysis (i.e.,            Medium
                                                                                       2015
     resources from the Better than Cash Alliance).
     Through cost benefit analysis encourage private employers to                    December
29                                                                       Medium
     make wage/salary payments electronically.                                         2018




                    Financial Education Group:

                v. KPI: Increase the percentage of adults (15+) who reported having
                   received some training / advice or support on how to manage
                   personal finances and administration of money from 10% to 20%.
                   Only 10 percent of households have received any kind of lesson on
                   personal finance or money management. While still a small base of the
                   total population, the goal is to double the percentage of adults that have
                   received advice and/or support on personal finances. This effort will need
                   the involvement of the public and private sectors. This supports the first
                   objective of the strategy (i.e., reducing the financial vulnerabilities of
                   families at the base of the pyramid). The source of the baseline data is the
                   2013 EIF.


                    Supporting Quick Win:

                     Develop financial education tools, guidelines and content for educational
                    institutions, social service agencies and financial institutions, with an
                    emphasis on vulnerable populations and their characteristics (topics may
                    include credit cards, interest, payments, loans, savings, insurance, and
                    consumer protection, considering the design of the content to be delivered
                    to distinct segments of the population).


                    One of the first guidelines in providing consumers with financial advice is
                    the encouragement of setting goals and establishing a plan to accomplish
                    those goals. To ensure that organizations and individuals involved in



                                                      National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 30
             providing financial education are providing sound guidance, tools and
             content guidelines will be developed and shared with financial educators.




             Supporting Policy Actions:

#    Task                                                         Priority       Date

     Conduct a base-line study and impact evaluation (with a
                                                                              December
30   control group) of the mandatory financial education            High
                                                                                2015
     curriculum for secondary school.
     Develop a National Strategy for Financial Education                      December
31                                                                Medium
     which expands educational activities beyond secondary                      2016
     school to incorporate teachable moments for adults
     Implement a national campaign on financial education
     that shares information through different channels in an                 December
32                                                                Medium
     engaging way and guides on financial products and                          2016
     services.




             Consumer Protection Group:

            vi. KPI: All institutions that provide regulated and non-regulated
            financial services have and publicize arrangements for customer
            complaints and queries that take into account the realities of all
            income groups, including the financial vulnerable.

             Recourse mechanisms provide consumers a low-cost mechanism to
             potentially resolve problems and they provide institutions a method of
             receiving feedback on their products and resolving problems before they
             are brought to the attention of regulators. This target was established to
             ensure consumers have recourse mechanisms at the primary level in
             addition to the secondary recourse mechanisms at SEDECO, BCP (also
             SIS and SIB) and INCOOP. This indicator supports the fourth objective of
             this strategy (i.e., balancing a push for inclusion while ensuring that
             consumers are protected). The source of the baseline information is the
             2014 Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy Diagnostic.


             Supporting Quick Win:

              Improve the regulation on transparency of interest rates and fees via a
             total financial cost initially for credit and for all lenders.




                                              National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 31
                A frequent cause for complaints with financial products is consumers
                where not fully informed or did not fully understand the products initially.
                As such, improving the transparency of rates and fees via total cost of
                credit disclosure will help consumers compare and better understand their
                financial decisions.



                Supporting Policy Actions:




#    Task                                                         Priority       Date
     Implement risk-based market conduct supervision to
     cover all companies both regulated and non-regulated
                                                                                 June
33   performing financial services by all the appropriate           High
                                                                                 2016
     enforcement agencies of the financial sector (BCP,
     INCOOP, SEDECO, SEPRELAD).

     Clarify the mandates and competence of agencies
     relevant to financial consumer protection, and establish                 December
34                                                                  High
     modalities for information sharing between SEDECO,                         2016
     BCP & INCOOP.

     SEDECO to issue market conduct rules for all non-
     prudentially regulated firms (for example, monitoring the                December
35                                                                  High
     usury law, transparency and what constitutes abusive                       2016
     debt collection practices).

     SEDECO and supervisory agencies to establish internal
     systems/procedures for receiving and resolving                           December
36                                                                Medium
     complaints, analyzing complaints information, and                          2016
     making statistics available to the public.

     Promote the development and use of user-friendly price
     transparency websites and other measures to facilitate                   December
37                                                                  Low
     comparison, stimulate transparency and enable better                       2016
     consumer choice.

     Issue circular or other form of guidance to set out
     content, wording, and format for Key Fact Statements for                 December
38                                                                  High
     adding to contracts and other uses. Initial focus could be                 2016
     on loans/credit cards.

     Strengthen financial consumer protection units in BCP,                   December
39                                                                Medium
     INCOOP and SEDECO.                                                         2016

     Investigate methodologies for how the total financial cost
                                                                              December
40   of products beyond credit could be calculated and            Medium
                                                                                2016
     disclosed.




                                                  National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 32
             Vulnerable Populations Group:

             vii. KPI: Extend financial services via cost effective channels to all 69
             financially excluded and more populated districts in the country with an
             emphasis on the 17 vulnerable priority districts that are part of
             government’s plan to end extreme poverty. A significant portion of the
             population (17 percent) lives in a district that is not served by traditional bank,
             finance company or cooperative branch, agent or ATM. This affects people’s
             ability to save in monetary assets that are readily accessible in times of acute
             need. Paraguayans that do save are four times as likely to save for emergencies,
             than for any other reason. Having the knowledge and avenues, be it traditional
             products or mobile money, to develop emergency savings will help families be
             more financially secure and directly supports the first objective of this strategy
             (i.e., reducing the financial vulnerability of families at the base of the pyramid).
             For the purposes of this strategy people in income groups 1 and 2 above (i.e.,
             extreme poor and poor, but not extreme) and people in income group 3 (i.e.,
             middle income) with below average net worth are considered financially
             vulnerable. Financially excluded districts are those that do not have any bank
             presence whether through branches, bank agents or ATMs.50 The source of the
             baseline data is the 2013 EIF.



             Supporting Quick Win:

             Leverage the widespread use of mobile phones and coverage of mobile network
             operators to further expansion of savings among vulnerable populations.


        There are more cell lines than people in Paraguay and the mobile networks cover
        98% of the districts according to the Supply Side Technical Note. This infrastructure
        can provide hard to reach communities with a cost effective and accessible option for
        savings and payments as well as potentially credit and insurance. Given that this
        section refers to a group of people and not a product or the delivery environment, the
        policy actions in this area specify where cross over and coordination is needed with
        other working groups.



                       Supporting Policy Actions:




 #     Task                                                                 Priority       Date
       Promote the access for small producers to production
                                                                                        December
 41    finance. This action should be in coordination with the
                                                                              High        2015
       Credit Working Group.


50
   If more people begin utilizing mobile money as a channel to save money and/or receive loans the concept of
financially excluded based on geography will need to be revisited.

                                                           National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 33
      Carry out a study on business models of financial products
                                                                                   December
42    targeted at vulnerable populations and their applicability in      High
                                                                                     2015
      Paraguay.

      Designing and implementing a financial literacy program
      nationally (mass channels) addressed to the vulnerable                       December
43                                                                       High
      population. This should be coordination with the Financial                     2015
      Education Working Group.

      Leverage the automated transfer system (ATS) to reduce
      costs for conditional cash transfer and wage payments and
                                                                                   December
44    increase their convenience by allowing consumers to                High
      choose the financial institutions or mobile network they are                   2016
      delivered to. This action should be in coordination with the
      Payments Working Group
      Propose strategic alliances between financial institutions of
      government, the private sector and the telcos to provide
      comprehensive financial services to vulnerable populations.                  December
45                                                                       High
      This action should be coordinated Savings, Credit,                             2016
      Insurance and/or Payments Working Groups as applicable.


      Explore the possibility of insurance companies offering
      micro-insurance for vulnerable populations. This action                           June
46    should be in coordination with the Insurance Working             Medium
                                                                                        2016
      Group.

      Design products and savings incentives that encourage
                                                                                   December
47    savings among vulnerable populations. This action should         Medium
      be coordinated with the Savings Working Group.                                 2016

      Facilitate development of emergency loan products,                                           Impro
      associated savings, which aid access to resources at                                          ving
                                                                                        June
48    critical times and avoid economic setbacks for families. This    Medium                        the
                                                                                        2017
      action should be coordinated with the Savings and Working
      Groups.                                                                                     Financ
                                                                                                      ial
           Inclusion Environment:

           Supporting Policy Actions:

           While not tied to a specific key performance indicator or thematic area of the
           strategy, these policy actions are important for the measurement and macro-
           environment for financial inclusion.

 #      Task                                                                    Priority       Date

        To aid in understanding the true level of non-performing loans,
 49     require banks, cooperatives and finance companies to keep                High      June 2015
        records of loans sold to unsupervised companies.
        Strengthen INCOOP as a regulator of savings and credit
                                                                                           December
 50     cooperatives to ensure savings are safe while balancing                  High
                                                                                             2016
        financial inclusion objectives.
        Public Banks: BNF is well positioned to contribute to financial
        inclusion through the promotion of simplified bank accounts and
        by leveraging its extensive geographical network presence.
 51                                                                                        June 2016
        CAH can continue to reach out to new populations that are                High
        unable to access loans from other institutions with new
        innovative products such as factoring that can sustainably

                                                       National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 34
     create new credit opportunities for micro and small enterprises.
     AFD can promote long-term financing for rural and other
     MSMEs, by working with more financial institutions that serve
     MSMEs.
     Encourage the development and adoption of banking and
52                                                                          Medium      June 2016
     cooperative industry codes of ethics.
     Implement demand-side financial inclusion survey every two
                                                                                        December
53   years to measure progress on usage and understanding of                  High
                                                                                          2017
     financial services.
     Implement targeted demand-side studies to better understand                        December
54                                                                          Medium
     trends in awareness of consumer protection mechanisms.                               2016
     Implement a process for monitoring the compliance with interest                    December
55                                                                          Medium
     rate caps across lenders.                                                            2016
     Determine how to consolidate the supervisory structure of the                      December
56                                                                          Medium
     pension schemes.                                                                     2016
     Study the efficiency of financial intermediation in financial sector
     and impact on consumers and inclusion. Based on findings                           December
57                                                                          Medium
     determine what actions, if any, could be taken to promote                            2016
     competition.
     Allow financially healthy banks, finance companies and
                                                                                        December
58   cooperatives to expand branch networks via multi-year                    High
                                                                                          2016
     expansion plans as opposed to branch by branch approvals.

     Secure and encourage long-term pension savings, allow capital
                                                                                        December
59   markets to create products and ensure that all providers of              High
                                                                                          2016
     pensions are supervised.

     Create the standards and certification process for institutions to
                                                                                        December
60   receive a “seal of commitment” to financial education and                High
                                                                                          2015
     consumer protection from the government.


     D. Governance Framework

        Through Decree 1971 on July 22, 2014 the Office of the President
        established a National Financial Inclusion Committee with senior level
        representation from the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP), Ministry of
        Finance (MH), National Institute of Cooperativism (INCOOP) and the
        Ministry of Planning (STP) responsible for this ENIF. This Committee is
        chaired by the Minister of Finance. Beneath the National Financial Inclusion
        Committee is a Technical Team comprised of these same organizations which
        will be responsible for managing the implementation of the ENIF and will oversee
        thematic ad hoc working groups that are established by the National Financial
        Inclusion Committee. An Executive Secretary has been appointed by the
        National Financial Inclusion Committee during the second half of 2014. The
        Executive Secretary should report to the chair of the National Financial Inclusion
        Committee, and support the work of Technical Team and working groups.

        The National Financial Inclusion Committee may create and/or disband the ad
        hoc working groups and determine the composition of them from the private and
        public sectors as needs dictate. The initial priority areas and scope of activities
        for the working groups are shown in Figure 7 below.

                                                    National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 35
            Figure 7: Governance Framework for the National Financial Inclusion Strategy



                               National Financial Inclusion Committee



                                         Executive Secretary

                                         Financial Inclusion
                                          Technical Team




Savings    Credit         Insurance         Payments                                    Consumer             Vulnerable
                                                                  Financial
                                                                                        Protection           Populations
Working   Working          Working          Working              Education
                                                                                                              Working
Group     Group            Group             Group              Working Group          Working Group           Group




            The Role of Private Sector

            Although the government of Paraguay is initiating this ENIF, for it to be
            implemented its critical that a diverse set of private sector actors be
            engaged. While these diverse for-profit and not-for-profit actors will have
            different motivations for participating in this financial inclusion process, a common
            thread is that all organizations will need to experiment with new methodologies,
            technologies and possibly business models. In addition, as policy makers seek
            to create an enabling environment it will need to achieve a balance between
            protecting consumers that may be totally excluded from financial services with
            allowing the private sector to meet its own legitimate self interests. As such,
            critical private sector consultation is being conducted as part of this strategy and
            their involvment in the working groups will be paramount. In addition to the
            private sector, support from a diverse group of development partners such as the
            World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, United Nations and others will
            be needed.

            Working Group Activities

            While some activities may involve more than one working group the initial terms
            of reference for the working groups will be divided based on the thematic areas
            and terms of reference will be provided to each group. These are some of the
            sub-topics that working groups should tackle:

                       1) Savings Working Group: Documentation and other requirements
                          and barriers to open a savings and/or basic account; deposit
                          insurance; data and measurement studies; agent banking and


                                                       National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 36
                 branch network expansion; long-term savings products; know your
                 customer and anti-money laundering.

             2) Credit Working Group: Improving access to credit, consolidation
                and coordination among credit bureau initiatives; development of
                an electronic collateral registry system; evaluation of provisioning
                standards for microfinance and other loans; improve MSME
                access to credit.

             3) Payments Working Group: Establishing interoperability
                standards; shift from cash to electronic payments by government
                and private sector; expansion of mobile money networks and
                move towards e-wallet transactions; deposit insurance for mobile
                money.

             4) Insurance Working Group: Expansion of the market place for
                insurance including coverage types and options; business models
                for the introduction of agricultural insurance products and micro-
                insurance.

             5) Financial Education Working Group: Financial capability for
                youth and adults; working with educational institutions and other
                partners.

             6) Consumer Protection Working Group: Consumer protection
                issues (i.e., transparency, recourse, data protection, over-
                indebtedness, fair treatment of clients)

             7) Vulnerable Populations Working Group: Rural finance; a
                particular focus of the group will be to provide tools and data for
                vulnerable populations (i.e., areas with no access, rural farmers,
                and extreme poor).

E. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework

  The Executive Secretary and the Financial Inclusion Technical Team will be
  responsible for the oversight, coordination and implementation of the
  strategy. Much of the work will require the active participation of private and
  public sector financial institutions as well as other public and private non-financial
  entities. These institutions will be an essential part of the thematic working groups
  and implementation of the ENIF.

  To facilitate progress each working group should report its progress
  quarterly to the Executive Secretary. On an annual basis the National
  Financial Inclusion Committee should prepare a report on its activities and
  progress towards the KPIs identified above and action plan below. In addition to
  this reporting on activities completed, a strong measurement and evaluation
  system is needed to track progress relative to the objectives and KPIs of this

                                         National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 37
         strategy. This will aid in the identification of successful programs that can be
         replicated, obstacles that need to be removed, unintended consequences that
         result and/or tactical re-adjustments of the strategy that are needed.

         Key to this measurement and evaluation framework is conducting a full
         demand-side financial inclusion survey every two years to measure
         progress against the 2013 base-line survey. The Technical Team will explore
         options for how best to conduct the survey using existing resources within the
         DGEEC and/or new resources. Important to this exercise is the recognition that
         the baseline data includes information at the individual, not household, level.
         While data on the banks and finance companies in the country is generally
         available and robust, better information on the size, scale and impact of the 330
         cooperatives that focus on financial intermediation and less formal consumer
         lenders and pawnshops is needed. Within the future demand-side surveys
         attention will be given to the uptake and usage of products to aid in assessing the
         impact of these activities.


5. The Action Plan - How do we get there?

  The four high-level objectives (i.e., 1) reduce the vulnerability of families, 2)
  promote outreach of financial services, 3) support access to credit , and 4)
  balance financial inclusion with stability, integrity and protection) will be achieved
  through a multi-stakeholder action plan that will be coordinated by the Executive
  Secretary. The action plan incorporates key performance indicators that have been
  informed by a gap analysis of demand-side, supply-side, legal/regulatory and consumer
  protection technical diagnostics that were completed in mid-2014. The action plan is
  prioritized, identifies the timeframe for actions and specifies which working group will be
  assigned to the task.

  For ease of reference a consolidated list of all policy actions from above that are part of
  the action plan is listed in Annex 1.




                                                National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 38
                                                       Annex 1


       Consolidated List of Policy Actions



                                                                                                                 Working
#    Task                                                                       Priority         Date
                                                                                                                  Group
     Study and improve the design and business model for financial
                                                                                                                  Savings
1    institutions offering cuentas básicas. Then re-promote with                 High         June 2015
     consumers and financial institutions.
     Introduce a deposit insurance bill for cooperatives and launching of
2    a fund for all cooperatives primarily engaged in savings and credit         High         June 2015           Savings
     services.

     To boost confidence and usage of formal savings, raise awareness
                                                                                              December            Savings
3    of deposit insurance and simplify communication on coverage                Medium
                                                                                                2016
     levels.

     Financial institutions (banks, finance companies, cooperatives)
                                                                                              December            Savings
4    should consider developing innovative savings products, such as            Medium
                                                                                                2016
     savings programmed for specific objectives.
     Implement targeted demand-side studies to better understand                              December             Credit
5                                                                               Medium
     trends in use of informal financial services.                                              2016
     To aid in monitoring over indebtedness, annually receive                                 December
6                                                                               Medium                             Credit
     information at BCP from unsupervised credit providers.                                     2015
     Conduct study of causes for high liquidity in banks, potential                                                Credit
7                                                                               Medium        June 2015
     impact on credit markets and implement changes as appropriate.
     To support secured lending, implement an electronic collateral
8    registry system allowing lender to determine existing liens on             Medium        June 2016            Credit
     assets.

     Apply proportional credit definitions and provisioning structure
                                                                                              December
9    across cooperatives, banks and finance companies if the                     High                              Credit
                                                                                                2016
     underlying risks are comparable.

     Refine provisioning methodology to ensure faster provisioning of                         December
10                                                                               High                              Credit
     microcredit loans.                                                                         2016

     Consolidate and improve credit information systems through
     multiple initiatives including lenders sharing positive information,                     December
11                                                                               High                              Credit
     appropriate use of the credit bureau data and data quality and                             2016
     usage rules.

     Establish accuracy, timeliness, disclosure, and recourse standards                       December
12                                                                              Medium                             Credit
     for all credit bureaus.                                                                    2016

     Implement a process to monitor the level of over indebtedness via
                                                                                                                   Credit
     improved credit bureau information, regulatory agency                                    December
13                                                                               High
     communication, non-performing loan data and demand side data                               2016
     analysis.

14                                                                               High                              Credit
     Finalize the Guarantee Fund for MSMEs law and issue its                                  December


                                                                National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 39
     regulations so that the Fund can be implemented.                                          2016

     Explore the possibility of implementing factoring and leasing                          December
15                                                                            Medium                             Credit
     products in the market.                                                                  2016

     Increase usage of insurance via new products with a focus on
16                                                                             High         June 2016          Insurance
     insurance education and promotion.
     The financial aspects of pre-paid medicine schemes should be                           December
17                                                                            Medium                           Insurance
     prudentially regulated.                                                                  2016

     Explore the possibilities of implementing micro-insurance products                     December
18                                                                            Medium                           Insurance
     in the market.                                                                           2016

     Increase delivery channel innovations that balance consumer
                                                                                            December
19   protections and allow insurance companies to deepen outreach in          Medium                           Insurance
                                                                                              2018
     a profitable manner.

     Develop a regulatory framework for obligatory auto insurance                           December
20                                                                            Medium                           Insurance
     (SOAT) and supervise accordingly.                                                        2016

     Promote agent model among banks, finance companies,
     cooperatives and mobile money telcos. Encourage banks, finance
21   companies, cooperatives and telcos to offer account opening or at         High         June 2015          Payments
     least facilitate opening accounts through agents to broaden the
     payment infrastructure.

     Issue a directive to allow alternative mechanisms of product
                                                                                            December
22   acceptance and electronic signatures in customer due diligence            High                            Payments
                                                                                              2015
     procedures.

     Encourage usage of e-wallets as opposed to OTC transactions for                        December
23                                                                             High                            Payments
     clients without access.                                                                  2015

24   Define capital adequacy requirements for e-payment companies.            Medium        June 2015          Payments

     Consider expanding direct access to the payment system for all
     financial entities that can meet risk and operational management                       December
25                                                                            Medium                           Payments
     requirements so that individuals can easily and affordably receive                       2016
     electronic payments.

     Evaluate guarantee mechanisms to allow insurance coverage to
                                                                                            December
26   pass through to e-wallet account holders should the financial            Medium                           Payments
                                                                                              2016
     institution holding the e-float account fail.

     Strongly encourage interoperability of payment systems (e.g.,
                                                                                            December
27   card processors for its services of POS and ATMs, mobile                  High                            Payments
                                                                                              2016
     networks, EMPES and financial institutions).

     Demonstrate the benefits of government's move towards electronic
                                                                                            December           Payments
28   payments through cost benefit analysis (i.e., resources from the         Medium
                                                                                              2015
     Better than Cash Alliance).
     Through cost benefit analysis encourage private employers to                           December           Payments
29                                                                            Medium
     make wage/salary payments electronically.                                                2018




                                                              National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 40
     Conduct a base-line study and impact evaluation (with a control                                             Financial
                                                                                              December
30   group) of the mandatory financial education curriculum for                  High                            Education
                                                                                                2015
     secondary school.
                                                                                                                 Financial
     Develop a National Strategy for Financial Education which                                December           Education
31                                                                              Medium
     expands educational activities beyond secondary school to                                  2016
     incorporate teachable moments for adults

     Implement a national campaign on financial education that shares                         December           Financial
32   information through different channels in an engaging way and              Medium
     guides on financial products and services.                                                 2016             Education

     Implement risk-based market conduct supervision to cover all                                                Consumer
     companies both regulated and non-regulated performing financial                                             Protection
33                                                                               High         June 2016
     services by all the appropriate enforcement agencies of the
     financial sector (BCP, INCOOP, SEDECO).

     Clarify the mandates and competence of agencies relevant to
                                                                                              December           Consumer
34   financial consumer protection, and establish modalities for                 High
                                                                                                2016             Protection
     information sharing between SEDECO, BCP & INCOOP.

     SEDECO to issue market conduct rules for all non-prudentially
     regulated firms (for example, monitoring the usury law,                                  December           Consumer
35                                                                               High
     transparency and what constitutes abusive debt collection                                  2016             Protection
     practices).

     SEDECO and supervisory agencies to establish internal
     systems/procedures for receiving and resolving complaints,                               December           Consumer
36                                                                              Medium
     analyzing complaints information, and making statistics available to                       2016             Protection
     the public.

     Promote the development and use of user-friendly price                                                      Consumer
     transparency websites and other measures to facilitate                                   December           Protection
37                                                                                Low
     comparison, stimulate transparency and enable better consumer                              2016
     choice.

     Issue circular or other form of guidance to set out content, wording,
                                                                                              December           Consumer
38   and format for Key Fact Statements for adding to contracts and              High
                                                                                                2016             Protection
     other uses. Initial focus could be on loans/credit cards.

     Strengthen financial consumer protection units in BCP, INCOOP                            December           Consumer
39                                                                              Medium
     and SEDECO.                                                                                2016             Protection

     Investigate methodologies for how the total financial cost of                            December           Consumer
40                                                                              Medium
     products beyond credit could be calculated and disclosed.                                  2016             Protection

     Promote the access for small producers to production finance .                                             Vulnerable
                                                                                              December          Populations
     This action should be in coordination with the Credit Working               High
41                                                                                              2015
     Group.

     Carry out a study on business models of financial products
                                                                                              December          Vulnerable
42   targeted at vulnerable populations and their applicability in               High
                                                                                                2015            Populations
     Paraguay.

43   Designing and implementing a financial literacy program nationally          High         December           Vulnerable
     (mass channels) addressed to the vulnerable population. This

                                                                National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 41
     should be coordination with the Financial Education Working                               2015           Populations
     Group.

     Leverage the automated transfer system (ATS) to reduce costs for
     conditional cash transfer and wage payments and increase their
                                                                                            December          Vulnerable
44   convenience by allowing consumers to choose the financial                 High
                                                                                              2016            Populations
     institutions or mobile network they are delivered to. This action
     should be in coordination with the Payments Working Group

     Propose strategic alliances between financial institutions of
     government, the private sector and the telcos to provide
     comprehensive financial services to vulnerable populations. This                       December          Vulnerable
45                                                                             High
     action should be coordinated Savings, Credit, Insurance and/or                           2016            Populations
     Payments Working Groups as applicable.


     Explore the possibility of insurance companies offering micro-
     insurance for vulnerable populations. This action should be in                                           Vulnerable
46                                                                            Medium        June 2016
     coordination with the Insurance Working Group.                                                           Populations


     Design products and savings incentives that encourage savings
     among vulnerable populations. This action should be coordinated                        December          Vulnerable
47                                                                            Medium
     with the Savings Working Group.                                                          2016            Populations


     Facilitate development of emergency loan products, associated
     savings, which aid access to resources at critical times and avoid                                       Vulnerable
48                                                                            Medium        June 2017
     economic setbacks for families. This action should be coordinated                                        Populations
     with the Savings and Working Groups.

     To aid in understanding the true level of non-performing loans,                                           Technical
49   require banks, cooperatives and finance companies to keep                 High         June 2015           Team
     records of loans sold to unsupervised companies.
                                                                                                               Technical
     Strengthen INCOOP as a regulator of savings and credit                                                     Team
                                                                                            December
50   cooperatives to ensure savings are safe while balancing financial         High
                                                                                              2016
     inclusion objectives.

      Public Banks: BNF is well positioned to contribute to financial
     inclusion through the promotion of simplified bank accounts and by
     leveraging its extensive geographical network presence. CAH can
     continue to reach out to new populations that are unable to access                                        Technical
51   loans from other institutions with new innovative products such as        High         June 2016           Team
     factoring that can sustainably create new credit opportunities for
     micro and small enterprises. AFD can promote long-term financing
     for rural and other MSMEs, by working with more financial
     institutions that serve MSMEs.
                                                                                                               Technical
                                                                                                                Team
     Encourage the development and adoption of banking and
52                                                                            Medium        June 2016
     cooperative industry codes of ethics.


     Implement demand-side financial inclusion survey every two years                                          Technical
                                                                                            December
53   to measure progress on usage and understanding of financial               High                             Team
                                                                                              2017
     services.
                                                                                                               Technical
     Implement targeted demand-side studies to better understand                            December
54                                                                            Medium                            Team
     trends in awareness of consumer protection mechanisms.                                   2016



                                                              National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 42
                                                                                                                 Technical
     Implement a process for monitoring the compliance with interest                          December
55                                                                              Medium                            Team
     rate caps across lenders.                                                                  2016
                                                                                                                 Technical
     Determine how to consolidate the supervisory structure of the                            December
56                                                                              Medium                            Team
     pension schemes.                                                                           2016
     Study the efficiency of financial intermediation in financial sector                                        Technical
     and impact on consumers and inclusion. Based on findings                                 December
57                                                                              Medium                            Team
     determine what actions, if any, could be taken to promote                                  2016
     competition.
     Allow financially healthy banks, finance companies and
                                                                                              December           Technical
58   cooperatives to expand branch networks via multi-year expansion             High
                                                                                                2016              Team
     plans as opposed to branch by branch approvals.

                                                                                                                 Technical
     Secure and encourage long-term pension savings, allow capital
                                                                                              December            Team
59   markets to create products and ensure that all providers of                 High
                                                                                                2016
     pensions are supervised.


     Create the standards and certification process for institutions to                                          Technical
                                                                                              December            Team
60   receive a “seal of commitment” to financial education and                   High
                                                                                                2015
     consumer protection from the government.




                                                                National Financial Inclusion Strategy of Paraguay 2014 | 43
