                                                                                       95458

                                          Foreword
                                                    ,_

        The World Bank's World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health, the sixteenth in
the World Development Report sedes, examined the interplay between human health, health
policy, and economic development. Underlying the conclusions of Investing in Health is a series
of economic, epidemiological, demographiC and institutional analyses. Many of these analyses
present original data and interpretations; and most of them are lengthy and somewhat technical.
In order to make these analyses available to the policy and scholarly community, I have asked the
authors to publish them in a series of background papers; this is one paper in that series. Titles of
the other background papers appear on the following page. Views and conclusions expressed in
the background papers are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the World
Bank group.
       In this background paper -- one of two dealing with population and family planning --
Cochrane and Merrick explore the interaction between family planning and health. In particular
they explore how family planning programs and delivery systems can be reoriented in order to
enhance their impact on health outcomes. The analyses points to the importance of improved
method mix, a broader range of services and greater emphasis on information and counseling.


                                                             Dean T. Jamison
                                                             Staff Director
                                                             World Development Report 1993

                                                             October, 1994




                                                                                                     ;:u
                                                                                                     CD
                                                                                                     "'CJ
                                                                                                     c
                                                                                                     ;::i-


                                                                                                     ...
                                                                                                     <C
                                                                                                     <C
                                                                                                                      -


                                                                                                 <-
                                                                                                 D>           w
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                 -           0
                                                                                                             ......
                                                                                                 g
                                                                                                 •           =
                                                                                                             (0

                                                                                                             ....
                                                                                                             0
                                   Background Papers
       The World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health


1.    Bobadilla, Jose-Luis, Peter Cowley, Philip Musgrove and Helen Saxenian, "The Essential
         Package of Health Services in Developing Countries".
2.    Cochrane, Susan H. and Thomas W. Merrick, "Family Planning and Health".
3.    Cochrane, Susan H., David H. Guilkey and John S. Akin, "The Cost:-effectiveness of Family
         Planning in Reducing the Mortality of Women and their Offspring".
4.    Hecht, Robert M. and Vito L. Tanzi, "The Role ofNGOs in the Delivery of Health Services in
         Developing Countries".
5.    Hill, Kenneth, "Global and Regional Demographic Estimates and Projections: 1950-2030".
6.    Hill, Kenneth and Abdo Yazbeck, "Trends in Child Mortality, 1960-90: Estimates for 84
           Developing Countries".
7.    Hill, Kenneth, Dean T. Jamison, Lawrence J. Lau, Jee-Peng Tan and Abdo Yazbeck, "The
           Impact of Health Status on Economic Growth".
8.    Jamison, Dean T., "Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries: An Overview of Cost-
         Effectiveness Assessments".
9.    Jamison, Dean, Joanne Leslie and Philip Musgrove, "Protein-Energy Balance in the Diet and
         Human Growth".
10.   Lau, Lawrence, Abdo Yazbeck, Kenneth Hill, Dean Jamison and Jee-Peng Tan, "Sources of
         Child Health Gains since the 1960s: An International Comparison".
11.   Michaud, Catherine and Christopher Murray, . "Aid Flows to the Health Sector in Developing
         Countries".
12.   Murray; Christopher and Alan D. Lopez, "The Global Burden of Disease in 1990".
13.   Murray, Christopher, Ramesh Govindaraj and Gnanaraj Chellaraj, "Global Domestic
         Expenditures in Health".
14.   Murray, Christopher, Jay Kreuser and William Whang, "Cost-Effectiveness Model for
         Allocating Health Sector Resources".
15.   Pritchett, Lant and Lawrence H. Summers, ''Wealthier is Healthier".
16 .. Yazbeck, Abdo, Jee-Peng Tan and Vito L. Tanzi, "Public Spending on Health in the 1980s: The
         Impact of Adjustment Lending Programs').
                           Family Planning and Health




                                                  by

                                         Susan H. Cochrane
                                   Principal Population Economist

                                        Thomas W. Merrick
                                      Senior Population Adviser




                            Population, Health and Nutrition Department
                                          The World Bank
                                             June, 1994

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions in this paper do not necessarily represent official Bank
policy.
                              Family Planning and Health



                                   Tuble of Contents

Section Title                                              Page

I. Introduction                                               1

II. Nature of the Evidence                                    1

III. Avoiding High Risk Pregnancies                           2
       High Risks to Infants and Children                     3
       High Risks to Mothers                                  4

IY. Reducing the Risks from Unsafe Abortion                   6

V. Reducing Health Risks in Fertility Control               .7

VI. Policy and Programmatic Implications                      9
       Increased access to Services                           9
       Improvements in the Quality of Services                10
              Broader Method Mix                              10
             Selection and Training of Providers              11
              Education of Clients                            11
              Program Management                              12

VII. Conclusions                                              12

      Table 1

      Bibliography
                       FAMILY PLANNING AND HEALTH


I. Introduction

       Giving women better control over their reproductive lives brings both
individual and societal-level health and welfare benefits. These benefits involve
more than just the avoidance of sickness and disease. Proper timing and spacing
of births enable women to take better care of themselves, their children and other
family members. Poorly timed and inadequately spaced births increase the risk of
morbidity and mortality for both mothers and children. They are also an in-
creased burden on the health-care system and draw resources away from other
uses. Three areas where reproductive health outcomes could be improved
warrant specific attention: (1) avoiding high-risk pregnancies, (2) reducing the
number of deaths from unsafe abortion, and (3) reducing health risks in fertility
control methods. These areas will be discussed. Then the programmatic and policy
requirements for reducing reproductive risks through family planning will be
addressed1• Before proceeding to the substantive discussion, it is useful to consid-
er the nature of the evidence needed and available to address these issues.

II. Nature of the evidence

        In developing countries, most rural peoples do not have contact with the
registration or medical systems. Thus, it is impossible to rely on vital registration
data, or medical-system statistics to measure the level of mortality or its correlates
to the extent that one can in developed countries2• Household-survey data have
become a major source of our knowledge about infant and child morality in
developing countries. Surveys are a less useful source for data on maternal
mortality for two reasons: (1) maternal mortality is a much rarer event than infant
and child mortality,3 and thus huge samples would be needed to document
difference in maternal mortality, and (2) while it is the mother who is interviewed

     1
       There is substantial debate about whether the demand to restrict
fertility which depends on education, residence and family economic circum-
stances or supply of family planning services is more important for fertility
reduction. This debate is not strictly relevant for this paper which focuses
on reproductive health, as. opposed to fertility reduction. The education and
counseling of women on reproductive risks is highly relevant here, however.
     2
       Even in the more developed countries, statistical and medical-system
data must be backed up with household data.
     3
         There are about 16 infant deaths for every maternal death.
                                        -2-
about the survival of children, it is difficult to find a respondent who would be
knowledgeable in all cases about the death of a woman in childbirth. 4

        Even if one can acquire information on deaths and fertility patterns, those
patterns are only one of several potential causes of mortality. In addition, fertil-
ity's effect on infant and child health operates through biological and behavioral
channels. For example, when a breastfeeding mother becomes pregnant her breast
milk is reduced and thus the preceding child may be damaged by an early subse-
quent pregnancy, or a if a mother becomes pregnant too soon after a preceding
child she may be too depleted for the fetus to develop fully. On the behavioral
side, if there are too many young children in a household, a mother may not have
the time to adequately care for each child, or household resources may be
inadequate to provided need food, shelter or medical care for all children. Sorting
out the multiple channels and multiple causes of high fertility's effect on child
survival is extremely complex, and our knowledge to date must be tempered with
consideration of this complexity.5 Fortunately, a large body of survey data from
the World Fertility Surveys of the 1970s and the Demographic and Health Surveys
of the 1980s and early 1990s has now been accumulated. These surveys offer a
wide range of data on fertility, infant and child mortality, breast feeding, certain
health care variables and some socio-economic background variables. The scope
of this brief review does not permit us to explain the complexities of measuring
the effect of fertility patterns on mortality. (See the other working paper in this
series by Cochrane et al. for details) Therefore, we will present the general
consensus on the relationships and provide references for those who wish to
pursue the details further.

III. Avoiding high-risk pregnancies

       Pregnancy always carries some risk to the mother, and birth carries risks to
the child, but some pregnancies have predictably higher risks to mothers and
children. By avoiding such high risk pregnancies, maternal and child health can be
improved. 6 It is generally the case that pregnancies that occur too early or too
late in a woman's reproductive life, those that are too closely spaced, those that
occur to women who have already had many births, those that occur to women

     4
       Some experimenting is being done to see if women can accurately report
on the survival of their sisters.
     5
         See Boerma and Bicego (1991) and National Research Council (1989).
     6
       Reproductive health risks are not limited to high-risk groups. In fact,
the majority of maternal deaths occur outside these groups, even though the
relative risk is less.
                                          -3-
who have health problems such as high blood pressure and diabetes that could be
aggravated by pregnancy, and those that are unwanted - all pose health risks for
mothers and/or for their children.

       High Risks to Infants and Children: The factors that cause higher risk for
infants and children are somewhat different from those that cause higher maternal
mortality. Births to older women and high-parity births are less likely to elevate
the risk for the child than to elevate risk for the mother, while births to very
young women bring high risks to both mother and child. Closely spaced births are
more likely to affect the survival chances of the child than of the mother. Also a
mother's death from complications of pregnancy and labor is almost always
associated with the death of her infant. An estimated 7 million perinatal infant
deaths are associated with poor maternal health and poor management of
pregnancies (see Tinker and Post, forthcoming).

        The timing of pregnancies is important for the health of babies. For
example, proper spacing of births improves the survival chances of infants and
reduces their vulnerability to health risks. Infants whose births are spaced two
years apart have significantly better survival chances than those born after shorter
birth ,intervals. Proper spacing also reduces the health risks among children one to
five associated with the poorer nutrition and lack of attention given to children
born after a short interval, particularly baby girls in some regions of the world.
Longer birth intervals also increase the survival chances of toddlers and young
children who are the older of two siblings.

       The adverse effects of these risk factors on the health of infants and
children are evident from differences in child survival. World Fertility Survey data
(Table 1) show comparative risks of dying for infants and children with several
risk factors. 7 In Indonesia, infants with a sibling born in the prior 24 months are
1.85 times as likely to die within the first year of life as infants without a sibling
born in that interval. In Jordan, infants in the former group have an even higher
mortality risk - three times that of infants in the group with adequate spacing.
Similar patterns are observed in Kenya and Mexico. The increased mortality risk
of having siblings less than 24 months older persists among toddlers, and except in
Mexico, also among young children below age five.

         Birth parity is a second influence on the probability of childhood deaths.


     7
       These risks are estimated holding· constant parity, maternal age,
spacing and level of maternal education where appropriate (see Hobcraft et
al., 1985).
                                         -4-
The first birth has consistently higher risk in the first year of life, but except for
Mexico, higher parity does not systematically raise risks (See Table 1). Maternal
age, a third risk factor, also shows mixed effects. Births to women younger than
20 years, and particularly under 18, have consistently higher risks throughout the
first five years· of life, but births to older women are not always at greater risk of
death. This pattern was only observed once it was possible to look at large data
sets from many countries and control for maternal education, parity, along with
birth spacing and maternal age.

         High Risks to Mothers: As indicated above, fewer data exist on maternal
  mortality in developing countries. Therefore, one must consider the relative risks
  reported as rough approximations. The World Health Organization estimates that
  in half of the developing countries, maternal mortality is the first or second most
  common cause of death among women 25 to 34. In all others, it is in the top ten
  (see Winikoff, 1987, p.415). The chances that a woman will die from pregnancy
  related causes depends on the chance of dying at each pregnancy and the number
  of pregnancies that a woman has~ The former depends on a number of factors:
  the a.dequacy of health care available to the woman, her general health and her
  age a.nd parity at the time of the pregnancy and whether the birth is wanted or
  not. Each year, an estimated 500,000 maternal deaths occur in the developing
  world. For each of those deaths, there are, in addition, between 10 and 16 cases
  of maternal morbidity. Data from India indicate that, although. women have a
  higher probability of dying during child bearing years than men, women are less
. disadvantaged where the fertility is lower. After adjusting for differences in
  literacy, women have "only" an 18 percent higher risk of dying at a total fertility
  rate (TFR) of three. At a TFR of five, they have almost a 40 percent higher risk.
  To put these mortality differences in perspective, it has been estimated that in
  high-fertility areas of West and Central Africa women have a 1 in 20 chance of
  dying from maternal causes because of both high risks for each pregnancy and
  because women have many pregnancies, while in East Asia, a woman would have
  a 1 in 722 chance of maternal death due to better survival chances at each
  pregnancy and to having fertility at least half that in West and Central Africa. In
  Northern Europe, with its even lower fertility and much better health facilities,
  the chances are 1 in 10,000 (Tinker and Koblinsk.y, 1993).

       The risks of maternal death depend on both age and parity. Girls who
have a birth before age 18 are three time more likely to die in childbirth than
women who have their first birth between the ages of 20 and 29. First births are
generally more risky than second or third births, but as parity rises over three, the
risk of maternal mortality tends to increase. There is a debate in the literature
about whether high mortality of mothers under 18 and their infants is the result of
                                        -5-
young age per se, primiparous status or whether it is due to the fact that women
who have births early tend to be from poorer families and receive less health care
and poorer nutrition. It has been suggested that the medical causes of higher risks
in early child bearing -are related to physiological factors such as smaller pelvises
(particularly for women under 16), pregnancy induced hypertension, more
frequent pregnancy aggravated malaria. This evidence has not clarified whether it
is age per se or poverty and lack of medical care that are most important in
contributing to these hazards (National Research Council, 1989).

      Depending on the ages and reproductive intentions of expectant mothers,
adequate timing, spacing or limiting of pregnancies would reduce such risks.
Many women in developing countries say they want to space or limit their births
but are not doing so. Their reasons for not using contraception vary by region. In
Sub-Saharan Africa, the lack of knowledge and access are very important. In
almost all countries, health concerns or side effects are of major concerns. Almost
nowhere are husbands objections or religion per se specified as reasons for non-
use by those who say they wish to limit fertility. Others are at risk and do not
express a desire to limit or space8, but might do so if they received adequate
counseling about the health risks of a poorly timed- pregnancy. -

      The effect of short birth intervals on maternal survival has proven hard to
document, and there is no definitive evidence on this link. There is a hypothesis
that women's health and nutritional status are eroded by many and frequent
pregnancies - the maternal depletion syndrome. This relationship has also been
hard.to verify. Some evidence does indicate that combining a heavy burden of
childbearing with a heavy burden of physical work does have detrimental effects
on maternal nutrition. In general, the data on maternal morbidity are even harder
to come by than maternal mortality. 9 An international epidemiological survey of
women's reproductive health would substantially increase the understanding about
the consequences of high fertility for women's health and the appropriateness of
family planning counseling and contraceptive selection for women's health conditions.



     8
       Religion, fatalism and ignorance of family planning seem to important
factors that explain why women do not specify that they want no more children
even at high levels of fertility. There is evidence that increasing knowledge
of contraception and access to a range of methods increases the proportion of
women who say that they wish to restrict fertility when other factors such as
age, number of living children, educatio11, urban residence and assets are
controlled. (See data from Zimbabwe, Colombia and Tunisia in various papers by
Cochrane and Guilkey.)
     9
       See Winikoff, 1987, and Herz and Measham, 1987, for reviews of litera-
ture on this subject.
                                        -6-
IV. Reducing the health risks from unsafe abortion

       Unwanted pregnancies10 are a matter of health risk for all women, particu-
larly when unwanted pregnancies lead to unsafe abortions. The avoidance of
unwanted pregnancy will protect women from exposure to these risks. Quantifying
these risks and the number of abortion related deaths and injury is extremely
difficult because in most countries of the developing world it is illegal and will not
be reported by the person who preforms it, the woman or her family.

       It has been estimated using WFS data that about a quarter of all births
were. unwanted11 in the late 1970s (Maine, 1985). Of the estimated half-million
women who die from pregnancy-related causes in developing countries, at least
one-in-five dies because of complications from an unsafe abortion. The unwanted
pregnancies that move women to seek abortions can result from lack of access to
or knowledge about family planning, or from the failure or discontinued use of a
method for which the women received inadequate counseling or follow-up on side
effects. WHO data indicate that the majority of women who seek unsafe abortion
in developing countries are married women with children. The first line of attack
in reducing the death toll from unsafe abortion is high-quality sex education and
family planning information and services, including adolescents and other unde-
served groups. The next line of defense depends on whether or not abortion is
legal. Where it is legal, it is necessary to make sure that safe abortions are
available. 12 This needs to be backed up with appropriate abortion management:
appropriate treatment for complications of abortion and appropriate post-abortion
counseling on family planning methods. There is a risk of pregnancy with even
the most effective planning methods such as oral contraceptives. Therefore,
making safe abortion widely available as a backup for contraceptive failure (and
for women who do not use contraception) is still needed to prevent maternal
mortality and morbidity from unsafe abortion.


     10
        Women may not want a specific pregnancy for a number of reason: (1)
they want no more children, (2) they want to delay the next pregnancy or (3)
they may not want the pregnancy of a specific partner that they suspect to be
the father, as in the case of marital infidelity.
     11
        These estimates are generally arrived at by examining the proportion
of births that women report as being unwanted or in some cases mistimed. Since
women may be reluctant to report births after the fact as unwanted, this is an
·underestimate. Likewise, since some unwanted pregnancies have been aborted,
they are not included in this number. Therefore, undoubtedly more pregnancies
than births are unwanted-.
     12
       Both India and the U.S. offer examples where abortion is legal, but
where~ due to limitations on funding, safe, legal abortions are not readily
available to all poor women.
                                        -7-
V. Reducing health risks in fertility control

       Risk not only attach to pregnancy, but to a lesser extent to the use of
methods to prevent births. Although not all side effects of contraception are
serious, some are. It is important to weigh these effects against the risks associat-
ed with childbearing that were discussed above. Figure 1 shows the risks from
various contraceptive methods and from child bearing. The fact that the risks of
pregnancy related deaths are so much higher in developing countries, means that
in general contraceptive methods have lower relative risks there. Figure 1 shows
the relative risks of women in rich and poor countries respectively dying from
complications of specific contraceptive methods13 and from dying from pregnancy
arising from unprotected sex. The risks depend on the age of the woman, the
method and the level of development. For example, in developed countries the
risk of dying form the complications of oral contraceptives over the age of 35
exceeds the risk from dying a pregnancy, i.e. the dark solid line falls below the
light solid line after age 35. In developing countries on average, the risks of
pregnancy substantially exceeds the risks of dying from all contraceptive methods
at all ages due to the much greater maternal morality risks.

       Survey data point to a considerable unmet need for family planning
information and services among women who want to space or limit births. In
some cases, women do not have access to the temporary methods appropriate for
spacers. Others may be users of temporary methods but due to inadequate
information about methods use them poorly, resulting in method failure or
discontinuation. Of course, in some cases, women are not motivated to use
methods consistently just as patients everywhere fail to follow doctors instructions
on the use of medication. This well known compliance problem is most difficult
for oral contraceptives and coitus related contraceptive. Counseling can help, but
the provision of alternative methods for individuals who are likely to have
compliance problems is also of great importance. The quality of family planning
services is, in many instances, inadequate for women who want to space. In other
instances, women do not have access to permanent methods and are exposed to
long periods of failure with temporary methods because method mix is limited,
providers are not trained to recognize and respond to health problems and other
client concerns, or there is inadequate counseling about side effects and little
follow up with problems that arise.



     13
        These figures actually overstate the risks from oral contraceptives
because they were complied based on data from periods when pills generally had
higher dosages than is true today.
                                       -8-
       No single family planning method can serve the needs of all women. Pro-
grams that push one method, particularly permanent ones such as sterilization,
will not appeal to spacers. Legal and medical regulations on the provision of a
particular method may be having the opposite effect from the one intended:
instead of reducing health risks they increase them by putting unnecessary barriers
in the way of women who would benefit from having access to that method.

       There are some health risks associated with the use of contraceptive
methods: pills can cause circulatory problems for older women, particularly those
who smoke; IUDs are not recommended for groups at risk for STDs or women
with certain gynecological complications; sterilization is a surgical procedure, so
that infection is a risk, albeit remote unless the procedure is done under unsani-
tary conditions. Side effects (menstrual irregularity, for example) may be encoun-
tered, though users may not know this and be anxious about them. Users need to
be counseled about side effects and their significance. Women need to be alerted
to which side effects are serious and need to be treated and which ones are minor
and or no significance. In addition, if side effects bother women they should be
told of alternative methods. 14

       Most method-related risks are rare, particularly when family planning
services are of high quality. These risks can be further reduced by selection of the
appropriate method for particular users. At the same time, problems arise if
service quality erodes. Poor counseling of pill users is associated with high dis-
continuation rates and method failure. Similar problems arise when IUD users are
not well counseled or find it difficult to get follow-up services when they experi-
ence problems.

      Increased health risks also occur when women who want no more births do
not have access to effective contraception provided by permanent or long-term
methods. Older, high-parity women who want no more births run higher risk of
an unintended pregnancy due to failure or discontinuation of an inappropriate
temporary method. The pill, for example, which carries greater risk for the women
noted above (older women, smokers, women with circulatory problems). As
indicated in Figure 1, even though the chances of getting pregnant are lower for
these older women, their chances of dying are very much greater.


     14
        A recent DHS survey showed that in one country with a program ranked
as slightly above average, over 90% of pill users were not counseled about
side effects, proper use of the method or alternative methods available. This
problem arose because pills were provided off prescription by pharmacies. Even
for the clinically provided IUDs, about 70% of the women were not informed
about alternative methods available if a women had a problem.
                                        -9-
      At the same time, there are non-contraceptive health benefits for users of
oral contraceptives, for example, prevention of ectopic pregnancy, reduced risk of
endometrial and ovarian cancer, and reduction of menstrual problems.

VI. Policy and Programmatic Implications

       The potential health benefits of family planning do not materialize fully in
many developing countries because existing programs are lacking in coverage and
quality. Two major issues require attention: expanded access and improved
quality.

       Increased Access to Services: Achieving these outcomes requires that
services be expanded to meet the needs of women who want to space or limit
their births but do not have access to services. The 1990s present new challenges
in meeting these needs. While fertility rates have declined in many countries, the
number of women entering their reproductive ages continues to increase. Further
attention needs to be focused on the large numbers of unmarried adolescents
who, up to now, have not been adequately served by family planning programs
targeted on married women. Expanding numbers of women of reproductive age,
falling desired family sizes and increased sexual activity among the unmarried
mean that many countri.es have had to "run faster in order to stand still" in
meeting the demand for family planning. Limited· developing country government
resources and the competition for foreign assistance funding puts a further
squeeze on the capacity to expand services. Careful planning is required.
Resources need to be marshaled and allocated efficiently.

       While it is essential to provide services for family planning and reproductive
health, they need not be provided through government facilities. As described in
the World Development Report: Investing in Health, there are a variety of combi-
nations of public, private and NGO provision and financing of family planning as
well as other health services. There are also cost and benefits of each combination
of provision and finance. Public finance is needed if the poor are to be served, but
government can either subsidize private providers or NGOs or provide the
services directly. The arguments against government provision revolve around the
lack of quality of government services and the lack of incentives for government
providers to reduce costs. This argument, however, is not completely valid. If
private providers are protected from competition, they will be no more likely to
be efficient or to provide high quality services than public providers. Likewise, a
subsidy to a private provider to provide a service such as family planning only
benefits the poor, if it is passed on to the poor in the form of lower prices. Where
there is not public monitoring of the pricing of private services to the poor or
                                       - 10 -
substantial competition among private providers, the poor may not benefit from
public provision. 15 Thus, the issue of who is to provide services for the poor and
who should pay for them should not be decided oil narrow ideological grounds,
but by careful evaluations of the capacities of each provider in each contexts.

        Some functions such as the provision of information and research have
much clearer public finance arguments for government support than others, but
still there exists a possible distinction between who provides the service and who
pays for it.

       Improvement in the Quality of Services: Many women are contraceptive
users but experience problems associated with use of an inappropriate method,
side effects, discontinued use or method failure. Others are at risk because of
inadequate screening for STDs and other reproductive health problems. Most of
these problems can be traced to poor quality services: a limited offering of meth-
ods, poorly trained providers, inadequate screening and counseling, lack of follow-
up when problems occur (Bruce, 1990). Programs that appear highly effective in
terms of contraceptive prevalence can still have serious quality problems. These
problems require action on a number of fronts: (a) broader method mix, (b)
selection and training of providers, (c) education of clients and (d) program
management.

a.     Broader Method Mix: Method mix is an telling indicator of family planning
service quality. Potential family planning users who are not offered methods
appropriate to their specific needs are less likely to begin using family planning
and Qtore likely to discontinue use and experience a failure or other health
hazards. Programs that emphasize sterilization a~d offer no or few temporary
methods do not meet the needs of spacers. This has proven very difficult to do in
countries where the program is centered around a set of incentives for the
adoption and recruitment of acceptors of permanent methods. Thus improving the
method mix has much broader implications than just introducing new methods
into the clinic and training personnel. Attention should also be given to replacing
temporary methods that carry higher risks of side effects or discontinuation (the
steel-ring IUD used in China, high-estrogen pills still dispensed in some countries)
with more appropriate alternatives (low-estrogen pills, the Copper-T IUD).
Barriers that inhibit the availability of a broad range of appropriate methods need
to be removed: unnecessary medical screening, approval procedures that duplicate
processes already completed in other countries, packaging and labeling require-


     15 This is well attested to with cases of medicare fraud in health

systems such as those in the U.S.
                                       - 11 -
ments that perform no useful function but increase the cost of methods, import
restrictions or tariffs that make procurement difficult. In countries where public-
sector providers are required· to use products on an "essential-medicines" list,
procurement of contraceptives may be blocked by failure to have them on such
lists.

b.     Selection and Training of Providers: Even when an appropriate range of
contraceptive methods is available, it is not guaranteed that they will be offered to
users due to provider bias. Service personnel need to be trained to recognize and
respond to the varying need of their clients. Sensitivity to client feelings and
needs is an important criterion for both the selection and training of providers.
Attention also needs to be given to cultural and social sensitivities: in societies
with strictures on male-female contacts, recruitment of female providers is crucial
to service quality. The issue of incentives whether monetary or physiological, are
also central16• This is particularly true where providers have been in a habit of
either receiving money or some other form of performance related payment.

       The quality of client-provider interactions is also important for effective,
continued use of methods even when the appropriate method is provided. Inade-
quate knowledge of methods on the part of providers or bias for or against a
specific method can distort the method mix. Providers need to be trained in how
to inform clients about potential problems with a methods and about when and
how to follow up on them.

c.      Education of Clients: Despite the fact that most surveys indicate a high
level of awareness of contraceptive methods by potential users, there is solid
evidence that there is little detailed knowledge of specific methods. High rates of
pill failure have been linked to poor understanding about when to take the pill
and what to do when a user forgets to take one. Rumors about the IUD and
inadequate understanding of minor side effects have caused many users to remove
them in the absence of significant problems. Clear and accurate information for
both users and providers of methods is an important remedy to these problems. 17

     16
       Incentives can be provided to either providers of services or accep-
tors. There is a great deal of discussion of the abuses of incentives. In
addition, to the possible use of coercion, there is bound to be distrust
between those who accept services if they know that the providers have a
financial incentive for provision. Thus, ideally programs are better off
without incentives.
     17
       Poorly educated populations are more difficult to inform about proper
use of family planning, about side effects and about alternative methods that
would circumvent side-effects. As indicated in the OHS survey referred to
above, counseling on pills provided by pharmacies was particularly inadequate
                                          '
                                       - 12 -
Oear. information is particularly important for post-partum women who want to
take advantage of the contraceptive effect of the post-partum amenorrhea brought
about by breast feeding. This "natural" method of birth spacing requires a careful
breast feeding regime and information on when to use appropriate backup
methods. It is also necessary to educate women about the risks of short birth
intervals and possibly the effects of age and parity for maternal and child health.
Women also must be screened to determine their own, specific health hazards and
the dangers of both pregnancy and specific methods.

d.     Program Management: Many people think that quality implies higher cost
in delivering services. Indeed, some users may require more attention, which adds
to the cost of serving them. These costs can be offset by patient-flow efficiencies
and by management information systems and at.her administrative tools to identify
and target high-risk clients who need special care. Better training of providers
and better education of clients can are also cost-effective. The challenges in keep-
ing up with growing demand for services during this decade and the next call for
special efforts to make sure that subsidized services are targeted on those who
have the greatest needs. To the .extent that these needs can be differentiated
according to the methods, screening, counseling and follow-up services, required,
quality of service can be maintained and improved at the same time that cost
containment is exercised.                          ·

VII. Conclusions

       Although there is still considerable uncertainty about the relative risks of
age, parity and spacing of births for mother and child, there is enough evidence to
make a convincing case that a decrease in the pace of childbearing would improve
the health of children and limiting childbearing to the ages 20 to 34 would
improve the health of the mother and to a less extent the health of children.
Limiting the number of children would also reduce women's lifetime risk of
pregnancy-related mortality and morbidity, even though parity per se may or may
not increase the relative risks. This health rationale must balance the risks from
pregnancy against the risks of contracepting. For the most part this balance is
quite favorable to family planning. It is necessary to provide access to a wide
range of .contraceptive methods for both married and unmarried individuals and
to provide good education and counseling to clients.



because there was little incentive for pharmacies to discuss alternatives not
available through their store. In addition, since pills were such a small
portion of the overall activity of the pharmacy, there was little incentive
for their owners to become informed about the proper use . or side effects.
                                       - 13 -
                                                )


       In addition to the health rationale, there is also the rationale to provide
family planning to help women and men qave the number and spacing of children
that they want. Expanding the range of cnoice is the major determinant of
improved living standards, however measured. There is a large proportion of
women in the developing world who either do not want any more children or wish
to space their next birth. Many do not have access to good quality family planning
or suffer method failures. Among the many adverse consequences of the lack of
access to high-quality family planning, is the fact that there are far too many
abortions in the developing world. In a few places it is legal and safe, in most
places, it is not. As noted earlier in the paper, at least 20% mortality in countries
of the developing world is associated with unsafe abortion. In addition to the
suffering and loss of these women, there are enormous costs for their families and
communities. Clearly, there is a strong complementarity between health rationales
for family planning and the rationales of improving couples' ability to realize their
reproductive aspirations and raise their standard of living.
                                    Table 1. The Relative Risk of Dying in Different Periods
                                                   for C,ertain Risk Factors
                                                               I


                                                                                                         Mother's Age 2

                                                                    Parity                      <20            30-      35+     40+
                                                                                                               39

                                Preceding Short        First        4-6          7+
                                 Birth Interval'
                                                               Comparative 2-3

Infant Mortalitli:'.J

Indonesia
            Uncontrolled              1 .52           1. 17         .93          1 .21          1 .42         1.00              (1.361
                                      1.85            1.22          .97          .99            1.31                    1.05
            Controlled 5

Jordan
            Uncontrolled              2. 19            .86          .83          1 .07          1 .31         1.00              (1 .33)
            Controlled                3.03            2.20         ~.73           .96           1.20                      .76

Kenya
            Uncontrolled              1.44            1.20          .96          1 .23          1.34          1.00              (1 .43)
            Controlled                1.63            2.03          .98          1.19           1 .28                     .93

Mexico
            Uncontrolled              1.37            1.08         1. 19         1::fo          1.29          1.19              (1.441
            Controlled                1 .50           1 .30        1. 17         1 .43          1.52                    1.03

Toddler Mortalitli:'.

Indonesia
            Uncontrolled              1 .52           1.04         1 .33         1. 12          1 .17         1.05              (0.48)
            Controlled                1 .79           .96          1 .27         1 .44          1 .46                   (.48)




             !These are the relative risks of dying if one is born less than 24 months after a previous surviving birth(s).
   For the uncontrolled estimates, it is compared with a child born 24-4 7 months after a previous child. For the
   controlled estimate, it is compared with no children in the previous 24 months and it assumes only one surviving
   child was born in the previous 23 months.

             2
                 For the uncontrolled estimates, there are three ages with risk given and the comparative group is
   composed of those 20-29. For the controlled estimates, there are two age categories given, under 20 and over
   34. The comparative group is 25-34.

             3
                 For the controlled infant mortality estimates, there are a weighted average of nee-natal and post-nee-natal
   mortality relative risks.

             4
                 The uncontrolled estimates come from Rutstein ( 1 983) and simply compare the mortality in each
   category.

             5
                 The controlled estimates are based in multiple log linear model where the previous birth interval, birth
   order, maternal age, parental education and sex of the child are controlled. The comparison category is no births
   in the previous 24 months, parity 2-3, maternal age 25-34, and low level of education. For toddler and chld
   mortality, the birth of a subsequent child is al controlled. The estimates come from Hobcraft, et al ( 1985).
I

      Jordan
                    Uncontrolled   1.85   .99     .97    1.35    1.29   1.26            (.56)
                    Controlled     2.01   1.04    .76    .68     .99             .44

      Kenya
                    Uncontrolled   1.31   1.05    .96    .95     1.05   .92              .67
                    Controlled     1.43   1. 11   .96    .97     1.23            .92

      Mexico
                    Uncontrolled   1.39   .66     1.18   1.18    1.19   .95             (.94)
                    Controlled     1.35   .70     1.76   1.51    2.32            1.03

      Child Mortality (one
      alive in 0-24)

      Indonesia
                    Uncontrolled   1.26   .93      .99   1.20    1.14   .82             (.781
                    Controlled     1.25   .80     1.00   1.15    1.52            .90

      Jordan
                    Uncontrolled   2.08   .68     1.63   1.05    1.51   1.12            (2.76)
                    Controlled     1.93   .73     1.14   .64     1.65            .53

      Kenya
                    Uncontrolled   1.20   .89     1.12   1.50    1.21   1,.§.6          (1.33)
                    Controlled     1.21   .78     1.05   1.49    1.40            1.16

      Mexico
                    Uncontrolled   .80    .91     1.58   1.32    1.21   .93             (1.44)
                    Controlled     .88    .80     1.27   1.(13   1.46            1.05




    SHCochrane:sss
    December 14, 1993
    Fila:c\l\sc\birtM. tbl
"
              Bibliography of Family Planning and Health

    Boerma, J. Ties, and George T. Bicego. 1992. "Preceding birth intervals and
         ·child survival: searching for pathways of influence." Studies in Family
          Planning. 23(4):243-256.

    Bruce, Judith. 1990. "Fundamental elements of the quality of care: a simple
           framework." Studies in Family Planning 21(2):61-91, March/April.

    Cochrane, S.H. and D.I{. Guilkey. (forthcoming) "How access to contraception
          affects fertility and contraceptive use in Tunisia." Economic Development
          and Cultural Change.

    Cochrane, S.H. and D.I{. Guilkey. 1992. "Fertility intentions and access to services
          as constraints on contraceptive use in Colombia." In Proceedings of the
          Demographic and Health Surveys World Conference. August 1991.
          Columbia, MD: IRD/Macro.

    Cochrane, S.H., D.I{. Guilkey, and J.S. Akin. 1993. "1'-e Cost Effectiveness of
          Family planning in Reducing the Mortality of Women and Children." draft
          of a background paper prepared for the World Developing Report: Investing
          in Health.

    Guilkey, David and Susan Cochrane. (forthcoming) "Zimbabwe: Determinants
          of Contraceptive Use at the Leading Edge of the Fertility Transition in
          Sub-Saharan Africa." World Bank Economic Review.

    Herz, Barbara and Anthony R. Measham. 1987. "The safe motherhood initiative:
          proposals for action." World Bank Discussion Papers #9. Washington,
          D.C.: The World Bank.

    Hobcraft, J. N., J. W. McDonald, and S. 0. Rutstein. 1985. Demographic
          determinants of infant and child mortality: a comparative analysis."
          Population Studies. 39(3)363-385.

    Maine, Deborah. 1985. "Maternal mortality in the Third World." People. 12(7):8.

    National Research Council. 1989. Contraception and Reproduction Health
          Consequences for Women and Children in the Developing Countries.
          Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

    Population Crisis Committee. 1985. "Issues in Contraceptive Development."
          Population Briefing Paper 15 (May).
Tinker, Anne and Marjorie A. Koblinsky. 1993. "Making motherhood safe."
       World Bank Discussion Paper. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Tinker, Anne and May Post. 1993. "The influence of maternal health on child
       survival." World Bank Policy and Research Working Papers Series,
       forthcoming.

Walsh, Julia A., Chris N. Ferber, Anthony R. Measham, and Paul J. Gertler.
       1991. "Maternal and perinatal health problems." Health Sector Priorities
       Review. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

Winikoff, Beverly. 1987. "Family planning and the health of women and
      children." Technology in Society. 9:415-438. Pergamon Journals, Ltd.

World Bank, 1993. "Effective family ·planning programs." Washington, D.C.:
      The World Bank.

World Bank. 1992. "Healthy mothers--healthy babies." PHN Notes, Population
      and Human Resources Department 2:9. Washington, D.C.: The World
      Bank.
