                                                                        95540
                                                                  The World Bank
                                                        Agriculture Global Practice
                                                                  September 2014




Rural development in Haiti:
Challenges and opportunities




 Barbara Coello • Gbemisola Oseni • Tanya Savrimootoo • Eli Weiss
Rural development in Haiti:                    Barbara Coello
                                               Gbemisola Oseni
                                               Tanya Savrimootoo
Challenges and opportunities                   Eli Weiss




                           The World Bank
                 Agriculture Global Practice
                           September 2014
      Standard Disclaimer
This volume is a product of staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors
of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

      Copyright Statement
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable
law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World
Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to
reproduce portions of the work promptly.
  For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a
request with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-
4470, http://www.copyright.com/.
  All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should
be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW,
Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org
  Photo credit: Eli Weiss, World Bank, 2013

      Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank Federica Marzo, Diego Arias and Michael Morris
for their guidance and advice during the elaboration of this paper.
Contents
Excecutive Summary....................................................................................................iv

1. Introduction and Background.................................................................................1

2. Data Sources..............................................................................................................4

3. Profile of Rural Households.....................................................................................6
    3.1. Characteristics of Rural Households.................................................................7
    3.2. Economic Activities of Rural Households........................................................12
           3.2.1 Agriculture..................................................................................................16
           3.2.2 Nonfarm Activities....................................................................................22
           3.2.3 Other Income and Remittances...............................................................25

4. Determinants of Rural Income Generating Activities..........................................28

5. Determinants of Market Access..............................................................................34

6. Determinants of Participation in Nonfarm Activities..........................................38

7. Determinants of Poverty and Food Insecurity......................................................42

8. Key Findings and Recommendations.....................................................................46
    8.1. Promoting Diversification of Livelihoods
         Sources among Rural Households.....................................................................47
           8.1.1 Findings......................................................................................................47
           8.1.2 Recommendations.....................................................................................48
    8.2. Improving the Performance of Rural Markets
         for Inputs and Outputs........................................................................................50
           8.2.1 Findings......................................................................................................50
           8.2.2 Recommendations.....................................................................................50

9. References..................................................................................................................54

Appendix.......................................................................................................................58
     Executive Summary
     Haiti is one of the least developed countries in the world and has faced many
     challenges in its development process due to its vulnerability to natural disasters
     and fragility. The frequent natural disasters are particularly devastating because they
     directly affect the large share of the population that lives in rural areas and depends
     on agriculture as a primary livelihood source. Approximately 50 percent of Haiti’s
     population of 10 million currently reside in rural areas, and according to recent
     figures about 70.7 and 53.9 percent of rural households are poor (income of less
     than $1.98 per day) or extremely poor (income of less than $1.00 per day). Haiti’s
     rural population remains one of the most food insecure in the world. Ecological
     challenges, rapid population growth, and high import dependency, combined with
     the devastating effects of the 2010 earthquake, have exacerbated an already dire
     food insecurity situation, and revitalization of the agricultural sector has become
     a foremost priority of the Haitian government. The nonfarm sector in Haiti is also
     important for the rural economy and contributes to improved livelihoods of rural
     households.
        The objective of this report is to examine the linkages between rural economic
     activity, food insecurity and poverty in Haiti as a means of determining the barriers
     to rural development. The analysis draws on a newly available set of household-
     level living standards measurement data collected in 2012 (ECVMAS). About
     70.7 percent of all rural households are poor, and education levels are low with an
     average of 2.8 years of education for the household head. Agriculture dominates
     economic activity (78 percent of all households are involved in agricultural
     activities), although almost 25 percent of the agricultural households supplement
     their agricultural income by engaging also in some type of nonfarm activity. Overall
     nonfarm activity participation (including households that engage in agricultural
     activities and households that do not) is reported at 46 percent. Nonfarm activities
     can be related to agriculture upstream (input supply) or downstream (value-adding
     and processing), or they can be unrelated to the sector (retailing). This report
     identifies the main factors of production that correlate with increased productivity
     in the agricultural sector and examines the determinants of nonfarm participation,
     poverty and food security within rural Haiti.

           Key Findings and Recommendations
     The information and analysis presented in this report point to two priority areas
     for rural development interventions in Haiti: (i) promoting diversification of
     livelihoods sources among rural households, and (ii) improving the performance
     of rural markets for inputs and outputs. Focusing on these areas could increase
     agricultural productivity, boost rural incomes, improve food security, thereby
     potentially reducing constraints to rural development.




iv
      I.	 Promoting Diversification of Livelihoods Sources
          among Rural Households

      Findings
• Diversifying agricultural production activities is correlated with higher
  productivity and could reduce vulnerability to shocks.
• Remittances are positively associated with higher incomes, increased agricultural
  productivity, and improved food security, but the causal relationships are difficult
  to discern.
• Nonfarm activities in rural areas seem to provide a pathway to escape from
  poverty and food insecurity.
• Female headed households have reduced access to farming inputs, which could
  explain the observed gender gap in input use and agricultural productivity. In
  the nonfarm enterprise sector, female headed households similarly have reduced
  access to inputs and use lower quantities of inputs.

      Recommendations
• Promote diversification of agricultural production activities as a way to
  increase income and improve food security. Activities that could be undertaken
  to promote diversification include educational campaigns to increase awareness
  of the benefits of diversification, research to identify crops and livestock species
  suited for particular locations or production environments, extension activities to
  disseminate locally appropriate management methods, and programs to improve
  the availability and accessibility of key inputs. Nevertheless, farmers might also
  be able to expand productivity / increase income on a single crop, if they select to
  invest in crops that provide higher profits.
• Help poor rural households take advantage of non-farm employment
  opportunities as a way of generating additional revenue and managing risk.
  Special consideration should be given to interventions that will help the poorest
  households overcome entry barriers (lack of key assets and access to basic
  services, and distance to markets and labor), including not only interventions
  designed to improve the quality of the rural labor force (e.g., basic education,
  vocational training), but also interventions designed to generate increased rural
  non-farm employment opportunities (e.g., programs to encourage expansion of
  rural enterprises, support to rural financial institutions).
• Encourage poor rural households to invest remittances in improving the
  productivity of their agricultural activities. Poor rural households receiving
  remittances often use those remittances to purchase food, and as a result they
  miss an opportunity to build the base of productive assets needed to generate an
  enhanced stream of income over the longer term. Interventions are needed to
  encourage poor rural households invest a portion of the remittances they may
  receive in productive assets that can ensure a longer term stream of future income.


                                                                                         v
     •	 Invest in soil and water management technologies to improve the productivity
        of the natural resource base on which agriculture depends. Over the longer
        term, the welfare of rural households in Haiti will depend crucially on the
        quality of the natural resource base on which agriculture depends. Efforts are
        needed to compensate for decades of mismanagement, with the goal of reversing
        land degradation, restoring soil fertility, re-establishing vegetative cover, and
        conserving and protecting increasingly scarce water resources. A place to begin
        would be through the promotion of more environmentally friendly agricultural
        production practices, combined with introduction of regulations to restrict the
        uncontrolled exploitation of common-pool resources especially including trees.
        These could be complemented in time with schemes to promote payments for
        environmental services (PES), which led to good results in some countries and
        could provide opportunities for rural households to generate additional income
        by preserving the environment.

           II.	 Improving the Performance of Rural Markets
                for Inputs and Outputs

           Findings
     •	 Agricultural productivity in Haiti is severely constrained by the limited availability
        and high cost of purchased inputs.
     •	 For many rural households, incentives to invest in improved agricultural
        productivity are undermined by lack of access to reliable markets for outputs.

           Recommendations
     •	 Strengthen private sector-led input distribution systems to help ensure timely
        availability of improved inputs.
       a.	 For seeds, modern varieties hold the potential to deliver significant yield
           increases in virtually all of the major staples. Seed production and marketing
           are by nature commercial activities, but newly established private seed
           companies face many obstacles and may require public support during an
           initial phase. This support should come in two forms: (i) public investments
           that lower R&D costs of private companies (e.g., investments in public
           plant breeding research and public production of foundation seed), and (ii)
           enactment of policies that favor the emergence of a pluralistic and competitive
           seed industry.
       b.	 For fertilizer, stimulating the development of an efficient, profitable, and
           competitive fertilizer industry would require a two-pronged approach to
           strengthen demand for fertilizer on the one hand and improve the supply of
           fertilizer on the other. Possible interventions include measures that would
           improve the ability of farmers to access credit needed to purchase fertilizer, as
           well as scale up the use of fertilizer vouchers to make fertilizer more affordable



vi
      to the poorest farmers. It is important that these programs be time-bound,
      however, to ensure that subsidies can be phased out as the quantities used
      of fertilizer increase and commercial distribution becomes profitable. Efforts
      to strengthen demand for fertilizer must be accompanied by parallel efforts
      to improve supply. Fertilizer market development efforts should be aimed at
      creating viable private production and distribution systems. As with seed,
      public support may be needed during an initial phase to allow emerging private
      fertilizer companies to become established and expand their operations to
      a commercially viable scale, but this support should be time-bound. Haiti
      lacks the raw materials needed to produce fertilizer, so the domestic fertilizer
      industry will rely for the foreseeable future on imported components. The
      government should promote private investment in the industry, but it should
      avoid directly participating in importing and distributing fertilizer.
•	 Improve access of rural households to output markets. Many rural households
   in Haiti have little incentive to invest in expanding their agricultural enterprises
   because of the difficulty of selling surplus production. Efforts are needed to reduce
   the transactions costs incurred by rural households in identifying and accessing
   remunerative markets for outputs. An initial set of interventions could focus on
   different types of mobile phone- and internet-based market information systems
   that speed flows of market information and help connect buyers and sellers.
   Such efforts will have to be complemented with investments in infrastructure—
   especially rural roads—that can allow households located in remote areas to
   access inputs and evacuate outputs quickly and at lower cost.
•	 Exploit immediate opportunities to match supply and demand. Development
   of efficient markets for agricultural commodities in Haiti will take time. In
   the short run, however, opportunities exist to link selected producers with
   remunerative markets, such as food aid programs, school feeding initiatives,
   and other institutional feeding schemes that can systematically source products
   from local producers. One promising approach that has been used successfully
   in many other countries to tackle this multi-pronged agenda is the Productive
   Alliances model that links producer groups to markets.
•	 Strengthen food safety through regulations and implementing institutions.
   As Haiti’s food system transitions from its current subsistence orientation to
   become more market-oriented, food quality and safety will become increasingly
   important for public health and competitiveness. A comprehensive food safety
   strategy covering the entire supply chain “from farm to fork” would help to
   ensure that investments in improving food quality and nutritional content are
   sustained over time. Such a strategy should raise awareness about food safety
   and nutrition issues, provide production and market incentives, and develop the
   appropriate policy and institutional framework needed to ensure the availability
   of the necessary infrastructure and supporting services.




                                                                                           vii
1
    Introduction and Background
1.	 Haiti, one of the poorest countries in the world, faces many development
    challenges due to its fragile resource base, vulnerability to natural disasters,
    and political instability. The economic challenges Haiti faces today are
    similar in many respects to those highlighted 15 years ago in the 1999 World
    Bank Haiti Poverty Assessment. The 1999 report indicated that among the
    two-thirds of the population classified as rural, as many as 80 percent lived
    in poverty, including more than 65 percent who lived in extreme poverty.
    Haiti also suffered from high rates of child malnutrition and low educational
    achievements1 (World Bank 1998). Today, very little has changed: about 502
    percent of the Haitian population of almost 10 million people resides in
    rural areas where development indicators are lagging and poverty is more
    widespread. The most recent figures3 indicate that about 70.7 percent of rural
    households fall into the “poor” category (based on the moderate poverty line
    of $1.98 per day), and about 53.9 percent fall into the “extreme poor” category
    (based on a poverty line of $1.00 per day4). The main economic activities of rural
    households also remain relatively unchanged. Although households in rural




                                                                                            Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
    Haiti engage in multiple income generating activities, as in many developing
    countries, the agriculture sector employs more than 705 percent of the rural
    population and contributes about 28 percent to GDP (World Bank 2008). As
    is becoming more common in many developing countries, households in rural
    areas often diversify outside agriculture, and the importance of the nonfarm
    sector continues to grow (Barrett et al. 2001). This is also the case in Haiti,
    where about 45 percent of rural households engage in the nonfarm sector.
2.	 Haiti’s rural population remains extremely poor and food insecure. In rural
    Haiti, 7 out of 10 people live in poverty, a rate that is higher than the rate found
    in any other country in the region (World Bank Data). While countries such as
    Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Bolivia also experience rural poverty rates
    over 50 percent, most other Latin American and Caribbean countries experience
    rates below 50 percent. In comparison, the rate of rural poverty stands at about
    56 percent in Malawi and Mozambique and at about 30 percent in Ethiopia. The
    high levels of rural poverty in Haiti are reflected in widespread food insecurity:
    about 36 percent of the rural population suffers from food insecurity. According
    to the Global Food Security Index, Haiti ranks near the bottom of the table in food



1	   Adult literacy rates were at about 55 percent and 35 percent of children under 5
     suffered from malnutrition.
2	   In contrast the 2003 census showed that about 60 percent of the population was
     classified as rural (WB 2005)
3	   See Chapter 1: Poverty profile and trends, Haiti Poverty Assessment 2014
4	   Both the moderate and extreme poverty rates are based on exchange rate of 41.58
     HTG to the US dollar (2012).
5	   Except when indicated, all statistics are from the Enquête sur les Conditions de Vie
     de Ménage Après le Séisme (ECVMAS 1), conducted in 2012-2013 by the National
     Bureau of Statistics of Haiti, l’Institut Haïtien de Statistique et d’Informatique
     (IHSI), see paragraph 5 below for more details


                                                                                                 1
                                   security6 (The Economist, 2014). It ranks dead last within the Latin American
                                   region, and it is one of the worst performers even when compared to other low
                                   income countries such as Niger, Bangladesh, and Uganda.
                              3.	 The agriculture sector in Haiti is adversely affected by high rates of
                                  population growth and harsh environmental conditions. Agriculture remains
                                  the mainstay of the rural economy in Haiti. The main food crops are rice, maize,
                                  bananas, yams, cassava, green beans, and millet, while important export crops
                                  include coffee and mangoes. Production is highly dependent on unreliable
                                  rainfall, as fewer than 1 percent of farmers use irrigation (Jadotte 2007). Most
                                  farmers have poor access to tools, machinery, and purchased inputs including
                                  improved seeds and fertilizer. Many have difficulty connecting to markets due
                                  to transportation constraints and poor infrastructure (WB 2005). In a country
                                  that is already densely populated, steady population growth continues to put
                                  pressure on the natural resource base, and farm sizes have declined over time
                                  and become less productive (WB 2005). To compound matters, Haiti’s exposure
                                  to frequent hurricanes and tropical storms, combined with high rates of soil
                                  erosion that have reduced soil fertility and adversely affected crop output, cause
                                  annual productivity losses in agriculture ranging from 0.5 to 1.2 percent (WB
                                  2005). Extensive deforestation7 in many parts of the country has worsened the
                                  erosion problem and led to the loss of enormous quantities of fertile topsoil
                                  (Verner 2008; WB 2005).
                              4.	 Haiti is highly dependent on international markets for its food security,
                                  importing more than 50 percent of its food including 80 percent of the
                                  main staple, rice (USAID 2014, WB 2014 and figure A1). The 2008 global
Introduction and Background




                                  food price crisis caused food prices in Haiti to spike sharply. Higher food
                                  prices were particularly harmful to the poor, more than 50 percent of whose
                                  expenses are dedicated to food. Food supply shortages are believed to have
                                  caused irreversible effects on human health, even though these effects are
                                  difficult to quantify. The 2008 experience highlighted the dependence of Haiti
                                  on food imports and its vulnerability to fluctuations in international prices.8
                                  The 2008 food price crisis was followed by a series of severe storms in 2008 and
                                  widespread devastation to the nation’s capital caused by the earthquake in 2010.
                                  The large quantities of emergency food aid that were imported in response to
                                  these crises had unintended negative impacts on Haitian agriculture, as food
                                  prices fell precipitously in local markets. These events discouraged investment
                                  in Haitian farming,9 but at the same time they also led to some urban-to-


                              6	   Haiti ranks 103 out of 109 countries included in the index. The index considers
                                   three dimensions: affordability, availability, quality and safety.
                              7	   Haiti forest cover less than 2 percent of the country (Country profile, Library of
                                   congress federal research division)
                              8	   Former President Bill Clinton apologize in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
                                   about the consequences of US rice subsidies inducing a loss of capacity for Haitian
                                   farmers to continue producing rice (March 10, 2010)
                              9	   John Holmes (U.N. humanitarian chief) in The Associated Press and former
                                   Director-General of UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Jacques Diouf


  2
    rural migration as people abandoned Port-au-Prince. This confluence of
    reduced food supply and increased rural demand created an incentive for
    the government to attribute increased importance to rural development as a
    national development objective (Shamsie 2012). Today, rebuilding the nation’s
    agricultural production base ranks among the top priorities of the government10
    (Arias et al., 2013). Promoting development of the rural nonfarm sector is also
    considered important, as an expanding nonfarm sector could absorb surplus
    unproductive labor as it exits from the agricultural sector, slowing rural-to-
    urban migration while at the same time creating opportunities to increase
    household income (Lewis 1954 and Verner 2008).
5.	 The Ministry of Agricultural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR)
    has implemented important agriculture policy reforms. In 2010, the
    Government implemented a short- to medium-term strategy and investment
    plan for the period 2013-16. The plan identifies four main objectives for the
    agricultural sector: (i) modernize the ministry of agriculture to enable better
    governance; (ii) increase agricultural productivity to improve food security




                                                                                          Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
    and increase revenue; (iii) develop agricultural value chains, with particular
    emphasis on increasing exports; and (vi) adopt and promote ecological
    agriculture to preserve natural resources. Other major agricultural policy
    reforms have started to changed the way direct support to farmers is handled.
    For the first time, subsidies to agricultural inputs are being provided through
    voucher schemes, which are less distortionary than traditional subsidies applied
    across the board to input prices. The use of vouchers has encouraged increased
    participation by the private sector in the provision of inputs, allowing for a
    general positive spillover effect on non-beneficiaries. Finally, ongoing efforts
    have been made in strengthening the capacity of key institutions charged with
    the provision of agricultural public goods and services, in particular in the areas
    of animal and plant health, but also in the areas of research and development
    (R&D) and extension.




10	 The objectives of the National Plan of Agricultural Investments (2011-2016)
    includes (a) increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the agricultural
    sector, (b) increase by 25 percent the contribution of agriculture productivity to
    national food availability, (c) Reduce by 50 percent the number of individuals in
    food insecurity, (d) Increase agricultural income for at least 500,000 households,
    (e) Increase resilience of the population to natural hazard.


                                                                                               3
4
    2
        Data Sources
6.	 This report on the linkages between rural economic activities, food security,
    and poverty in Haiti takes advantage of a new and unique data set11. The
    analysis presented below is based on data from the first wave of the panel
    survey, Enquête sur les Conditions de Vie de Ménage Après le Séisme (ECVMAS
    1), conducted in 2012-13 by the National Bureau of Statistics of Haiti, l’Institut
    Haïtien de Statistique et d’Informatique (IHSI) in collaboration with the
    World Bank and the French research institution, Développement, Institutions
    et Mondialisation (DIAL).  The survey follows the typical Living Standards
    Measurement Study (LSMS) framework. The survey sample was designed to
    be representative at the national, departmental and rural/urban levels. The full
    ECVMAS sample includes 4,960 households, both urban and rural, drawn
    from 500 enumeration areas. For the purpose of this chapter, the analysis has
    been restricted to the rural sub-sample, which includes 2,296 households from
    287 enumeration areas.
7.	 One of the main objectives of ECVMAS 1 is to capture key socio-demographic
    and socio-economic characteristics of the population. ECVMAS 1 contains




                                                                                               Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
    comprehensive data on employment and unemployment, agricultural and
    non-agricultural economic activities of the household, primary and secondary
    economic activities of the individuals, housing conditions, consumption
    spending, migration, shocks as well as coping mechanisms. The ECVMAS data
    enables a closer look at crop, livestock and other agricultural activities of the
    80 percent of rural households engaged in agriculture. Detailed information
    was also gathered on the nonfarm sector, focusing on areas such as industry of
    activity, size of enterprise, ownership, and destination of products.12
8.	 The availability of such comprehensive data on post-earthquake Haiti
    allows us to gauge with greater accuracy the current living conditions
    and socio-economic profiles of rural Haiti and to help determine some
    of the potential barriers to rural development. Section 2 presents a detailed
    profile of rural households in Haiti and their food security status. Section 3
    examines the economic activities of rural household both in the farm and
    nonfarm sectors. Section 4 presents analysis on the determinants of rural
    income generating activities in Haiti and explores the role of remittances. The
    analysis also examines the factors that matter for poverty and food security of
    rural household in general and agricultural households in particular. Section 5
    concludes by summarizing key findings and policy implications.




11	  The analysis in this report is carried out within the availability of data collected in
    the first wave of the ECVMAS survey.
12	 The ECVMAS has some limitation on the quality and accuracy of the data, which
    would have been useful for this study, such as data on soil, productivity, access to
    irrigation, credit or localization.


                                                                                                    5
6
    3
        Profile of Rural Households
9.	 This section presents descriptive statistics on rural households in Haiti,
    reports on the economic activities of these households, and examines the
    correlates to poverty. For present purposes, Haiti’s 10 departments are grouped
    into four regions:13 Nord, Sud, Transversale, and Ouest.

      3.1	Characteristics of Rural Households
10.	 Rural households in Haiti suffer from higher rates of poverty than urban
     households, for example those found in the Port-au-Prince (PAP) region.
     Using a poverty line of $1.98/day, 70.7 percent14 of all rural households are
     categorized as poor (Figure 2.1). The rural poverty rate ranges from a low of
     59.8 percent in Ouest region to a high of 82.8 percent in Nord region. These
     variations are likely due in part to the regions’ respective physical proximities
     to urban centers such as PAP, the Ouest being the closest and the Nord the
     most remote. About 53 percent of the rural population lives in extreme poverty,
     surviving on less than $1.00/day. The rate of extreme rural poverty is highest in




                                                                                         Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     Nord region, where over 67 of the population lives in extreme poverty. Female-
     headed households experience marginally higher rates of extreme poverty and
     food insecurity than male-headed households.
11.	 Education levels are low in rural Haiti, with an average of 2.8 years of
     education for the household head. Education levels are slightly higher in Ouest
     region compared with the other regions, where household heads have 3.5 years
     of education on average and about 51 percent are literate (Table A1). This is
     not unexpected as the Ouest region has the highest share of non-poor rural
     households. Education levels reflect a gender gap: male household heads report
     more years of schooling compared to female household heads (3.4 vs 1.9).




13	 Haiti is divided into 10 departments: Artibonite, Centre, Grand’Anse, Nippes,
    Nord, Nord-Est, Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud-Est, and Sud. The department with
    the highest share of rural households is Sud-Est with 85.1 percent of households
    classified as rural. This is followed by the Nippes department with 82.2 percent
    rural households, the Centre department with 80.6 percent, the Sud department
    with 78.5, and the Grand’Anse department with 77.8 percent rural. The Ouest
    department, home to the nation’s capital Port-au-Prince,has the lowest share
    of rural households by far with just 20.6 percent of households classified as
    rural. Although, Ouest has the lowest share of rural households, due to its high
    population it has the highest number of rural households. The departments are
    grouped in 4 regions as follows: 1. Nord: Nord, Nord-Est and Nord-Ouest; 2. Sud:
    Grand’Anse, Nippes and Sud; 3.Transversale: Artibonite and Centre and 4. Ouest:
    Ouest and Sud-Est. The 5th region, Aire Metropolitaine, is not relevant to rural
    analysis and therefore not represented in this chapter.
14	 The poverty rate of 70.7 percent is based on the rural sub-sample used in the
    analysis in this chapter.


                                                                                              7
                                                               Figure 2.1: Poverty and Food Insecurity Status of Rural Households




                                              All Rural




                                                 Nord

                                                  Sud
                              Region




                                          Transversale

                                                Ouest




                                        Female Headed
                              of head
                              Gender




                                          Male Headed



                                                          0   10         20       30        40           50     60           70        80   90


                                                                   Poverty             Extreme Poverty               Food Insecurity




                                                 12.	 In rural Haiti, the very high of economic dependency ratio15 found in rural
Profile of Rural Households




                                                      Haiti (94.3 percent) translates to an almost 1:1 person pressure on the
                                                      productive population. While the dependency ratio provides some insight
                                                      into the household composition, it can be misleading. In the case of Haiti
                                                      especially, the dependency ratio as conventionally defined does not necessarily
                                                      reflect the labor dynamics of rural households, where individuals past the age
                                                      of retirement (65 years) often continue to engage in economic activities. In
                                                      Haiti, 58 percent of individuals past the age of 65 still contribute actively to the
                                                      household economy. Households with high dependency ratios are frequently
                                                      poor, which is supported by the data from Ouest region, which has the lowest
                                                      dependency ratio (87.6 percent) (Table A1).




                                                 15	 The dependency ratio is defined as the number of individuals outside the working
                                                     age group of 15-64 divided by the number of individuals in the working age group.
                                                     The dependency ratio is different from the ‘economic dependency ratio,’ which
                                                     takes into account the entire working population regardless of age.


  8
           Table 2.1a.: Household Characteristics (Percentage unless otherwise noted)

                                                                                     All Rural

 Household Head is male                                                                61.5

 Age of household head                                                                 49.4

 Household Head Edu (years)                                                            2.8

 Household Head is literate                                                            45.9

 Household head in committed relationship                                              65.5

 Household size                                                                        4.9

 Number of children under 5yrs old                                                     0.6

 Dependency Ratio1                                                                     94.3

 Per capita Annual Consumption (HTG)2                                                30695.5

 Observations                                                                         2261




                                                                                                       Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
 1. Dependency ratio is based on 2154 hhs, since 107 hhs reported no adults of working age.
 2. The computed annual consumption is based on Oct 2012 prices and is also geographically deflated.



13. Rural households in Haiti have poor access to infrastructure, such as
    electricity, safe water sources, and adequate waste disposal systems (Table
    2.1b). Although most rural households own their dwelling, the dwellings tend to
    be constructed using inferior materials, and many are considered precarious16.
    Access to electricity in rural Haiti is very limited, with the highest levels of
    home electrification (22.2 percent) occurring in Ouest region. The region with
    the greatest access to clean water needed for drinking and for use in household
    activities such as cooking and cleaning is the Ouest, with about 65.3 percent
    and 41.3 percent of households reporting access to safe water sources for these
    two categories. Low penetration of key infrastructure in rural Haiti is a direct
    constraint on the country’s ability to reach its Millennium Development Goals.
14. Non-poor households are better educated, smaller in size, and characterized
    by lower dependency ratios. Among households classified as non-poor,
    per capita annual consumption expenditures (HTG 62,319) are more than
    three times higher than per capita annual consumption expenditures in poor
    households (HTG 17,624) (Table 2.2a). A greater proportion of non-poor
    households (40.9 percent) reported experiencing earthquake-related damage
    to their dwellings than poor households (33 percent), which could be due
    to the closer proximity of many non-poor households to the hard-hit urban
    centers. Poor households tend to live in lower quality dwellings, with less access
    to infrastructure and public services (Table 2.2b).


16	    Dwellings are defined as precarious if the structure is made from cheap materials
      such as homes with thatch roofs, mud walls, palm leave doors and usually
      with minimal open air cooking facilities, or if it is assembled from discarded
      construction materials, in tents or temporary shelters.


                                                                                                            9
                                           Table 2.1b.: Housing Characteristics (Percentages unless otherwise noted


                                                                                                                 All Rural

                              Ownership of dwelling                                                                   84.3

                              Dwelling is considered precarious                                                       18.0

                              Number of rooms                                                                         2.7

                              Walls are mostly made of bricks/stone or cement                                         49.0

                              Roof is mainly cement                                                                   5.6

                              Flooring is mainly cement or ceramic/mosaic                                             46.0

                              Main source of cooking fuel is wood                                                     81.8

                              Main source of lighting is electricity                                                  12.1

                              Main drinking water source is from a protected or safe source1                          56.9

                              No toilet system (nature)                                                               36.5

                              Observations                                                                           2261


                              The safe source includes any treated water source or naturally safe such as artesian wells.



                              Table 2.2a.: Household Characteristics by Poverty Status (Percentages unless otherwise noted)

                                                                                 All Rural      Non Poor      Poor           Difference ttest4

                              Household Head is male                               61.5           60.4        61.9                 1.5
Profile of Rural Households




                              Age of household head                                49.4           48.8        49.7                 0.9

                              Household Head Edu (years)                            2.8           4.5          2.1               -2.4***

                              Household Head is literate                           45.9           60.7        39.8               -20.8***

                              Household head in committed relationship             65.5           55.0        69.8               14.7***

                              Household size                                        4.9           3.5          5.5                2.0***

                              Number of children under 5yrs old                     0.6           0.3          0.8                0.5***

                              Dependency Ratio1                                    94.3           58.5        108.8              50.3***

                              Per capita Annual Consumption (HTG)2                30,695         62,272      17,621            -44,651.6***

                              House was damaged in earthquake                      35.4           40.9        33.0               -7.9***

                              Observations3                                        2261           707         1554


                              1. Dependency ratio is based on 2154 hhs. 107 hhs reported no adults of working age.

                              2. The computed annual consumption is based on Oct 2012 prices and is also geographically deflated.

                              3. The number of observations of poor and non-poor is unweighted

                              4. Note: Significance levels are *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




10
     Table 2.2b.: Housing Characteristics by Poverty Status (percentages unless otherwise noted)


                                                         All Rural   Non Poor      Poor      Difference ttest3

 Ownership of dwelling                                     84.3         77.3        87.1          9.8***

 Dwelling is considered precarious                         18.0         13.4        19.9          6.5***

 Number of rooms                                            2.7         2.8         2.6            -0.2**

 Walls are mostly made of bricks/stone or cement           49.0         63.7        42.8          -20.9***

 Roof is mainly cement                                      5.6         13.6        2.3           -11.2***

 Flooring is mainly cement or ceramic/mosaic               46.0         67.8        36.9          -30.9***

 Main source of cooking fuel is wood                       81.8         60.9        90.4          29.5***

 Main source of lighting is electricity                    12.1         25.1        6.7           -18.4***

 Main drinking water source is from a protected or         56.9         69.6        51.7          -17.9***
 safe source1

 No toilet system (nature)                                 36.5         21.1        42.9          21.8***




                                                                                                                 Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
 Observations2                                             2261         707        1554


 1. The safe source includes any treated water source or naturally safe such as artesian wells.

 2. The number of observations of poor and non-poor is unweighted

 3. Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




15.	 Food insecurity is more pronounced among the poorest of the poor. The
     lowest consumption quintile experiences the highest levels of food insecurity,
     suggesting that the poor are caught in a food security trap. If this is the case, any
     intervention that helps households trapped at the bottom of the distribution
     to move closer to the poverty line (while still being poor) could translate to
     considerable increases in food security. Using both the objective measure
     (FAO index)17 and the self-reported measures of food security, we observe
     wider gaps between households in the lowest quintile and in the 20-40 quintile
     than between the other quintiles (Table 2.3). Furthermore, the share of food
     insecure households decreases along the consumption quintile using either
     measure (Table A8). As expected, we also find that within the food secure rural
     population, non-poor households enjoy a higher food security index score
     than poor households (Table 2.4)




17	 The FAO dietary diversity score (HDDS) is constructed by grouping food
    consumption in questionnaire into 16 food groups designated by FAO guidelines.
    The 16 food groups (cereals, white roots and tubers, vitamin A rich fruit, flesh
    meat etc.) are then aggregated into 12 dietary groups. Each household ends up
    with a HDDS score between 0-12. The cut-off point chosen was 8 whereby a
    household is considered food insecure with a HDDS score of 8 or lower.


                                                                                                                 11
                                                                     Table 2.3. Food Security Index  

                                                                               Food Security Index (FAO)              Food Security Index
                                                                                       Score1                           (Self-Reported)2

                                                                             Mean Score               %                         %

                               All rural                                         8.9                 35.7                      32.6

                               Consumption quintiles

                               Lowest                                            7.4                 68.9                      54.1

                               20-40%                                            8.5                 43.7                      38.0

                               40-60%                                            9.2                 33.1                      30.9

                               60-80%                                            9.4                 24.5                      22.7

                               Highest                                           9.9                 13.5                      20.6


                               1.  FAO security Index is based on Household Dietary Diversity Index score ranging between 0-12, (see
                               Swindale and Ohri-Vachaspati, 2005). The cutoff point chosen was 8, based on Crush et al. (2012) findings
                               on link between food security and FAO hdds score.

                               2.  The self-reported food security score takes on a 0-1 value based on 3 questions about consumption
                               (no access to food, spent a day without eating or went to bed hungry). Household were classified as food
                               insecure if they suffered at least one of the three conditions listed above for at least 10days within the last
                               4 weeks.



                                                                     Table 2.4. Food Security Score

                                                                                            Food Security Index (FAO) Score
Profile of Rural Households




                                                                                Poor                  Non-poor                      T-Test

                               Food Secure                                       9.9                      10.4                      -0.5***

                               Food Insecure                                     6.8                        6.6                       0.3



                                        3.2	Economic Activities of Rural Households
                              16.	 About 54 percent of households in rural Haiti engage in farm activities
                                   only, while 22 percent of households engage in nonfarm activities only.18
                                   Even though agriculture is the dominant activity in rural Haiti, with about
                                   78 percent of households engaging in agricultural activities, there is some
                                   degree of diversification, as almost 25 percent of agricultural households also


                              18	 Farm only category is defined as households where all economically active
                                  members are engaged in a farm activity. This includes households where all
                                  members are only engaged in agricultural wage activities. The nonfarm only
                                  category refers to households where all economically active members are engaged
                                  in nonfarm activities whether household enterprise or nonfarm wage/salary. Both
                                  Farm and Nonfarm category refers to households where economically active
                                  members are engaged in a combination of farm and nonfarm activities. Some
                                  examples of nonfarm activity include selling pre-made products such as shoes,
                                  soap and packaged food such as rice and candy.


12
    engage in at least one nonfarm activity (Figure 2.2). Overall, 46 percent of rural
    households engage in the nonfarm sector, which can be related to agriculture
    on the upstream (input suppliers) or on the downstream (value-adding and
    processing) or be separate to the sector (such as small retail).

         Figure 2.2: Participation of Rural Households in Farm and Nonfarm Activities


                24%                          54%

                                                          Farm only
                                                          Nonfarm only
                                                          Both farm and Nonfarm
                22%




17.	 Participation in nonfarm activities is highest in Ouest region (Table A2a),
     where 32.4 percent of all households are involved in nonfarm activities. This




                                                                                         Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     is not surprising, given that Ouest region has the highest education levels
     and literacy rates, which are important factors for participation in nonfarm
     activities. Ouest region is also located close to the capital, PAP, so many more
     households have better access to infrastructure such as electricity and safe
     water sources, which are especially relevant for nonfarm activity.
18.	 Female-headed households are twice as likely to be engaged in a nonfarm
     household enterprise only (Table A2a). A much higher proportion of female-
     headed households is engaged in nonfarm household enterprises only, compared
     to male-headed households (31.7 percent compared to 16.4 percent). Female-
     headed households also make up over 51 percent of nonfarm enterprises only,
     highlighting the economic role of this sector for female-headed households
     (Figure 2.3).

                Figure 2.3: Economic Activities, by Gender of Household Head

   100
    90
    80                                                                         Female
                                                                               Male
    70
    60
    50
    40
    30
    20
    10
     0

             Farm Only            Non farm Only           Both Farm
                                                         and Non farm




                                                                                         13
                              19.	 Households that depend on agriculture are poorer than households that
                                   depend on nonfarm activities. Among agricultural19 households, a much
                                   higher proportion (80.6 percent) are poor compared with households involved
                                   in nonfarm activities only (54.7 percent) (Figure 2.4 and Table A2b). Gender
                                   differences in poverty are also higher among households engaged in agricultural
                                   activities only. Diversification of livelihood into the nonfarm sector appears
                                   to be beneficial to rural households in Haiti, as we find a positive correlation
                                   between participation in the nonfarm sector and lower levels of poverty.
                                   Households with both farm and nonfarm income sources are less likely to be
                                   poor than those engaged in farming alone.

                                                       Figure 2.4: Economic Activities, by Poverty Level

                                  100
                                   90
                                   80                                                                      Non Poor
                                                                                                           Poor
                                   70
                                   60
                                   50
                                   40
                                   30
                                   20
                                   10
                                    0
Profile of Rural Households




                                           Farm Only              Non farm Only            Both Farm
                                                                                          and Non farm




                              20.	 The majority of the employed in rural Haiti (90 percent) are engaged in
                                   a household-owned economic activity. Most of these individuals work on
                                   a household farm or in a household-run non-farm enterprise, either as the
                                   owner or as an unpaid worker. Income from these activities is generally taken
                                   as household income. Wage employment is limited in rural Haiti, with only a
                                   small percentage of individuals (10 percent) employed as wage laborers (Figure
                                   2.5).




                              19	 Agriculture households are defined as households that have crop, livestock, and/or
                                  agriculture wage activity. Some of these households also have nonfarm activities.


14
               Figure 2.5: Participation of Individuals, by Type of Employment


                37%
                                                 10%
                                                         Wage earner
                                                         Self-employed
                                                         Unpaid Labor
                53%




21.	 Within farm-only20 households, the share of self-employed individuals and
     the share of unpaid household labor are roughly equal. By comparison, in
     the nonfarm sector the shares of self-employed individuals and wage earners
     are much higher than the shares of unpaid household labor. The majority of
     the individuals in the sample of farm-only households are self-employed,
     with female-headed households having a higher share of self-employed




                                                                                             Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     individuals compared with Male-headed households (Table A3). Regionally,
     self-employment is the most common type of work in all four regions.

                 Figure 2.6: Employment by Farm and Nonfarm Participation

 100
  90
  80
  70
                                                                             Self-employed
  60
                                                                             Unpaid Labor
  50
                                                                             Wage earner
  40
  30
  20
  10
   0

           Farm Only           Non farm Only            Both Farm
                                                       and Non farm




22.	 The agricultural sector employs the largest percentage (70 percent) of
     individuals in rural Haiti (Table 2.5). The trade sector trails far behind,
     employing only 17 percent of the population. Transversale region has the highest
     share of individuals engaged in agricultural employment. Female-headed
     households participate more in trade activities than Male-headed households,
     with participation rates of 20.9 percent and 14.7 percent, respectively. Female-
     headed households make up less than 35 percent of workforce. About 65 percent
     of female-headed households have at least one person working in agriculture,

20	 Farm only category includes all rural households that engage only in agricultural
    economic activities.


                                                                                             15
                                    a figure that is only slightly lower than the equivalent figure in male-headed
                                    households (see Table 2.5 below).

                                                              Table 2.5: Industry of employment


                                                    Agriculture   Industry      Trade     Transport   Education     Other

                               All rural               70.8          3.6        16.7         1.5         2.0         5.4

                               Gender of Head

                                    Female             64.7          4.9        20.9         1.4         2.1         6.0

                                    Male               73.6          3.0        14.7         1.5         2.0         5.2

                               Poverty Status

                                    Poor               75.2          3.5        13.6         0.9         1.4         5.4

                                    Non-poor           57.4          4.0        26.2         3.1         3.8         5.5

                               Food Security

                                    Food Insecure      75.0          3.9        12.6         1.4         1.2         6.0

                                    Food Secure        68.8          3.5        18.7         1.5         2.4         5.2




                                                3.2.1 Agriculture

                                       Factors of production
Profile of Rural Households




                              23.	 Agricultural households in Haiti tend to cultivate relatively small areas,
                                   with average landholdings of 1.3 ha (Table 2.6)21. This is similar to Sub-
                                   Saharan African countries such as Burundi, Rwanda, and Malawi, where
                                   over 80 percent of landholdings also tend to be smaller than 1.5ha. Female-
                                   headed households cultivate slightly smaller plots compared with male-headed
                                   households. Female-headed households are also less likely to lease in and lease
                                   out land compared with male-headed households. The areas leased in or leased
                                   out by households are small relative to the size of owned landholdings (see
                                   appendix Table A4). Many farmers engage in practices designed to improve soil
                                   fertility, as evidenced by the substantial share of households that regularly leave
                                   some land fallow. The cost of cultivating infertile land may also be high relative
                                   to the benefits, making it rational to leave infertile land fallow.




                              21	    Available survey data does not allow us to identify rural community land practices
                                    specific to Haiti such as any potential pooling of resources and land among farmers
                                    for better water access.


16
                                Table 2.6: Land Acquisition (Percentages unless otherwise noted)

                                               All rural           Female           Male          T-Test            Poor           Non-Poor          T-Test

 Own Land                                        89.7               89.8            89.6            -0.2            90.1             88.3              1.7

 Land size (Owned, ha)                           1.0                0.9             1.1             0.1*             0.9             1.2              -0.3

 Leased in land                                  31.7               23.3            35.4          12.1***           30.2             36.6            -6.4*

 Leased out land                                 16.4               12.8            17.9           5.1**            14.9             21.0            -6.1**

 Left land fallow                                34.5               31.4            35.9            0.0             34.7             33.9              0.9

 Land Size (cultivated, ha )                     1.3                1.2             1.4             0.2*             1.2             1.6             -0.4**


 Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                               Table 2.7. Agriculture Inputs (Percentages unless otherwise noted)




                                                                                                                                                              Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                                        All rural          Female          Male           ttest             Poor           Non-Poor         ttest

 Labor input

     Used non-household labor           67.3               59.4            70.7           11.3***           65.1           74.3             -9.3**

     Non hh labor (number)              5.7                5.0             6.1            1.1               5.1            7.7              -2.5**

     Value of non hh labor (HTG)        2068.7             1414.8          2355.2         940.4**           1663.5         3347.7           -1,684.1***

     Hh labor (number, incl. owner)     2.6                2.4             2.6            0.2               2.7            2.2              0.5***

 Non labor input

     Fertilizer incidence               21.1               21.3            21.0           -0.3              17.8           31.5             -13.6***

     Fertilizer amount spent (HTG)      650.1              413.4           753.9          340.5             363.5          1555.1           -1,191.6**

     Seeds incidence                    53.8               48.8            56.0           7.2**             52.2           58.7             -6.5*

     Seeds amount spent (HTG)           960.2              642.4           1099.4         457.0***          821.0          1399.5           -578.6***

     Pesticides incidence               20.1               16.4            21.7           5.4               19.6           21.6             -2.0

     Pesticides amount spent (HTG)      95.6               77.3            103.6          26.4              73.1           166.7            -93.6*

     Share of total input cost/ total   49.7               30.4            58.2           27.8***           50.5           47.4             3.1
     value of production




24.	 Male-headed households have better access to productive factors, both labor
     and non-labor inputs. Given the high demand for labor during the planting
     and harvest periods, it is not surprising that households resort to hired labor
     to supplement their own family labor (Table 2.7). Male-headed households are
     not only more likely to rely on non-household22 labor; they also use higher
     numbers of hired workers than female-headed households. Similar patterns
     also are evident in the case of purchased inputs such as fertilizer, improved


22	 Unfortunately, the non-household labor cannot be separated into paid and unpaid
    labor (e.g., exchange labor) because this information is not available in the survey.


                                                                                                                                                              17
                                  seed,23 and pesticides: male-headed households are more likely to use purchased
                                  inputs (except for fertilizer), and they tend to spend more on purchased inputs.
                                  As a share of total production value, male-headed households spend more on
                                  both labor and physical inputs than female-headed households, except in the
                                  case of pesticides, where female-headed households spend marginally more
                                  (Figure 2.7).

                                                   Figure 2.7: Share of Input Cost in Total Production Value

                                   70,0

                                   60,0                                                                        Female
                                                                                                               Male
                                   50,0

                                   40,0

                                   30,0

                                   20,0

                                   10,0

                                    0,0

                                          Non HH       Fetilizer   Seeds     Pesticides    Other       Total
                                           Labor                                           Input       Input




                                     Types of agricultural activities
Profile of Rural Households




                              25.	 As mentioned earlier, agriculture is a core economic activity in rural Haiti,
                                   with the majority of farm households growing food crops, and nearly
                                   50 percent growing at least one cash crop. About 71.4 percent of all rural
                                   households engage in at least one agricultural activity, although a greater
                                   proportion of male-headed households (81.4 percent) participate in agricultural
                                   activities than female-headed households (57.6 percent) (See appendix Table
                                   A5). It is also worth noting that 84.3 percent of households growing food crops
                                   sell part of what they grow.24 In addition to growing crops, 74.8 percent of
                                   households raise cattle and other livestock, and 30.4 are engaged in forestry
                                   activities. Households that grow cash crops are more likely to be non-poor
                                   and more likely to be food secure (Table 2.8). Food secure household are more
                                   likely to raise livestock than food insecure households.




                              23	 The survey does not have adequate information to distinguish between those that
                                  purchased improved seeds and those that bought regular seeds.
                              24	 The agricultural module unfortunately does not provide us with quantities
                                  produced, sold or consumed but provide values instead. This limits the ability to
                                  analyze the share of production sold, consumed or otherwise.


18
             Figure 2.8: Percentage of Households Engaging in Different Farming Activities



      Food crop


      Liverstock


      Cash crop


       Forestry


       Fisheries



                   0      10         20     30      40     50          60   70         80   90         100




                                                                                                             Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                       Table 2.8. Activities of Agricultural Households  (Percentages)

                               Cash Crop1    Food Crop       Livestock       Fisheries      Forestry

 All rural                        49.7           97.7           74.8             4.2         30.4

 Gender of Head

         Female                   46.9           96.9           69.8             4.7         21.6

         Male                     51.0           98.1           77.0             3.9         34.3

 Poverty Status

         Poor                     47.8           97.6           74.1             3.2         30.8

         Non Poor                 55.7           98.2           77.0             7.1         29.0

 Food Security Status

         Food secure              53.5           97.5           77.0             5.9         30.8

         Food Insecure            42.7           98.0           70.7             1.0         29.7


 Cash crops include mangoes and coffee




26.	 Diversification within agriculture is common in rural Haiti, with male-
     headed households more likely to diversify than female-headed households
     (Figure 2.9)25. The most commonly combined activities are crop and livestock,
     followed by crop, livestock and forestry or fishery. Mangoes are the most
     common cash crop, with over 40 percent of households growing mangoes
     compared with about 17 percent growing coffee (Figure 2.10). The three most
     commonly cultivated crops are maize, bananas, and cassava/yams. The average
     farm household cultivates about 5 crops (Table 2.9).


25	     Available survey data does not allow us to capture information on crop rotation
       practices of rural farm households.


                                                                                                             19
                                                         Figure 2.9: Diversification of Farm Activity, by Gender


                                         Maize

                                      Bananas

                              Cassava, Yams etc

                                   Green beans

                                        Mango

                                         Millet

                                        Coffee

                                           Rice

                                    Vegetables

                                       Peanuts

                                                  0,0      10,0     20,0     30,0       40,0   50,0      60,0       70,0    80,0   90,0



                                                        Figure 2.10: Principal Crops, by Frequency of Cultivation

                                         100
                                          90                                                            Only Fisheries or
                                                                                                        Forestry
                                          80
                                                                                                        Livestock Only
                                          70
Profile of Rural Households




                                                                                                        Only Livestock and
                                          60                                                            Fisheries or Forestry
                                                                                                        Crop and Fisheries or
                                          50
                                                                                                        Forestry (no livestock)
                                          40                                                            Crop, Livestock, and
                                          30                                                            Fisheries or Forestry
                                                                                                        Crop and Livestock
                                          20
                                                                                                        Crop only
                                          10
                                           0

                                                        Female                   Male




20
         Table 2.9: Diversity in cropping patterns, by Region and Household Characteristics


                                                       Average number of   Share of farms that grow
                                                          crops grown           4 or more (%)

All rural                                                     4.7                   72.5

Region

                             Nord                             4.6                   74.6

                             Sud                              4.9                   78.6

                             Transversale                     4.5                   66.1

                             Ouest                            4.7                   73.4

Gender of Head

                             Female                           4.4                   68.6

                             Male                             4.8                   74.2

Poverty Status




                                                                                                      Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                             Poor                             4.6                   73.0

                             Non Poor                         4.7                   70.8

Food Security Status

                             Food secure                      4.8                   74.4

                             Food Insecure                    4.4                   69.0



27.	 The livestock sector in Haiti is dominated by poultry and small ruminants.
     The livestock sector is a small scale sector and is most commonly exercised as a
     joint activity alongside other crop production. Relatively few households raise
     cattle or pigs. Poultry are the most common type of livestock raised in rural
     Haiti and regionally. It is also the most common livestock among poor farm
     households, followed by goats. Male-headed households are more likely to raise
     livestock, but female-headed households are more likely to use non-household
     labor in their livestock activities (Table 2.10).




                                                                                                      21
                                                                                  Figure 2.11: Type of Livestock Kept by Rural Households


                                                                 Chicken

                                                                  Goats

                                                                  Cattle

                                                                    Pigs

                                                                 Equine

                                                                  Sheep

                                                          Other Poultry

                                                                 Rabbits


                                                                            0,0        10,0        20,0       30,0       40,0       50,0          60,0            70,0




                                                                            Table 2.10: Livestock Inputs (Percentages)


                                                                   All rural        Female        Male        ttest        Poor       NonPoor            ttest

                              Incidence of owning livestock          74.8            69.8         77.0        7.2**        74.1            77.0           -2.9

                              Labor input:

                                  Incidence of labor                 33.5            34.1         33.2         -0.9        32.8            35.7           -2.9
Profile of Rural Households




                              Non labor input (vet and other):

                                  Incidence of nonlabor              71.1            65.4         73.7        8.3***       69.6            76.1          -6.5**




                                                                            3.2.2 Nonfarm Activities26

                                                                 Types of nonfarm activities
                                                       28.	 In Haiti as in many other countries, the nonfarm sector can provide an
                                                            important source of household income for the rural poor and eventually
                                                            serve as a pathway out of poverty. Having a nonfarm enterprise (NFE) in
                                                            Haiti is positively correlated with not being poor and being food secure. The
                                                            differences in participation between poor and non-poor and food secure and
                                                            food insecure are statistically significant. We also find statistically significant
                                                            differences in NFE participation between male and female headed-headed


                                                       26	     The term ‘Nonfarm Activities’ is defined as all economic activities that are not
                                                              classified as a farm activity, (see footnote 18). They include the sale of goods
                                                              that have been manufactured (transformed), goods sold without transformation
                                                              and services. The main type of nonfarm activity is the resale of goods without
                                                              transformation, in particular sale of rice and of soap products.


22
     households with the latter having higher participation. In the nonfarm sector,
     the majority of activities are in the trade industry, where female-headed
     households are more likely to be involved than male headed households.
     Such activities can be related to agriculture on the upstream (input suppliers)
     or on the downstream (value-adding and processing) or be separate to the
     sector (such as small retail). The non-poor participate more in higher skilled
     industries, such as education and health.


                 Table 2.11: Nonfarm Activity, by Type of Household (Percentages)


                                           Household               Salaried/Wage
                                           enterprises             Nonfarm          Other Nonfarm 1
                                           %                       %                %

All Rural                                  31.5                    13.8             6.6

Gender of Head

                       Female              34.6**                  13.3             6.9




                                                                                                                              Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                       Male                29.6**                  14.1             6.4

Poverty Status

                       Poor                27.8***                 12.9             5.7**

                       Non Poor            40.4***                 15.9             8.7**

Food Security Status

                       Food secure         36.2***                 14.1             7.5**

                       Food insecure       23.1***                 13.2             5.0**


Other nonfarm employment includes unpaid apprenticeship and hh labor.
Note: * indicate statistically significant differences within category.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



                   Table 2.12: Households Participation in Nonfarm Activities by Industry (Percentages)


                                                    Industry and      Trade and    Transportation     Education     Other
                                                    Construction      Commerce                        and Health   Services

All Rural                                               15.6              63.9            6.2            8.9        24.0

Gender of Head

                         Female                         16.3              66.5            5.6            7.7        21.0

                         Male                           15.1              62.1            6.6            9.7        26.1

Poverty Status

                         Poor                           16.9              62.2            4.9            7.8        28.5

                         Non Poor                       13.4              66.6            8.4            10.7       16.5

Food Security Status

                         Food secure                    14.1              66.5            6.4            9.9        21.9

                         Food insecure                  19.2              57.5            5.9            6.2        29.4




                                                                                                                              23
                                       Profile of nonfarm household enterprises
                              29.	 In the nonfarm sector, as in the farm sector, male-headed households have
                                   greater access to productive factors than female-headed households. A
                                   greater proportion of male-headed households reported having access to labor,
                                   both hired and household labor (Table 2.13). Similar to households in other
                                   developing countries, households in Haiti diversify their economic activities
                                   to decrease their income dependence to a sector such as agriculture that is
                                   frequently affected by weather shocks and very vulnerable to international
                                   market price variability. Participation in the nonfarm sector thus can be viewed
                                   as a risk diversification strategy designed to minimize effects of exogenous
                                   shocks on income. The most common reasons provided by households for
                                   starting nonfarm enterprises include increasing income and compensating for
                                   the unavailability of wage employment (Table A6). Most nonfarm enterprises
                                   in rural Haiti operate on a small scale in the informal sector, for example
                                   selling pre-fabricated products (Table A7). Many are extremely small micro-
                                   enterprises averaging 1-2 workers including the owner, and the biggest market
                                   they serve consists of other households.


                                                              Table 2.13. Household Enterprise Profile


                                                                   Size                  Workforce                 Type of Business

                                                                                                  Household
                                                                                                 Workers (excl.
                                                                (workers)    Hired-in Workers1     owner)2            Informal
Profile of Rural Households




                                                                  Mean       %         Mean.         Mean.                  %

                              All Rural                            1.6       5.4        2.8           1.7                  100.0

                              Region

                                               Nord                1.5       6.6        2.1           1.4                  100.0

                                               Sud                 1.9       6.8        4.2           1.9                  100.0

                                               Transversale        1.3       2.7        2.8           1.7                  100.0

                                               Ouest               1.5       5.5        1.9           1.8                  100.0

                              Gender of Head

                                               Female              1.3       1.3        3.1           1.6                  100.0

                                               Male                1.8       8.4        2.8           1.7                  100.0

                              Poverty Status

                                               Poor                1.5       4.6        2.3           1.6                  100.0

                                               Nonpoor             1.7       6.7        3.4           1.7                  100.0


                              1. Conditional on using hired labor;
                              2. Conditional on having other household members working for enterprise besides the owner.




24
             3.2.3 Other Income and Remittances
30.	 Household composition of income in rural Haiti shows labor income is
     strongly supplemented by private transfers and consumption from own
     production (auto-consumption) (see Figure 2.12). Private transfers play
     an important role in household income, contributing nearly as much as
     nonagricultural income. Private transfers are especially important for female-
     headed households, where they contributed nearly twice as much as male-
     headed households. Private transfers, which include remittances, represent
     a relatively greater share of income for higher income groups (Figure 2.13).
     Auto-consumption tends to be more important for lower income groups.

                   Figure 2.12: Income Composition of Rural Households



                                                          Ag Labor Income




                                                                                             Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                                                          Non Ag Labor Income
                                                          Autoconsumption
                                                          Public Transfers
                                                          Private Transfers



      Figure 2.13: Income Composition, by Expenditure Percentiles of Rural Households

       100
        90
        80
                                                                       Private Transfers
        70
        60                                                             Public Transfers
        50                                                             Autoconsumption
        40
                                                                       Non Ag Labor Income
        30
        20                                                             Ag Labor Income

        10
         0

             10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90   100



31.	 Women are not only more likely than men to receive remittances from within
     and outside Haiti, but they are also more likely to receive them on regular
     basis. Non-poor households are more likely to receive remittances from abroad
     but less likely to receive from within Haiti, and their remittances are more
     likely to be regular. Non poor households tend to receive more than twice the
     amount received by poor households. The most common use of transfer is for
     food followed by education. Food insecure households in the highest income
     quintiles receive the highest share of remittances as a proportion of income
     (Fig 2.14).


                                                                                             25
                                                   Table 2.14a. Remittances and Other Income (Percentages unless otherwise noted)

                                                                       All Rural          Poor            Non-Poor            Ttest         Female           Male         T-Test

                              Transfers:

                                     Remittances from Haiti                 27.4           27.7             26.5               1.2            34.5           22.9       -11.6***

                                     Remittances from Abroad                21.4           15.6             35.3         -19.7***             25.2           18.9        -6.3***

                                     Any remittances                        45.4           41.3             55.3         -14.0***             55.7           39.0       -16.7***

                                     Remittances are regular                39.0           35.2             45.9         -10.6***             45.9           32.9       -13.1***

                                     Average remittance size (HTG)         6473.6        4447.3           10130.9       -5,683.6***         7239.8       5786.6         -1,453.1

                                     Remittance share of Income            269.4          226.8            346.5             -119.7           299.9          242.1        -57.9

                              Other Income Sources:

                                     Pension and other welfare              0.3               0.3           0.3                0.0             0.3            0.4             0.1

                                     Real Estate                            2.9               1.9           5.2              -3.3**            2.7            3.0             0.3

                                     Other                                  5.9               5.1           7.7               -2.6*            4.5            6.7             2.1*




                                                                                         Table 2.14b.: Uses of transfers (Percentages)


                                                                                                                        All Rural       Poor           Non-Poor        T-Test

                                                       Food                                                             65.6            68.2           60.8            7.4**

                                                       Rent                                                             0.1             0.1            0.1             -0.1
Profile of Rural Households




                                                       Education                                                        15.1            15.0           15.4            -0.4

                                                       Health                                                           6.0             5.3            7.2             -1.8

                                                       Construction or repairs to housing                               2.1             1.9            2.3             -0.4

                                                       Family events (deaths, weddings etc)                             2.2             2.0            2.4             -0.4

                                                       Economic Activity (Buying tools, raw materials etc)              2.1             1.9            2.6             -0.7

                                                       Other                                                            27.4            22.7           35.7            -13.0***


                                                                     Figure 2.14: Share of Remittances in Total Income, by Expenditure Decile


                                                                     0,8

                                                                     0,7
                                                                                                                                                Share of remittances
                                                                     0,6
                                                                                                                                                out of total income
                                                                     0,5                                                                        (All)

                                                                     0,4                                                                        Share of remittances
                                                                                                                                                out of total income
                                                                     0,3                                                                        (Food insecure)

                                                                     0,2                                                                        Share of remittances
                                                                                                                                                out of total income
                                                                     0,1                                                                        (Food Secure)
                                                                      0

                                                                             10     20   30     40   50     60     70   80     90     100




26
27
     Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
28
         Determinants of Rural Income




     4
            Generating Activities26
32.	 Increasing agricultural productivity is an important engine for reducing
     poverty and improving food security in developing countries (WDR 2008).
     Because almost 80 percent of rural households in Haiti are engaged agriculture,
     improving agricultural productivity is one of the main levers for generating
     pro-poor growth and alleviating food insecurity. For this reason, it is important
     to examine the agricultural sector, with a view to identifying the factors that can
     lead to improved productivity. Other studies have examined the determinants
     of agricultural growth in Haiti (see Verner 2008), but the availability of new
     data allows us to update and expand upon previous findings. Even though the
     data used for the analysis are cross sectional data, we hope to be able identify
     the main factors that correlate with increased productivity in the agricultural
     sector. It should be highlighted that the analysis does not claim causality but
     rather aims to establish robust correlations. 27
33.	 The measure of agricultural productivity used in our analysis is value of total
     harvest per hectare. Consistent with the literature, we include the following
     variables as covariates: characteristics of the household such as gender of




                                                                                            Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     head, education of head, age of head and household size; landholding; physical
     inputs such as fertilizer, seeds, and pesticides; labor inputs; and other plot
     characteristics. The determinants of agricultural productivity are explored
     using a simple household level OLS specification in the form below.


	                                                                          (1)

        Where Y is the total value of harvest per hectare, L is the total land size
     cultivated by the household in hectare, Pi and Dj represent the amounts of physical
     and labor inputs28 (respectively) used by the household, X29 is a vector of other
     household and plot characteristics, department fixed effects are captured by λ,
     and ε is the idiosyncratic error term. In addition to estimating the regression
     for the entire rural sample, we also estimate the model for poor and non-poor
     agricultural households separately to find if there are noticeable differences in


27	 Summary statistics of all variables used in the regressions are presented in appendix
    Tables A14a and A14b. Unfortunately, the data do not include GPS coordinates,
    which prevented the inclusion of geo-variables such as weather variables like
    temperature and rainfall in the analysis. Also, distant variables such as distance to
    market and roads were not available.
28	 All physical inputs variables (log fertilizer use, log pesticide use, log seeds use),
    refer to input costs that were divided by the hectare size cultivated and were
    normalized by log transformation.
29	 HH grows a cash crop is a dummy variable for whether the household produces
    either mango and/or coffee. Assistance post-earthquake variable is a dummy for
    whether household received help in the form of agricultural physical inputs such
    as fertilizer since earthquake. There is no information on amount received in
    module. The # of working age males and females refers to household members
    aged between 15 and 64.


                                                                                            29
                                                          the significant factors of production between poor and non-poor households.
                                                     34.	 Farm size and agricultural productivity are inversely related in Haiti. We
                                                          find that larger farms are less productive than smaller farms. More precisely, a
                                                          1 percent increase in the farm size is correlated with a 0.4 percent decrease in
                                                          agricultural productivity. This is a common finding in the agricultural literature
                                                          relating to developing countries.30 Global experience suggests that the reasons
                                                          explaining this relationship probably have to do with differences in access to
                                                          credit, irrigation31, labor, purchased inputs, or more often some combination of
                                                          these.32 Some factors probably have greater importance in Haiti than in many
                                                          other developing countries. For example, in this case remittances from abroad
                                                          are strongly correlated to higher productivity of agricultural households: a 10
                                                          percent increase in international remittances is associated with a 2 percent
                                                          increase agricultural productivity. This result must be interpreted with care,
                                                          however, as the result is not statistically significant when the sample is separated
                                                          into poor and non-poor households.


                                                                            Table 2.15: Determinants of Agricultural Productivity
Determinants of Rural Income Generating Activities




                                                      Dependent Variable: Log Total Crop Value per Ha     (All Rural)       (Poor)     (NonPoor)

                                                      Land Size:

                                                      Log Harvested Hectares                              -0.398***       -0.334***     -0.664***

                                                                                                           (0.087)         (0.100)       (0.190)

                                                      Log Harvested Hectares, squared                     0.048***         0.045***     0.101***

                                                                                                           (0.011)         (0.012)       (0.033)




                                                     30	 According to Barrett et al. (2010), the inverse relationship (IR) between farm size
                                                         and productivity likely stems from one of three main reasons: (i) imperfect factor
                                                         markets, (ii) omitted variables or (iii) statistical issues related to the measurement
                                                         of plot size. As Carletto (2013) describes, imperfect factor markets (land, labor,
                                                         insurance) are linked to differences in the shadow price of production factors that
                                                         in turn lead to differences in the application of inputs per unit of land, in ways
                                                         that are correlated with farm size. Carletto (2013) assesses the concerns about
                                                         measurement issues being the reason why we observe IR and finds that this is
                                                         with availability of better land measurements; the IR finding is strengthened, not
                                                         weakened. This finding supports studies by Unal (2008) which showed that IR
                                                         exists in Turkey and where Unal finds that IR is in particular driven by failures in
                                                         the labor market. Vadivelu et al. (2001) and Masterson (2007) also find empirical
                                                         evidence of IR in India and Paraguay. See Eastwood et al. 2010, Lipton 2009 for
                                                         further examples.
                                                     31	 Available survey data does not include irrigation access information or land
                                                         quality/topography information. Future consideration of these specificities would
                                                         enable a better understanding of their role in the Haitian context.
                                                     32	 See Eswaran and Kotwal 1986.


30
Physical Inputs:

Log Fertilizer use (HTG/ha)                             0.250***   0.221***   0.331***

                                                        (0.049)    (0.059)    (0.097)

Log Pesticide use (HTG/ha)                              0.254***   0.277***    0.171

                                                        (0.056)    (0.065)    (0.113)

Log Seed use (HTG/ha)                                   0.317***   0.356***   0.177***

                                                        (0.035)    (0.040)    (0.076)

Labor Inputs:

Log Household labor used per ha                          0.095     0.141*      -0.179

                                                        (0.075)    (0.084)    (0.177)

Log Non HHlabor used per ha                             0.145***   0.173***    0.048

                                                        (0.046)    (0.053)    (0.103)

Other Agricultural/Plot Characteristics




                                                                                         Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
Household owns livestock                                 0.163      0.181      0.093

                                                        (0.100)    (0.113)    (0.230)

Household grows at least one cash crop1                  0.057      0.137      -0.264

                                                        (0.099)    (0.114)    (0.212)

Number of crops grown                                   0.234***   0.245***   0.176***

                                                        (0.026)    (0.030)    (0.051)

Household owns plot                                     1.074***   1.106***   1.101***

                                                        (0.143)    (0.163)    (0.313)

Assistance post-earthquake: fertilizer, tools, seeds,    -0.060     -0.021     -0.048
plant cutting

                                                        (0.317)    (0.371)    (0.630)

Household Characteristics:

Household Head:

Household head is male                                   0.018      -0.001     -0.014

                                                        (0.095)    (0.107)    (0.211)

Age                                                      0.012      0.019      -0.008

                                                        (0.019)    (0.022)    (0.038)

Age, squared                                             -0.000     -0.000     0.000

                                                        (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)

Years education                                          0.024      0.025      0.005

                                                        (0.016)    (0.020)    (0.027)

Household Composition :

# of working age male members                            0.039      0.036      0.066

                                                        (0.043)    (0.048)    (0.104)




                                                                                         31
                                                      # of working age female members                             0.013             -0.002             0.056

                                                                                                                 (0.047)            (0.053)           (0.116)

                                                      # of dependents                                            -0.039             -0.036            -0.016

                                                                                                                 (0.025)            (0.028)           (0.067)

                                                      Remittances :

                                                      Household receives remittances from abroad                 0.220*             0.197              0.212

                                                                                                                 (0.116)           (0.140)            (0.211)

                                                      Household receives remittances from within Haiti            0.132             0.146              0.156

                                                                                                                 (0.098)           (0.114)            (0.196)

                                                      Other Economic Activities :

                                                      Nonfarm Household Enterprise                                0.001             0.013              0.101

                                                                                                                 (0.098)           (0.114)            (0.210)

                                                      Other Nonfarm wage                                         -0.159             -0.096             0.013

                                                                                                                 (0.162)           (0.183)            (0.369)
Determinants of Rural Income Generating Activities




                                                     Asset-Based Wealth Index                                     0.006             0.004              0.000

                                                                                                                 (0.007)           (0.010)            (0.012)

                                                     Constant                                                     0.910             0.390             2.987**

                                                                                                                 (0.559)           (0.637)            (1.243)

                                                     Observations                                              1,499.000          1,180.000           319.000


                                                     Note: OLS point estimates with robust standard errors in brackets. Results for state fixed effects and asset
                                                     based wealth index control variable not shown. Significance denoted * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.


                                                     35.	 Higher expenditure on purchased inputs and on labor is correlated with
                                                          increased productivity. Use of purchased inputs (fertilizer, pesticide, and
                                                          seeds) and of labor is positively associated with agricultural productivity. The
                                                          main source of labor and the importance of labor vary, however, depending on
                                                          the income level of the household. Among all households, a sample that relies
                                                          mainly on non-household labor, a 10 percent increase in labor use per ha is
                                                          correlated with a 1.5 percent increase in agricultural productivity. In contrast,
                                                          among poor households, a sample that relies more heavily on household labor,
                                                          a 10 percent increase in household labor use per ha is correlated with a 1.4
                                                          percent increase in productivity.
                                                     36.	 Crop diversification is correlated with higher agricultural productivity.
                                                          Households that grow larger numbers of crops have higher incomes on average
                                                          (Table A13). While causality cannot be confirmed based on the present analysis,
                                                          diversification seems beneficial as a risk management strategy. It may also
                                                          suggest that intercropping has positive impacts on agricultural productivity.
                                                          Interestingly, growing cash crops (mangoes and coffee) does not appear to be
                                                          significantly correlated with agricultural productivity. Keeping of livestock is
                                                          positively correlated with higher agricultural productivity for the third land



32
    quintile only. Although the correlation is positive for the higher quintiles, the
    difference is not statistically significant.
37.	 The remittances from abroad are positively correlated with agricultural
     productivity but when disaggregated by land size quintiles, we find that it
     is only significant for the smallest land quintile (Table A13). This implies
     that remittances from abroad seem to matter the most for the productivity of
     the smallest land owners. Households with smaller land sizes are more likely
     to be credit constrained and thus have less access to loans to purchase inputs.
     Even if it is assumed that all households are equally credit constrained, any
     additional income such as remittances may have higher marginal impact on
     input expenses for smaller land owners than for larger land owners.




                                                                                        Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities




                                                                                        33
34
     5
         Determinants of Market Access
38.	 Access to markets33 is an important factor that determines the ability of
     agricultural households to sell products, purchase inputs, and lease in
     additional land or hire additional workers if needed. In Haiti, households
     with larger landholdings are more likely to have access to markets. Remittances
     from abroad and income from pensions are positively correlated with market
     access. This suggests that access to other income sources can help rural
     households meet the transaction costs involved in gaining market access.
     Wealthier households are also more likely to have access to markets.
39.	 The bigger the plots size of a household, the more is spent on inputs like
     fertilizer, seeds and hired labor, but under proportional to the land size.
     Given the inverse land size-productivity relationship found earlier, it would
     appear that even though households with bigger plot sizes spend more on
     inputs, the expenses are probably under proportional to their land size. That
     is to say that a farmer with twice as large a plot of land might spend more on
     inputs but most likely will not spend twice as much.
40.	 Diversifying within agriculture appears to be positively correlated with




                                                                                              Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     higher expenses on inputs. Households that grow multiple crops are likely
     to spend more on seeds and hired labor. We also find that households with
     livestock activities are more likely to hire non household labor, lease-in land
     and face lower fertilizer cost. Having multiple agriculture activities could
     serve as a risk strategy for households such that a shock to one crop does not
     necessarily mean poor harvest for the season since the household can rely on
     production from other crops.
41.	 There is a positive and significant correlation between owning a nonfarm
     enterprise and higher expenses on fertilizer indicating some farm-nonfarm
     linkage. Similarly, there is a positive correlation between nonfarm wage and
     expenses on hired labor. Households with multiple income sources could be
     less credit constrained and thus more likely to spend on agriculture inputs.
     Studies have shown that farm households with nonfarm income generating
     activities could spend more on inputs (Oseni and Winters, 2009).
42.	 Female headed households are less likely to hire non household labor or
     lease in land for cultivation. This indicates that female headed households
     may face additional specific constraints in hiring extra help to work on their
     plots as well as acquiring additional land for cultivation. This is not surprising
     as female headed households are more likely to be credit constrained as they
     are probably single headed households unlike male headed households that
     are most likely dual headed households. For example, studies from Nicaragua
     (Foltz et al.,2000) and Nigeria (Lawal and Muyiwa, 2009) find that female
     headed households can be almost 200 percent more credit constrained than
     dual-headed households. In addition, other studies (Snapp et al. 2002) also find
     that female headed households face important credit constraints and that these
     constraints are important barriers to household production capabilities.


33	 Access to markets is measured as a ratio of value of sales to value of total production
    of all crops that the household cultivates.


                                                                                              35
                                                            Table 2.16: Determinants of market access to inputs

                                                               Market         Seeds2       Fertilizer2   Pesticides2   Non HH      Leased in
                                                               Access 1                                                 labor3       Land3

                                Land:

                                Log of total plot size         0.019***      850.408       -243.921      -42.110**     0.0910***   0.112***

                                                               (0.007)      (660.750)      (191.712)      (18.144)     (0.0153)    (0.0142)

                                Sq Log of total plot size       0.001      2,126.263***   173.864***       -0.431      0.00201     0.0146***

                                                               (0.002)      (157.946)      (45.827)        (4.337)     (0.00356)   (0.00325)

                                Nonfarm:

                                Nonfarm enterprise             -0.034**     -1,535.508    720.703**       -21.502       0.0307     -0.00316

                                                               (0.016)      (1,387.012)    (402.433)      (38.087)     (0.0306)    (0.0292)

                                Nonfarm wage                    -0.043       515.617       -858.380        1.493       0.0873*      -0.0363

                                                               (0.026)      (2,302.530)    (668.064)      (63.226)     (0.0451)    (0.0481)

                                Farm:

                                Value of harvest per ha          na          -148.399     185.929**      22.996***     0.0338***   0.0221***

                                                                            (299.190)      (86.808)        (8.216)     (0.00691)   (0.00728)

                                Ownership of livestock          -0.020      -1,036.176      -90.844       -62.773*     0.143***    0.0645**

                                                               (0.016)      (1,401.978)    (406.775)      (38.498)     (0.0323)    (0.0289)

                                Number of crops grown           0.006      1,025.099***     -30.189        7.600       0.0294***   -0.00700
Determinants of Market Access




                                                               (0.004)      (372.112)      (107.966)      (10.218)     (0.00863)   (0.00788)

                                Household grows cash crop       -0.004     -3,160.726**     63.037        -65.600*      -0.0176     -0.0251

                                                               (0.016)      (1,407.305)    (408.321)      (38.644)     (0.0310)    (0.0299)

                                Other Income:

                                Remittances from Haiti          0.002       -1,892.488     -391.101       -50.915       -0.0135     0.0187

                                                               (0.017)      (1,456.818)    (422.687)      (40.004)     (0.0331)    (0.0317)

                                Remittances from Abroad        0.042**       -389.195      971.607*       -39.803       0.0162      0.0214

                                                               (0.020)      (1,732.524)    (502.681)      (47.574)     (0.0384)    (0.0375)

                                Pensions                       0.275**      -3,118.391     -437.114        80.340       0.0615      -0.133

                                                               (0.130)     (11,376.657)   (3,300.865)    (312.398)      (0.247)     (0.186)

                                Rental Income                   0.044        910.500       -574.407       -10.980      0.167***     0.0537

                                                               (0.041)      (3,614.575)   (1,048.746)     (99.255)     (0.0624)    (0.0812)

                                Other Income                    -0.035       258.282       -277.860       -22.757       0.112**     0.0254

                                                               (0.030)      (2,639.686)    (765.888)      (72.485)     (0.0531)    (0.0565)




36
Household Head:

Household head is female                  0.001         -1,501.420       -500.677         42.033        -0.0782**        -0.134***

                                         (0.015)       (1,339.073)      (388.524)        (36.770)        (0.0305)        (0.0259)

Age                                      -0.001          353.275         -45.357          0.158          0.00468         0.00892

                                         (0.003)        (264.923)        (76.866)        (7.275)        (0.00581)        (0.00600)

Age, squared                              0.000           -3.171          0.410           0.007         -4.61e-05      -0.000122**

                                         (0.000)         (2.490)         (0.722)         (0.068)        (5.47e-05)      (5.74e-05)

Years education                          -0.002          82.623          57.633          14.308**        0.00717        -0.00818*

                                         (0.003)        (225.301)        (65.370)        (6.187)        (0.00525)        (0.00470)

Household Composition :

# of working age male members             0.007         -823.415        318.467*          4.643          -0.0124         -0.0181

                                         (0.007)        (576.346)       (167.223)        (15.826)        (0.0130)        (0.0124)

# of working age female members           0.009          352.673         -219.500         -9.421         -0.00780        -0.0179




                                                                                                                                     Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                                         (0.007)        (656.024)       (190.341)        (18.014)        (0.0146)        (0.0142)

Number of Dependents                    -0.012***        505.405         10.655           15.166         -0.00604        -0.00260

                                         (0.004)        (349.938)       (101.532)        (9.609)        (0.00777)        (0.00743)

Asset Based Wealth Index                 0.003**         -13.368         17.207           -1.464         0.00209        -4.58e-05

                                         (0.001)        (104.936)        (30.446)        (2.881)        (0.00259)        (0.00224)


1. Proxy for market access is defined as share of sales value/ total production value
2. Access to input use is defined by cost of input per ha
3. Access to leased in land and non household labor is given by a dummy where leased in=1 or non hh labor=1 if ag hh uses either
4. Department fixed effects and asset based wealth index control variable were also included but not reported above.




                                                                                                                                     37
38
         Determinants of Participation




     6
             in Nonfarm Activities
43.	 Nonfarm activity, although less prevalent than agriculture, remains an
     important economic activity in rural Haiti, especially among female-headed
     households. About 46 percent of all rural households have at least one member
     engaged in a nonfarm activity.34 Female-headed households represent about
     52 percent of employment in this sector. Later in this report, we discuss how
     participation in nonfarm activities reduces the likelihood of being poor and
     increases food security.
44.	 Given the importance of nonfarm activities in Haiti’s rural economy, it is
     important to understand the determinants of participation in nonfarm
     activities. Again, even though the data used for the analysis are cross-sectional,
     we hope to establish some robust relationships. Three separate regressions were
     estimated to explore the determinants of participation in nonfarm activities.
     The dependent variables for the three regressions included: (i) any nonfarm
     activity, (ii) nonfarm enterprise activities only, and (iii) nonfarm wage activities
     only. Running all three regressions allows us to compare results across types
     of nonfarm activities and determine what differences there are, if any, in the




                                                                                            Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     determinants of participation in a nonfarm enterprise versus nonfarm wage
     activities. Following common findings in the literature, the covariates included:
     gender, education and age of household head; male and female household labor
     supply; participation in other income generating activity; and remittances
     received by the household.
45.	 The determinants of nonfarm participation in rural Haiti were estimated using
     a Logit model of the following general form:

	                                                                         (2)

	                                                                         (3)

	                                                                         (4)

        Where P is equal to 1 if the household has at least one person engaged in
     a nonfarm activity, PF is equal to 1 if the household has at least one person
     engaged in a farm activity, RD is equal to 1 if household receives remittances
     from within Haiti, RA is equal to 1 if household receives remittances from
     abroad, X is a vector of other household characteristics,35 department fixed
     effects are captured by λ, and ε the idiosyncratic error term. Regressions (3)
     and (4) above are subsamples where PNFE is equal to 1 if household has at least
     one member engaged in nonfarm enterprise activities and PNFW is equal to 1 if
     households has at least one member engaged in nonfarm wage activities. The
     variable specifications are similar to those used in equation (2) described above.


34	 This statistics refers to household enterprise, wage, salary or unpaid nonfarm
    employment.
35	 Age variable enters the regression analysis in a nonlinear form, i.e. we specify Age
    and Age squared, to capture any effects of being older might have on likelihood of
    participation versus being younger.


                                                                                            39
                                                      46.	 Education and household labor are positively correlated with participation
                                                           in nonfarm activities. Household wealth measured using an asset index was
                                                           found to be positively correlated with participating in any nonfarm activity
                                                           and also with ownership of a household non-farm enterprise. Interestingly,
                                                           receiving remittances from abroad shows no significant effect on participation
                                                           in nonfarm activities, while receiving remittances from within Haiti has a
                                                           negative effect. This could be an indication that only the poorest households
                                                           receive remittance from within the country and are more likely agriculture
                                                           households.

                                                                          Table 2.17. Determinants Nonfarm Enterprise Participation


                                                                                                     Any Nonfarm        Nonfarm       Nonfarm
                                                      Dependent Variable:                              Activity        Enterprise      Wage

                                                      Household Characteristics:

                                                      Household head is male                           0.00912           -0.0207       0.00899

                                                                                                       (0.0281)         (0.0238)       (0.0128)
Determinants of Participation in Nonfarm Activities




                                                      Age                                              0.0117**         0.0201***     -0.00499**

                                                                                                       (0.00504)        (0.00449)     (0.00213)

                                                      Age, squared                                    -0.000114**     -0.000185***    4.53e-05**

                                                                                                      (4.78e-05)       (4.27e-05)     (2.07e-05)

                                                      Years education                                  0.0176***        0.00604*      0.00831***

                                                                                                       (0.00424)        (0.00345)     (0.00170)

                                                      Household Composition :

                                                      # of working age female members                  0.0740***        0.0387***     0.0248***

                                                                                                       (0.0138)         (0.0114)      (0.00600)

                                                      # of working age male members                    0.100***         0.0477***     0.0405***

                                                                                                       (0.0122)         (0.00993)     (0.00508)

                                                      # of dependents                                  0.0230***        0.0272***      -0.00377

                                                                                                       (0.00748)        (0.00634)     (0.00366)

                                                      Other Household Economic Activity:

                                                      Any Farm Activity                                -0.473***        -0.313***     -0.196***

                                                                                                       (0.0261)         (0.0278)       (0.0223)




40
Remittances :

Household receives remittances from abroad           -0.0748**          -0.0470*     -0.0213*

                                                     (0.0314)           (0.0259)     (0.0125)

Household receives remittances from within
Haiti                                                -0.135***         -0.0724***   -0.0515***

                                                     (0.0269)           (0.0230)     (0.0116)

Asset Based Wealth Index                            0.00606***          0.00211*    0.000395

                                                     (0.00166)          (0.00118)   (0.000539)

Observations: 2261


Note: Logit regression with department fixed effects. Department FE not shown.
Marginal effects reported with standard errors in brackets.
Significance denoted *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                 Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities




                                                                                                 41
42
         Determinants of Poverty




     7
           and Food Insecurity
47.	 Poverty and food insecurity are barriers to development for rural Haiti. As
     mentioned above, 70.7 percent of the rural population lives below the national
     poverty line of $1.98/day, and 35.7 percent of rural households suffer from food
     insecurity. In this report we are particularly interested in understanding how
     the economic activities pursued by rural households may contribute to poverty
     alleviation as well as increasing food security. Poverty and food insecurity
     are likely related, but they are not necessarily mutually inclusive events, and
     therefore separate regressions are estimated to capture potential differences in
     the determinants of each. In addition to the economic activity variables, we
     include covariates similar to those used in regressions (2) through (4) above,
     especially household characteristics such as gender of household head, age, and
     education.
48.	 The determinants of poverty and food insecurity were estimated using a Logit
     model of the following form:


	                                                                     (5)




                                                                                           Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
	                                                                     (6)

       Where Pnp is equal to 1 if household consumption expenditure is above the
    national poverty line of $1.98/day (non-poor); Pfs is equal to 1 if household is
    defined as food secure based on the FAO HDDS measure; PNFE is equal to 1
    if household has at least one member participating in a nonfarm enterprise
    activity; PNFW is equal to 1 if the household has at least one member participating
    in a nonfarm wage activity; Z is a vector of farm household characteristics;
    X is a vector of household level characteristics; department fixed effects are
    captured by λ, and ε is still the idiosyncratic error term.
49.	 In addition to estimating equations (5) and (6) above on the entire sample of all
     rural households, the same equations are estimated on the subsample of farm
     households to determine whether there are any determinants that are more
     likely to affect farm households.
50.	 Households with larger landholdings and more diversified livelihoods are
     less likely to be food insecure. Larger landholdings are negatively correlated
     with poverty and food security. Having a nonfarm activity is positively correlated
     with food security and lower likelihood of being poor. Livestock ownership is
     positively correlated with being food secure even though it does not appear to
     be correlated with lower likelihood of being poor. Not surprisingly, the more
     assets owned by a household, the less likely it is to be poor and more likely to be
     food secure. Also, having more working age females in the household increases
     the likelihood of being food secure. In general, receiving remittances from
     abroad or from within Haiti is associated with reduced poverty and increased
     food insecurity. These findings hold true across all variations in specifications
     conducted. Table 2.13b highlights the idea that remittances are used to buy
     food instead of investing in any productive asset.



                                                                                           43
                                                                                Table 2.18: Determinants of Poverty and Food Insecurity


                                                                                                                All Rural                             All Farm

                                              Dependent Variable:                                  Non-Poor             Food Secure       Non-Poor           Food Secure

                                              Nonfarm Activity:

                                              Nonfarm enterprise                                    0.114***                0.125***      0.0968***              0.0710**

                                                                                                    (0.0238)                (0.0229)      (0.0274)               (0.0304)

                                              Nonfarm wage                                          -0.0123                 -0.0488       -0.00448               -0.0674

                                                                                                    (0.0284)                (0.0358)      (0.0361)               (0.0552)

                                              Farm Activity:

                                              Value of harvest per ha                               -0.00109                -0.00444      -0.000623              -0.00344

                                                                                                    (0.00468)               (0.00533)     (0.00430)              (0.00608)

                                              Ownership of land                                     -0.0307                 -0.0651        -0.0169               -0.0711*

                                                                                                    (0.0366)                (0.0413)      (0.0322)               (0.0419)

                                              Livestock                                              0.0275                 0.108***       0.0214                0.115***

                                                                                                    (0.0269)                (0.0288)      (0.0206)               (0.0323)
Determinants of Poverty and Food Insecurity




                                              Share of Sales Value/Total Production Value            0.0393                 0.104**        0.0221                0.0954*

                                                                                                    (0.0462)                (0.0517)      (0.0366)               (0.0528)

                                              Number of crops grown                                 0.0122*                 0.0200**      0.0102*                0.0202**

                                                                                                    (0.00685)               (0.00793)     (0.00544)              (0.00812)

                                              Cash crop                                              0.0269                  0.0391        0.0214                 0.0349

                                                                                                    (0.0282)                (0.0302)      (0.0213)               (0.0313)

                                              Other Income:

                                              Remittances from Haiti                                -0.00692                 0.0243        0.0157                0.0562*

                                                                                                    (0.0217)                (0.0255)      (0.0225)               (0.0317)

                                              Remittances from Abroad                              0.0927***                 0.0231       0.0508*                 0.0179

                                                                                                    (0.0291)                (0.0297)      (0.0305)               (0.0393)

                                              Pension and other welfare                              -0.103                  0.129        -0.118**                0.0328

                                                                                                     (0.108)                 (0.158)      (0.0459)               (0.0864)

                                              Real Estate                                            0.0435                  0.0467        0.0172                 0.0797

                                                                                                    (0.0616)                (0.0689)      (0.0550)               (0.0562)

                                              Other                                                  0.0634                  0.0596        0.0515                -0.0149

                                                                                                    (0.0467)                (0.0456)      (0.0471)               (0.0316)

                                              Household Head:

                                              Household head is female                              0.00384                 -0.0109        -0.0237               -0.0149

                                                                                                    (0.0223)                (0.0258)      (0.0207)               (0.0316)

                                              Age                                                  0.0102***                0.00447       0.00631                0.00138

                                                                                                    (0.00361)               (0.00429)     (0.00399)              (0.00592)




44
 Age, squared                                           -9.02e-05***           -5.53e-05           -5.39e-05    -1.89e-05

                                                          (3.43e-05)          (4.03e-05)           (3.74e-05)   (5.55e-05)

 Years education                                          0.0127***           0.0170***            0.0104***    0.0150***

                                                          (0.00299)            (0.00400)           (0.00321)    (0.00552)

 Committed relationship                                    -0.0306             -0.0109              -0.0278      0.0392

                                                           (0.0229)            (0.0261)             (0.0237)    (0.0340)

 Household Composition :

 # of working age male members                           -0.0721***            -0.0133             -0.0466***    -0.0166

                                                           (0.0102)            (0.0107)            (0.00976)    (0.0129)

 # of working age female members                         -0.0697***            0.0320**            -0.0633***    0.0233

                                                           (0.0117)            (0.0125)             (0.0115)    (0.0152)

Number of Dependants                                     -0.0871***           0.0205***            -0.0630***   0.0203**

                                                          (0.00680)            (0.00687)           (0.00646)    (0.00811)




                                                                                                                             Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
Asset Based Wealth Index                                  0.0117***           0.0121***            0.0107***    0.0156***

                                                          (0.00128)            (0.00168)           (0.00165)    (0.00312)


Observations: 2261 for full sample, 1505 for farm subsample
Note: Logit regression with department fixed effects. Control variable for department fixed effects not shown
Marginal effects reported with standard errors in brackets.
Significance denoted *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



51.	 In addition to the four main sets of analyses described and shown above,
     different specifications of the models were estimated to provide additional
     robustness checks. For the determinants of agricultural productivity, we
     estimated the regression using cash crop share of total production value
     instead of a dummy for whether the household grows a cash crop. This did
     not change interpretation of coefficients or provide statistical significance
     to cash crop variable. For determinants of participation in nonfarm activity,
     various specifications using (i) household network variables, (ii) land size in
     lieu of farm activity or (iii) ownership of land in lieu of farm activity, all yielded
     similar results. Lastly, for the determinants of poverty and food security,
     regressions were estimated using (i) share of sales value/ total production
     value, (ii) types of crops grown, (iii) production value of crops by food group as
     share of total production, (iv) cash crop share of total production value and (v)
     food crop share of total production value. All results were consistent across all
     specifications. In addition, a separate regression was estimated using per capita
     consumption expenditures as dependent variable instead of poverty dummy.
     The results36 were also consistent with those described above.




36	 Regression results from robustness checks available upon request.


                                                                                                                             45
46
          Key Findings and




     8
         Recommendations
52.	 The information and analysis presented in this report point to two priority
     areas for rural development interventions in Haiti: (i) promoting diversification
     of livelihoods sources among rural households, and (ii) improving the
     performance of rural markets for inputs and outputs. Focusing on these areas
     could increase agricultural productivity, boost rural incomes, improve food
     security, thereby potentially reducing constraints to rural development.

      8.1	Promoting Diversification of Livelihoods Sources
          among Rural Households

             8.1.1 Findings
53.	 Diversifying agricultural production activities is correlated with higher
     productivity and could reduce vulnerability to shocks. Growing multiple
     crops is positively correlated with higher agricultural productivity, especially
     among poor households. Cultivating multiple crops presumably also provides




                                                                                          Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     protection against unexpected shocks affecting a particular crop.37 The benefits
     are even more pronounced when livestock activities are taken into account.
     This double benefit explains why for a given level of income, households with
     more crop diversification are more likely to be food secure. It should be noted,
     however, that diversification alone is not enough to raise rural households out
     of poverty, and in fact poor households in Haiti tend to be more diversified
     than non-poor households. This suggests that poor households rely on
     diversification to manage risk to a greater extent than non-poor households,
     which have greater ability to resort to food purchases to overcome unexpected
     food production shortfalls.
54.	 Remittances are positively associated with higher incomes, increased
     agricultural productivity, and improved food security, but the causal
     relationships are difficult to discern. Rural households that receive remittances
     are less likely to be poor, more likely to have productive farms, and more likely
     to be food secure than rural households that do not receive remittances, but
     there is considerable variability in the sources of remittances, in the households
     that receive remittances, and in the use of remittances. Remittances originating
     from within Haiti tend to go to poorer households and are positively correlated
     with improved food security for the receiving households, without necessarily
     impacting agricultural productivity. This suggests that poorer households may
     be using these remittances to purchase food. In contrast, remittances originating
     from international sources tend to go to wealthier households. While these
     remittances also are positively correlated with improved food security, in the
     wealthier households receipt of remittances seem to be positively correlated
     with agricultural productivity. This suggests that wealthier households may be
     using remittances to invest in their agricultural activities.

37	 Given the numerous weather and sanitary shocks that Haiti repeatedly experienced
    growing multiple crops allow households to mitigate the risk of a shock with the
    hope that one of the crops might be less affected than the other.


                                                                                          47
                                   55.	 Non-farm activities in rural areas seem to provide a pathway to escape
                                        from poverty and food insecurity. Nonfarm activities can be a significant
                                        source of income for rural households in Haiti, with positive impacts on food
                                        security. Rural households that engage in both agricultural and nonagricultural
                                        activities are more likely to be wealthier and food secure than households that
                                        engage only in one type of activity or the other. Such activities can be related
                                        to agriculture on the upstream (input suppliers) or on the downstream (value-
                                        adding and processing) or be separate to the sector (such as small retail).
                                        Interestingly, households that receive remittances are less likely to engage in
                                        nonfarm activities, which may indicate that such households feel less pressure
                                        to diversify their productive activities because the remittances already provide
                                        some level of protection against unexpected agricultural production shortfalls.
                                   56.	 Female headed households face particular constraints that impact their
                                        productivity which in turn increases their economic vulnerability. In
                                        particular, they have lower access to productive inputs which could lead to
                                        lower productivity thereby creating a gender gap. As expected higher quantity
                                        of factors of production such as labor, fertilizer, and seed were found to be
                                        positively correlated with increases agricultural productivity. A similar finding
                                        is observed in the nonfarm enterprise sector where female headed households
                                        also report lower access to inputs and lower quantities of inputs used.

                                                8.1.2 Recommendations
Key Findings and Recommendations




                                   57.	 Promote diversification of agricultural production activities as a way
                                        to increase income and improve food security. Given the benefits of
                                        diversification, households that rely on agriculture as a major livelihood source
                                        (which is to say the vast majority of rural households in Haiti) should be
                                        encouraged to grow multiple crops and to complement cropping activities with
                                        livestock keeping. Efforts to promote diversification might include educational
                                        campaigns to increase awareness of the benefits of diversification, research to
                                        identify crops and livestock species suited for particular locations or production
                                        environments, extension activities to disseminate locally appropriate
                                        management methods, and interventions to improve the availability and
                                        accessibility of key inputs. Nevertheless, farmers might also be able to expand
                                        productivity / increase income on a single crop, if they select to invest in crops
                                        that provide higher profits.
                                   58.	 Help poor rural households take advantage of non-farm employment
                                        opportunities as a way of generating additional revenue and managing
                                        risk. Although the poorest households are those most in need of nonfarm
                                        employment (as a way to boost income and manage risk), they often face the
                                        greatest challenges in accessing non-farm employment opportunities owing
                                        to their lack of key assets (education, skills, start-up capital), access to basic
                                        services and/or distance to markets and labor (FAO 1998). Special attention
                                        therefore should be given to interventions that will help the poorest households




48
    overcome these entry barriers, including not only interventions designed to
    improve the quality of the rural labor force (e.g., basic education, vocational
    training), but also interventions designed to generate increased rural non-farm
    employment opportunities (e.g., programs to encourage expansion of rural
    enterprises, support to rural financial institutions).
59.	 Encourage poor rural households to invest remittances in improving the
     productivity of their agricultural activities. Poor rural households that receive
     remittances often have no choice but to use those remittances to purchase food
     needed to meet immediate consumption needs. They frequently have little
     left over to invest in their agricultural enterprises. As a result, the urgency of
     addressing short-run needs prevents them from ever being able to build the
     base of productive assets needed to generate an enhanced stream of income
     over the longer term, and they remain trapped in poverty. Interventions are
     needed to help poor rural households invest a portion of the remittances they
     may receive in productive assets that can ensure a permanent stream of future
     income. Global experience suggests that well-designed safety net programs




                                                                                          Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     may play an important role in this regard—for example food-for-work or
     cash-for-work programs that involve construction of small-scale productive
     infrastructure (e.g., irrigation systems, grain storage facilities).
60.	 Invest in soil and water management technologies to improve the productivity
     of the natural resource base on which agriculture depends. Over the longer
     term, the welfare of rural households in Haiti will depend crucially on the
     quality of the natural resource base on which agriculture depends. Severe
     population pressure combined with uncontrolled exploitation of natural
     resources and unsustainable farming practices has exacted a heavy toll,
     leaving vast areas of the country with little or no forest cover, heavily eroded
     landscapes, and severely depleted soils. Efforts are needed to compensate
     for decades of mismanagement, with the goal of reversing land degradation,
     restoring soil fertility, re-establishing vegetative cover, and conserving and
     protecting increasingly scarce water resources. The obvious place to begin
     would be through the promotion of more environmentally friendly agricultural
     production practices, combined with introduction of regulations to restrict the
     uncontrolled exploitation of common-pool resources especially including trees.
     These could be complemented in time with schemes to promote payments for
     environmental services (PES), which could provide opportunities for rural
     households to generate additional income by preserving the environment.
     Investment in PES initiatives, which led to good results in some countries,
     could have many positive externalities, such as mitigating the impact of climate/
     weather shocks but as also positive effects on soil fertility, nutrient retention,
     which in the long term will contribute to a better agricultural productivity.
     Although not available in the survey data used in this report, capturing the GPS
     coordinates of households would allow for the inclusion of irrigation, erosion,
     land quality and climate shocks in future empirical analyses.




                                                                                          49
                                           8.2	Improving the Performance of Rural Markets for
                                               Inputs and Outputs

                                                  8.2.1 Findings
                                   61.	 Agricultural productivity in Haiti is severely constrained by the limited
                                        availability and high cost of purchased inputs38. A major factor contributing
                                        to the low levels of agricultural productivity prevailing in Haiti is the low use
                                        of purchased inputs (especially fertilizer and improved seeds and planting
                                        materials). The problem is particularly pronounced in female-headed
                                        households, which compared to male-headed households use fewer inputs,
                                        have less productive farms, enjoy lower incomes, and suffer from higher rates
                                        of food insecurity.
                                   62.	 For many rural households, incentives to invest in improved agricultural
                                        productivity are undermined by lack of access to reliable markets for
                                        outputs. The majority of rural households in Haiti report significant problems
                                        in accessing markets where they can sell surplus production. Lack of market
                                        access is particularly pronounced for poorer households; wealthier households
                                        are more likely to have the means to overcome the costs associated with
                                        identifying and reaching attractive markets for their products. Cut off from
                                        output markets, rural households have little incentive to produce surpluses that
Key Findings and Recommendations




                                        could be sold to generate additional income.

                                                  8.2.2 Recommendations
                                   63.	 Strengthen input distribution systems. Sustained productivity growth in
                                        Haitian agriculture will not be possible without continuous technological
                                        innovation, which depends in part on the timely availability of improved inputs.
                                        One of the biggest challenges facing policy makers in Haiti is how to strengthen
                                        private sector-led input distribution systems. In the past, input distribution has
                                        often been carried out by public agencies and parastatals. Generally speaking,
                                        the state-led efforts have been costly and inefficient. In recognition of past
                                        shortcomings, the government has developed national strategies for seed and
                                        fertilizer that rely on private-sector service delivery mechanisms.
                                     a.	Seed: Dissemination of modern crop varieties represents one of the largest
                                        potential “quick wins” in Haitian agriculture. Modern varieties hold the
                                        potential to deliver significant yield increases in virtually all of the major
                                        staples. Seed is the delivery vehicle through which modern varieties get
                                        to farmers. Seed production and marketing are by nature commercial
                                        activities, so efforts to strengthen seed distribution systems should be led
                                        by the private sector. At the same time, it must be recognized that newly

                                   38	    The availability of GPS data would have allowed us to include other variables of
                                         interest to this analysis including irrigation information, climate shocks, variations
                                         in land quality.


50
      established private seed companies face many obstacles and may require
      public support during an initial phase. This support must come in two forms:
      (i) public investments that lower R&D costs of private companies (e.g.,
      investments in public plant breeding research and public production of
      foundation seed), and (ii) enactment of policies that favor the emergence of a
      pluralistic and competitive seed industry.
  b.	Fertilizer: Stimulating the development of an efficient, profitable, and
     competitive fertilizer industry will require a two-pronged approach to
     strengthen demand for fertilizer on the one hand and improve the supply of
     fertilizer on the other. Demand for fertilizer is currently very weak in Haiti,
     so actions undertaken to improve supply will be unsuccessful unless they
     are accompanied by activities that can increase effective demand. Possible
     interventions include measures that would improve the ability of farmers
     to access credit needed to purchase fertilizer, as well as scale up the use of
     fertilizer vouchers to make fertilizer more affordable to the poorest farmers.
     It is important that these programs be time-bound, however, to ensure that




                                                                                            Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
     subsidies can be phased out as the quantities used of fertilizer increase and
     commercial distribution becomes profitable. Efforts to strengthen demand for
     fertilizer must be accompanied by parallel efforts to improve supply. Fertilizer
     is a private good, so the case for extensive public-sector involvement in
     fertilizer production and distribution is weak. Fertilizer market development
     efforts therefore should be aimed at creating viable private production and
     distribution systems. As with seed, public support may be needed during
     an initial phase to allow emerging private fertilizer companies to become
     established and expand their operations to a commercially viable scale, but
     this support should be time-bound. Haiti lacks the raw materials needed
     to produce fertilizer, so the domestic fertilizer industry will rely for the
     foreseeable future on imported components. The government should promote
     private investment in the industry, but it should avoid directly participating
     in importing and distributing fertilizer.
64.	 Improve access of rural households to output markets. Many rural households
     in Haiti have little incentive to invest in expanding their agricultural enterprises
     because of the difficulty of selling surplus production. Efforts are needed to
     reduce the transactions costs incurred by rural households in identifying and
     accessing remunerative markets for outputs. An initial set of interventions could
     focus on improving flows of market information. Advances in information
     technology have stimulated the emergence throughout the developing world of
     many different types of mobile phone- and internet-based market information
     systems that speed flows of market information and help connect buyers
     and sellers. Such efforts will have to be complemented with investments in
     infrastructure—especially rural roads—that can allow households located in
     remote areas to access inputs and evacuate outputs quickly and at lower cost.
     Construction of rural roads is obviously expensive, so such efforts would
     have to be preceded by a rigorous analytical exercise to identify investment
     opportunities with the greatest potential returns.



                                                                                            51
                                   65.	 Exploit immediate opportunities to match supply and demand. Development
                                        of efficient markets for agricultural commodities in Haiti will take time. In
                                        the short run, however, opportunities exist to link selected producers with
                                        remunerative markets. For example, food aid programs, school feeding
                                        initiatives, and other institutional feeding schemes can more systematically
                                        source products from local producers. Global experience points to many recent
                                        cases in which international agencies, NGOs, and government agencies have
                                        turned to local sources when conducting institutional procurement, thereby
                                        providing secure markets for local producers (WB, 2013).39
                                         Example: In Brazil, the “Zero Hunger National School-Feeding Program”40
                                       was very successful in reducing hunger and increasing the income of
                                       smallholders by imposing- by law- that 30 percent of the school-feeding budget
                                       be used for purchasing family farming production.41
                                   66.	 Build competitiveness of rural households. Improving market access of
                                        rural households will have limited impact of these households are unable to
                                        take advantage of new opportunities. For that reason, efforts are needed to
                                        strengthen the competitiveness of rural producers. This will require attention to
                                        several areas, some of which have already been mentions: (i) increasing farm-
                                        level productivity, (ii) decreasing post-harvest losses, (iii) promoting value
                                        addition, (iv) improving access to markets, and (v) strengthening business skills
                                        of producers. One promising approach that has been used successfully in many
                                        other countries to tackle this multi-pronged agenda is the Productive Alliances
Key Findings and Recommendations




                                        model. Productive Alliances link producer groups to markets: In the last
                                        decade, the expression productive alliance has been more and more attached to
                                        a series of projects promoted and funded by the World Bank, in collaboration
                                        with various Governments of developing countries, especially in Latin America
                                        and the Caribbean. A Productive Alliance is a formal agreement between a
                                        group of organized farmers and a buyer, for the provision of a certain good, in a
                                        specified quantity and quality. While Productive Alliances can take many forms
                                        and operate in different ways, the approach is characterized four key elements:
                                        (i) an organized group of producers, (ii) an institutional buyer (usually an
                                        agribusiness firm), (iii) resources to finance investment in production and
                                        marketing, and (iv) technical assistance. In some more advanced model the
                                        financial intermediary is added to the model.
                                   67.	 Strengthen food safety through regulations and implementing institutions.
                                        As Haiti’s food system transitions from its current subsistence orientation to
                                        become more market-oriented, food quality and safety will become increasingly
                                        important for public health and competitiveness. A comprehensive food safety

                                   39	 Structured demand connects large, predictable sources of demand for agricultural
                                       products to small farmers, which reduces risk and encourages improved quality,
                                       leading to improved systems, increased income and reduced poverty, see WFP,
                                       2013 and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for a detailed analysis of theory of
                                       change behind the “Structured Demand”.
                                   40	 Programa Nacional de Alimentação Escolar, PNAE
                                   41	 See WFP, 2013 for more details


52
strategy with a “from farm to fork” approach to food safety is best practice to
ensure that investments in improving food quality and nutritional content are
sustained over time. Such a strategy should raise awareness about food safety
and nutrition issues, provide production and market incentives, and develop
the appropriate policy and institutional framework to ensure the availability
of the necessary infrastructure and services. It is recommended that special
attention will be given to animal source foods, as their perishability put special
demands on their marketing and preparation to prevent contamination
and other food safety risks. In addition, residues harmful to consumers can
be an issue in certain types of production systems and the widespread use
of antimicrobial agents for preventive measures or as growth promoters, is
contributing significantly to growing microbe resistance which makes such
antimicrobial products ineffective in treating infectious or parasitic infections
in humans or animals.




                                                                                     Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities




                                                                                     53
54
     9
         References
Arias, 2014 WB unpublished working paper
Arias, D.; Leguía, J. J. Sy, Abdoulaye. (2013) “Determinants of Agricultural Extension
        Services : The Case of Haiti”. World Bank, Washington, DC. The World
        Bank.
Barrett, C. B., Reardon, T., and Webb, P. (2001). “Nonfarm Income Diversification
        and Household Livelihood Strategies in Rural Africa: Concepts, Dynamics
        and Policy Implications” Food Policy, 26 (5)
Barrett, C. B., M. F. Bellemare and J. Y. Hou. 2010. “Reconsidering Conventional
        Explanations of the Inverse Productivity-Size Relationship.” World
        Development 38 (1): 88-97
Carletto, C., Savastono, S., and Zezza, A. (2013). ‘Fact or Artefact: The Impact of
        Measurement Errors on the Farm Size-Productivity Relationship’. Journal
        of Development Economics, 103: 254-61
Coello B. et Alexis N., 2011. Promotion de l’egalite des sexes dans les programmes




                                                                                         Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
       de développement agricole et gestion de ressources naturelles de la BID en
       Haïti. IADB unpublished working paper.
Crush, J., Frayne, B. and W. Pendleton. (2012). “The Crisis of Food Insecurity in
       African Cities”, Journal of Hunger & Environmental Nutrition, 7:271-292.
Eastwood, R., M. Lipton and A. Newell. (2010). “Farm size.” In Pingali, P. L. and
      R. E. Evenson, eds., Handbook of agricultural economics. North Holland:
      Elsevier
Eswaran, M. and A. Kotwal. (1986). “Access to Capital and Agrarian Production
      Organization.” Economic Journal 96:482-98.
FAO, 1998. The State of Food and Agriculture. Part III: Rural non-farm income in
       developing countries.
FAO, 2011a. FAO AT WORK 2010–2011 Women – key to food security.
FAO, 2011b. The role of women in agriculture. Agricultural Development Economics
       Division. ESA Working Paper No. 11-02.
FAO, 2011c. The State of Food and Agriculture: Women in Agriculture: Closing the
       Gender Gap for Development. Rome.
Foltz, J., B. Larson and R. Lopez. (2000). Land tenure, investment, and agricultural
          production in Nicaragua. Development Discussion Paper No. 738, Institute
          for International Development, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University.
General Accountability Office of the US (GAO), 2011. Funding Development
       Projects through the Purchase, Shipment, and Sale of U.S. Commodities Is
       Inefficient and Can Cause Adverse Market Impacts-11-636.
Hidrobo, M., Hoddinott, J., Peterman, A., Margolies, A. and Moreira, V. (2012)
      Cash, food, or vouchers? Evidence from a randomized experiment in
      northern Ecuador
Jadotte, E. (2007). “ Characterization of Inequality and Poverty in the Republic of
        Haiti”, Estudios Sociales, Vol. 15, No. 29, pp. 8-56.

                                                                                         55
             Jadotte, E. (2011). “Vulnerability to poverty: a microeconometric approach and
                     application to the Republic of Haiti”, Inequality of opportunity : theory and
                     measurement.- Bingley [u.a.] : Emerald, ISBN 9781780520346., p. 179-216
             Lawal, J. and A. Muyiwa (2009). Food security and socioeconomic characteristics
                     of cocoa farming households in Nigeria: support through agricultural
                     biotechnology. Proceedings of the 2nd International e-Conference on
                     Agricultural BioSciences.
             Lewis, W. Arthur. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor.”
                    The Manchester School 22:139-191
             Lipton, M. 2009. Land Reform in Developing Countries: Property Rights and
                    property Wrongs. New York: Routledge (or Taylor and Francis).
             Masterson, T (2007) “Productivity, Technical Efficiency, and Farm Size in Paraguayan
                    Agriculture”. The Levy Economics Institute of Bard College. Working Paper
                    No. 490, Feb. 2007.
             Oseni, G. and Winters, P. (2009). Rural nonfarm activities and agricultural crop
                    production in Nigeria. Agricultural Economics, 40: 189–201.
             Shamsie, Y.(2012). “Haiti’s Post-Earthquake Transformation: What of Agriculture
                    and Rural Development?” Latin American Politics and Society Vol. 54, 2:
                    133–152
             Snapp, S., D. Rohrbach, F. Simtowe, and H. Freeman (2002). Sustainable soil
                    management options for Malawi: Can smallholder farmers grow more
                    legumes? Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, Vol. 91:159–174.
             Swindale A, Ohri-Vachaspati P. (2004). “Measuring household food consumption: a
                    technical guide”. Washington, DC: FANTA
             Unal, F (2008). Small Is Beautiful: Evidence of an Inverse Relationship between
                    Farm Size and Yield in Turkey. Working Paper No. 551, The Levy Economics
References




                    Institute Annandale-on-Hudson, NY 12504-5000.
             USAID, 2011. Women & Agriculture -Improving global food security. Feed the
                   Future.gov.
             Vadivelu, L. M. Bhole, P. Pathak, A.Wani, A., and A. B. Pande (2001), An Empirical
                    Analysis of the Relationship between Land Size Ownership and Soybean
                    Productivity: New Evidence from the Semi-Arid Tropical Region in
                    Madhya Pradesh, India. An Open Access Journal published by ICRISAT
                    SAT eJournal ejournal.icrisat.org August 2006, Volume 2(1).
             Verner, D. (2008).“ Labor Markets in Rural and Urban Haiti: Based on the First
                     Household Survey for Haiti,” Policy Research Working Paper 4574,
                     Sustainable Development Division, World Bank
             World Bank, “Haiti: The Challenges of Poverty Reduction”, Report No. 17242-HA,
                    August (1999)
             Walz, J. and Ramachandran, V. (2013). The Need for More Local Procurement in
                     Haiti. CEPR Brief paper


56
World Food Program (2013). Structured Demand and Smallholder Farmers in
      Brazil: the Case of PAA and PNAE.
World Bank. 1998. Haiti: The Challenges of Poverty Reduction. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2005. Haiti : Diagnostic and Proposals for Agriculture and Rural
      Development Policies and Strategies. Washington, DC.
World Bank, 2008. Haiti: The Challenge of Poverty Reduction, Volume 1. Main
      Report, Washington D.C.
World Bank, 2008. World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development.
       Washington, D.C: The World Bank.
World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and
      Development. Washington, DC.
World Bank, 2013. Agriculture for Nutrition in Latin America and the Caribbean:
       From Quantity to Quality.
World Bank, 2014. Pauvreté à Haïti: Éléments méthodologiques. Mimeo of 2014




                                                                                  Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
      Haiti Poverty assessment.




                                                                                  57
58
     Appendix
               Figure A1: Import dependency (Import / Domestic supply quantity)42

      100%
       90%
                                                                                           Rice
       80%
                                                                                           Cereals
       70%
       60%
       50%
       40%
       30%
       20%
       10%
        0%

                  2007             2008         2009          2010          2011




                                                                                                          Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
Source: FAOSTAT

                              Table A1: Household Characteristics by Region


                                                                         Region

                                                       Nord      Sud        Transversale          Ouest

 Household Head is male                                61.5      63.5             62.3            58.6

 Age of household head                                 49.9      51.7             47.8            49.1

 Household Head Edu (years)                            2.8       2.6              2.5              3.5

 Household Head is literate                            44.2      46.2             43.1            50.7

 Household head in committed relationship              70.4      67.1             62.5            63.5

 Household size                                        5.5       5.0              4.6              4.6

 Number of children under 5yrs old                     0.7       0.6              0.7              0.5

 Dependency Ratio1                                     97.2      95.0             97.3            87.6

 Per capita Annual Consumption (HTG)2               24374.9    29429.7        30301.3         37370.9

 House was damaged in earthquake                       20.9      32.8             28.7            58.4




42	    Domestic supply quantity: Production + imports - exports + changes in stocks
      (decrease or increase) = supply for domestic utilization. There are various ways of
      defining supply and, in fact, various concepts are in use. The elements involved
      are production, imports, exports and changes in stocks (increase or decrease).
      There is no doubt that production, imports and stock changes (either decrease or
      increase in stocks) are genuine supply elements. (source FAOSTAT)


                                                                                                          59
           Housing Characteristics

           Ownership of dwelling                                   87.4          81.3        87.4          80.4

           Dwelling is considered precarious                       25.1          20.9        14.9          13.3

           Number of rooms                                          3.0              2.9      2.4             2.5

           Walls are mostly made of bricks/stone or cement         38.7          56.8        41.9          59.5

           Roof is mainly cement                                    3.8              5.5      2.7          11.0

           Flooring is mainly cement or ceramic/mosaic             34.1          53.0        33.6          65.3

           Main source of cooking fuel is wood                     84.8          85.4        85.0          71.8

           Main source of lighting is electricity                   5.9          12.6         7.8          22.2

           Main drinking water source is from a protected
           or safe source1                                         60.9          54.6        49.1          65.3

           No toilet system (nature)                               34.2          39.1        44.3          26.5

           Observations (unweighted)                               567            643         506             545



                                    Table A2a: Economic Activities by Region and Gender


                                                    Farm only             Non farm only     Both Farm and Nonfarm

           All Rural                                  53.7                    21.9                  24.5

           Region

               Nord                                   52.5                    22.2                  25.3

               Sud                                    53.3                    17.1                  29.6

               Transversale                           61.8                    17.1                  21.1

               Ouest                                  44.4                    32.4                  23.2

           Gender of Head

               Male                                   57.2                    16.4                  26.4
Appendix




             Female                                   47.3                    31.7                  21.0



                 Table A2b: Poverty Distribution of Rural Households by farm and nonfarm participation


                                        Farm only                  Nonfarm only             Both Farm and Nonfarm

                                        Poor            Non Poor   Poor          Non Poor   Poor       Non Poor

           All Rural                    80.6            19.4       55.8          44.2       75.0       25.0

           Region

                 Nord                   89.3            10.7       73.4          26.6       86.8       13.2

                 Sud                    79.0            21.0       60.2          39.8       80.7       19.3

                 Transversale           78.8            21.2       59.5          40.5       64.7       35.3

                 Ouest                  76.3            23.7       39.2          60.8       68.1       31.9

           Gender of Head

                 Female                 83.6            16.4       56.0          44.0       78.9       21.1

                 Male                   79.3            20.7       55.6          44.4       73.3       26.7

60
                                Table A3: Type of Employment


                                        Wage earner           Self-employed          Unpaid worker

All Rural                                    10.2                 52.6                   36.9

Region

                        Nord                 11.9                 48.6                   39.1

                         Sud                 8.3                  57.2                   34.1

                  Transversale               7.6                  55.0                   37.2

                        Ouest                13.7                 48.6                   37.2

Gender of Head

                        Male                 9.6                  50.9                   39.3

                      Female                 11.5                 56.2                   31.8

Poverty Status




                                                                                                                                    Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                        Poor                 9.9                  50.8                   39.0

                   Non-Poor                  11.1                 58.0                   30.4



                                             Table A4. Land Acquisitions


                                        Agricultural Households by land acquisition title and land size:

                                       Lease-In or Received     Lease-Out or Given                                Land Size
                        Owner            from third party         to third party               Fallow         (under cultivation)

                  %             Ha       %            Ha           %          Ha         %              Ha            Ha

All Rural        89.7           1.0     31.7          0.3         16.4        0.1       34.5            0.4          1.3

Region

Nord             95.1           1.1     31.6          0.3         16.0        0.1       41.6            0.4          1.5

Sud              85.5           1.0     27.4          0.3         13.9        0.2       37.2            0.4          1.2

Transversale     88.4           1.0     32.7          0.3         19.5        0.2       30.7            0.4          1.3

Ouest            91.4           0.9     35.6          0.4         14.3        0.1       30.4            0.3          1.3

Headship

Female           89.8           0.9     23.3          0.3         12.8        0.1       31.4            0.3          1.2

Male             89.6           1.1     35.4          0.3         17.9        0.2       35.9            0.4          1.4

Poverty Status

Poor             90.1           0.9     30.2          0.3         14.9        0.1       34.7            0.4          1.2

Non Poor         88.3           1.2     36.6          0.4         21.0        0.2       33.9            0.4          1.6




                                                                                                                                    61
                                                     Table A5: Farm Activity of Agricultural Households


                                  Any Agriculture      Cash Crop1   Sold Crop      Food Crop    Livestock     Fisheries    Forestry   Ag Wage

           All Rural              71.4                 49.7         84.3           97.7         74.8          4.2          30.4       4.3

           Region

               Nord               72.5                 61.3         84.1           96.1         71.0          1.7          33.7       6.0

               Sud                78.3                 55.4         82.1           96.9         76.9          7.3          25.8       4.3

               Transversale       75.9                 43.8         88.8           98.8         71.9          4.4          31.8       2.6

               Ouest              58.7                 40.6         79.9           98.5         81.0          2.3          30.5       5.0

           Gender of Head

               Female             57.6                 46.9         82.3           96.9         69.8          4.7          21.6       3.9

               Male               80.1                 51.0         85.2           98.1         77.0          3.9          34.3       4.6

           Consumption Quintile

               Lowest             85.4                 50.0         82.7           98.6         72.6          0.5          29.9       10.0

               20-40              76.2                 47.1         83.0           96.9         78.1          2.0          31.7       4.7

               40-60              75.7                 49.8         85.2           96.5         75.2          6.1          31.9       2.6

               60-80              70.4                 47.7         85.4           98.5         74.4          4.1          32.1       3.7

               Highest            52.3                 54.8         85.5           98.2         73.5          9.0          25.4       1.4

           Poverty Status

               Poor               77.3                 47.8         83.6           97.6         74.1          3.2          30.8       5.3

               Non Poor           56.9                 55.7         86.4           98.2         77.0          7.1          29.0       2.0

           Food Security Status

               Food Secure        71.5                 53.5         86.2           97.5         77.0          5.9          30.8       3.6

               Food Insecure      71.2                 42.7         80.9           98.0         70.7          1.0          29.7       5.6
Appendix




           1. Cash crop refer to either mangos or coffee.



                                                                           Table A6: Nonfarm Enterprise Profile


                                                                                            Reason for Owning Household Enterprise

                                                                                  Could not
                                                                                find Salaried      To increase         To be           Family
                                                                                Employment           income         independent       business
                                                                                      %                 %                %               %

                                         All Rural                                  31.2               39.0               25.5          10.1

                                         Gender of Head

                                                          Female                    32.2               32.2               27.1          11.3

                                                          Male                      30.4               44.0               24.3              9.3

                                         Poverty Status

                                                          Poor                      33.5               38.0               26.2              8.8

                                                          Nonpoor                   27.2               40.7               24.2          12.4


62
                                                Table A7 :Nonfarm Enterprise Profile


                                                    Market                                      Type of Product Sold              Revenues

                                                                                                                                  Average
                                 Export                     Domestic1                                                              Sales
                                                                                         Pre-       Manufactured
                                                                  Public and                                           Services
                                                                                      fabricated          
                                                                   Private
                                                Household           Sector
 
                                    %                 %                  %                %                  %            %        Mean

All Rural                           1.1              89.0               11.4             71.4               27.3        15.4      21682.4

Gender of Head

                 Female             1.5              87.7               10.8             74.1               23.7        12.3      17062.3

                 Male               0.9              89.9               11.9             69.4               29.9        17.7      25115.4

Poverty Status

                 Poor               1.2              88.6               10.8             69.5               30.0        14.1      11085.3




                                                                                                                                             Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                 Nonpoor            1.0              89.6               12.5             74.6               22.6        17.7      39632.5


1. The domestic market was divided into two target groups: 1. domestic households or 2. government or private sector enterprises.



                           Table A8.: Food Security and Poverty (Percentages)


                                         FAO HDDS                                        Self-Reported

                          Food secure           Food insecure                  Food secure         Food insecure

Poor                         55.7                     44.3                        62.2                   37.8

Non Poor                     85.3                     14.7                        79.9                   20.1

Cons Quintiles

Lowest                       31.1                     68.9                        45.9                   54.1

20-40                        56.3                     43.7                        62.0                   38.0

40-60                        66.9                     33.1                        69.1                   30.9

60-80                        75.5                     24.5                        77.3                   22.7

Highest                      86.5                     13.5                        79.4                   20.6



                        Table A9. Food Security and Household Characteristics


                                                                  Based on Food Security Index (FAO)

                                                                Food Secure                     Food Insecure

Household Head is male                                             63.1                              58.6

Age of household head                                              48.6                              50.9

Household Head Edu (years)                                          3.4                              1.8

Household Head is literate                                         51.2                              36.5




                                                                                                                                             63
                                   Household head in committed relationship2                        67.8                               61.2

                                   Household size                                                   5.1                                4.6

                                   Number of children under 5yrs old                                0.6                                0.6

                                   Dependency Ratio3                                                92.4                               98.0

                                   Per capita Annual Consumption (HTG)4                        36680.7                            19669.3

                                   House was damaged in earthquake                                  34.8                               36.4



                                                              Table A10. Food Security and Housing Characteristics


                                                                                                            Based on Food Security Index (FAO)

                                                                                                            Food Secure           Food Insecure

                                   Ownership of dwelling                                                        84.0                      84.8

                                   Dwelling is considered precarious                                            16.2                      21.4

                                   Number of rooms                                                              2.8                          2.5

                                   Walls are mostly made of bricks/stone or cement                              53.6                      40.7

                                   Roof is mainly cement                                                        7.0                          3.2

                                   Flooring is mainly cement or ceramic/mosaic                                  52.1                      34.9

                                   Main source of cooking fuel is wood                                          77.7                      89.0

                                   Main source of lighting is electricity                                       14.7                         7.2

                                   Main drinking water source is from a protected or safe source5               59.9                      51.5

                                   No toilet system (nature)                                                    31.7                      45.2




                                              Table A11a: Share of Value of Sales/ Value of Production


                        All Farm
Appendix




                          HHs                 Gender             T-Test      Poverty Status         T-Test             Food Security               T-Test

                                                                                                                   Food
                                       Male        Female                   Poor     NonPoor                     Insecure         Food Secure

           Coffee        40.9          39.5            44.5       -5.0      42.7       35.7           7.0          38.5          42.0               -3.5

           Maize         27.1          26.7            28.0       -1.3      26.4       29.6          -3.2          23.7          29.1              -5.5**

           Millet        24.5          23.7            26.4       -2.7      24.3       24.9          -0.6          19.3          27.8              -8.6**

           Greenbeans    43.4          48.1            32.5       15.6      45.7       35.8           9.9          27.3          51.1              -23.8

           Rice          45.9          44.6            48.9       -4.3      42.5       51.2          -8.7          37.0          48.3              -11.3*

           Mango         13.1          14.5            9.3       5.3**      12.5       14.6          -2.0             8.7        14.9              -6.2***

           Cassava       25.9          25.9            26.0       -0.1      25.7       26.7          -1.0          23.3          27.2               -3.9

           Peanuts       49.6          49.3            50.5       -1.3      50.9       45.2           5.7          49.7          49.6               0.1

           Vegetable     37.4          38.7            34.5       4.2       35.9       40.4          -4.6          32.3          39.5               -7.2

           Banana        33.0          33.0            33.0       0.0       33.5       31.1           2.4          33.1          32.9               0.1




64
                                            Table A11b: Descriptive Stats Market Access


                                  Share sales value/
                                   Total Production         Seeds cost        Fertilizer cost     Pesticide cost
                                         Value               (per ha)            (per ha)           (per ha)          Hired in           Leased In

                                            %                  HTG                 HTG                 HTG               %                  %

All Rural                               38.1                 2736.6              1052.0                128.3            67.3               31.7

Region

             Nord                       35.8                 1406.7               185.0                59.5             61.7               31.6

             Sud                        35.5                 2117.9              1090.0                67.8             68.9               27.4

             Transversale               42.8                 2657.7              1442.6                166.1            67.5               32.7

             Ouest                      35.7                 5025.0              1244.1                211.4            70.7               35.6

Gender of Head

             Female                     38.8                 2634.0               632.5                193.3            59.4               23.3




                                                                                                                                                       Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
             Male                       37.8                 2781.5              1235.8                99.7             70.7               35.4

Poverty

             Poor                       36.6                 2882.3               750.2                128.0            65.0               30.2

             Nonpoor                    42.7                 2275.7              2006.3                129.1            74.4               36.5

Food Security

             Food Insecure              35.7                 1801.5               543.3                134.4            61.7               27.0

             Food Secure                39.4                 3245.7              1329.0                124.9            70.3               34.3



                            Table A12a: Share of Value of Sales/ Value of Production by Food Group


                             All Farm HHs          Gender            T-Test       Poverty Status          T-Test       Food Security         T-Test

                                                                                                                       Food       Food
                                                Male   Female                   Poor      NonPoor                    Insecure    Secure

Grains and Cereal                30.8           30.2    32.3          -2.1       28.8           37.2      -8.5***      25.2       33.9       -8.7***

Starch, roots and tubers         25.9           25.9    26.0          -0.1       25.7           26.7          -1.0     23.3       27.2        -3.9*

Pulses, Nuts and Seeds           49.6           49.3    50.5          -1.3       50.9           45.2           5.7     49.7       49.6          0.1

Fruits                           30.6           30.6    30.5          0.1        31.2           28.6           2.7     29.6       31.1          -1.5

Vegetables                       44.0           48.5    34.2          14.4       46.0           38.2           7.8     29.6       51.1       -21.5




                                                                                                                                                       65
                                 TableA12b: Share of Value of Consumption/ Value of Production by Food Group


                                         All Farm HHs         Gender            T-Test       Poverty Status     T-Test       Food Security         T-Test

                                                                                                                             Food        Food
                                                          Male    Female                   Poor    NonPoor                 Insecure     Secure

           Grains and Cereal                 52.7         52.4     53.5          -1.1      54.6       47.0      7.6***       58.3        49.7      8.5***

           Starch, roots and tubers          26.5         26.5     26.4          0.1       26.4       26.6       -0.2        25.0        27.2        -2.2

           Pulses, Nuts and Seeds            23.2         20.6     30.3         -9.6*      23.1       23.7       -0.6        21.8        23.9        -2.1

           Fruits                            62.8         64.2     59.1          5.2       64.7       56.8       7.9*        55.2        66.8       -11.6

           Vegetables                        48.5         46.1     53.9          -7.9      50.1       43.7       6.3         46.0        49.7        -3.8



                                                    Table A13: Determinants of Agricultural Productivity


           Dependent Variable: Log Total Crop Value/ Ha                (All Rural)       Land Q1     Land Q2     Land Q3       Land Q4          Land Q5

           Land Size:

           Log Harvested Hectares                                   -0.398***            -2.048*     -0.675*     1.378         -2.509           -2.050***

                                                                    (0.087)              (1.097)     (0.391)     (1.951)       (4.672)          (0.739)

           Log Harvested Hectares, squared                          0.048***             -0.114      0.072       2.310         2.154            0.457**

                                                                    (0.011)              (0.072)     (0.120)     (5.468)       (5.186)          (0.232)

           Physical Inputs:

           Log Fertilizer use (HTG/ha)                              0.250***             -0.229      0.178**     0.191         0.223**          0.377***

                                                                    (0.049)              (0.304)     (0.088)     (0.221)       (0.093)          (0.098)

           Log Pesticide use (HTG/ha)                               0.254***             0.420       0.210**     -0.191        0.259**          0.247***

                                                                    (0.056)              (0.348)     (0.105)     (0.241)       (0.118)          (0.077)

           Log Seed use (HTG/ha)                                    0.317***             0.205       0.210***    0.705***      0.251***         0.169***
Appendix




                                                                    (0.035)              (0.145)     (0.069)     (0.150)       (0.066)          (0.062)

           Labor Inputs:

           Log Household labor used per ha                          0.095                0.457       -0.111      0.057         -0.046           -0.129

                                                                    (0.075)              (0.706)     (0.117)     (0.203)       (0.120)          (0.119)

           Log Non HHlabor used per ha                              0.145***             0.340*      0.045       0.030         0.076            0.058

                                                                    (0.046)              (0.201)     (0.099)     (0.152)       (0.086)          (0.077)

           Other Agricultural/Plot Characteristics

           Household owns livestock                                 0.163                0.191       -0.138      0.881***      0.346**          0.120

                                                                    (0.100)              (0.582)     (0.152)     (0.306)       (0.163)          (0.169)

           Household grows at least one cash crop1                  0.057                0.017       0.240       0.578**       -0.171           0.040

                                                                    (0.099)              (0.718)     (0.153)     (0.286)       (0.157)          (0.150)

           Number of crops grown                                    0.234***             0.264       0.290***    0.070         0.191***         0.245***

                                                                    (0.026)              (0.203)     (0.043)     (0.070)       (0.040)          (0.037)

           Household owns plot                                      1.074***             0.437       -0.051      -1.234*       0.381            0.333




66
                                                   (0.143)     (1.057)    (0.217)    (0.677)   (0.248)    (0.278)

Assistance post-earthquake:                        -0.060      1.520      0.161      -0.452    0.523      -0.729*

fertilizer, tools, seeds, plant cutting            (0.317)     (3.254)    (0.483)    (0.749)   (0.654)    (0.406)

Household Characteristics:

Household Head:

Household head is male                             0.018       0.486      -0.064     -0.029    -0.099     -0.170

                                                   (0.095)     (0.565)    (0.149)    (0.330)   (0.156)    (0.155)

Age                                                0.012       0.149      -0.008     -0.031    0.045      0.023

                                                   (0.019)     (0.108)    (0.027)    (0.071)   (0.033)    (0.030)

Age, squared                                       -0.000      -0.001     0.000      0.000     -0.000     -0.000

                                                   (0.000)     (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.001)   (0.000)    (0.000)

Years education                                    0.024       0.082      0.007      -0.027    0.067**    0.033

                                                   (0.016)     (0.112)    (0.025)    (0.046)   (0.028)    (0.021)




                                                                                                                     Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
Household Composition :

# of working age male members                      0.039       -0.145     0.169**    0.026     0.023      0.040

                                                   (0.043)     (0.272)    (0.073)    (0.114)   (0.069)    (0.058)

# of working age female members                    0.013       -0.168     0.027      0.022     0.050      -0.051

                                                   (0.047)     (0.350)    (0.077)    (0.183)   (0.072)    (0.063)

# of dependants                                    -0.039      -0.215     0.063      -0.040    -0.084**   -0.032

                                                   (0.025)     (0.181)    (0.041)    (0.072)   (0.038)    (0.036)

Remittances :

Household receives remittances from abroad         0.220*      3.161***   0.102      0.025     -0.052     0.114

                                                   (0.116)     (1.002)    (0.190)    (0.315)   (0.178)    (0.165)

Household receives remittances from within Haiti   0.132       1.162*     -0.099     0.052     -0.220     0.180

                                                   (0.098)     (0.631)    (0.149)    (0.279)   (0.159)    (0.162)

Other Economic Activities :

Nonfarm Household Enterprise                       0.001       1.008      -0.031     -0.003    -0.017     0.093

                                                   (0.098)     (0.717)    (0.162)    (0.287)   (0.152)    (0.143)

Other Nonfarm wage                                 -0.159      -0.246     -0.361     -0.167    -0.304     0.242

                                                   (0.162)     (0.872)    (0.280)    (0.459)   (0.277)    (0.217)

Asset Based Wealth Index                           0.006       -0.020     0.016      0.035     0.003      0.004

                                                   (0.007)     (0.043)    (0.014)    (0.030)   (0.013)    (0.009)

Constant                                           0.910       -6.268**   3.639***   4.374*    2.296      3.680***

                                                   (0.559)     (2.965)    (0.938)    (2.419)   (1.428)    (1.174)

Observations                                       1,499.000   117.000    575.000    112.000   418.000    277.000

R-Squared                                          0.586       0.894      0.315      0.494     0.346      0.514




                                                                                                                     67
                                                     Table A13: Determinants of Agricultural Productivity


           Dependent Variable: Log Total Crop Value/ Ha              (All Rural)   Land Q1     Land Q2      Land Q3    Land Q4    Land Q5

           Land Size:

           Log Harvested Hectares                                    -0.459***     -2.346***   -0.805**     1.841      -1.155     -2.294***

                                                                     (0.095)       (0.994)     (0.392)      (2.003)    (4.999)    (0.785)

           Log Harvested Hectares, squared                           0.047***      -0.147***   0.053        2.651      0.679      0.495**

                                                                     (0.013)       (0.065)     (0.123)      (5.664)    (5.554)    (0.246)

           Physical Inputs:

           Log Fertilizer use (HTG/ha)                               0.108***      -0.048      0.101***     0.113      0.042      0.132***

                                                                     (0.020)       (0.142)     (0.024)      (0.072)    (0.033)    (0.038)

           Log Pesticide use (HTG/ha)                                0.042*        0.115       -0.016       -0.103     0.123***   0.026

                                                                     (0.024)       (0.150)     (0.031)      (0.071)    (0.039)    (0.039)

           Log Seed use (HTG/ha)                                     0.047***      -0.029      0.013        0.037      -0.001     0.028

                                                                     (0.013)       (0.071)     (0.017)      (0.039)    (0.022)    (0.023)

           Labor Inputs:

           Log Household labor used per ha                           0.212**       0.584       -0.101       0.156      -0.007     -0.166

                                                                     (0.085)       (0.684)     (0.119)      (0.213)    (0.128)    (0.125)

           Log Non HHlabor used per ha                               0.198***      0.160       0.111**      -0.023     0.130*     0.107

                                                                     (0.037)       (0.136)     (0.048)      (0.112)    (0.071)    (0.077)

           Other Agricultural/Plot Characteristics

           Household owns livestock                                  -0.024        -0.101      -0.241       0.663**    0.256      0.110

                                                                     (0.113)       (0.552)     (0.154)      (0.330)    (0.174)    (0.180)

           Household grows at least one cash crop1                   0.018         0.031       0.196        0.413      -0.197     0.103
Appendix




                                                                     (0.113)       (0.718)     (0.156)      (0.313)    (0.168)    (0.159)

           Number of crops grown                                     0.366***      0.232       0.323***     0.125*     0.255***   0.261***

                                                                     (0.029)       (0.170)     (0.043)      (0.076)    (0.043)    (0.039)

           Household owns plot                                       1.978***      0.667       -0.023       -1.594**   0.309      0.252

                                                                     (0.155)       (1.028)     (0.221)      (0.729)    (0.265)    (0.295)

           Assistance post-earthquake:                               -0.071        1.948       0.195        -1.118     0.672      -0.768*

           fertilizer, tools, seeds, plant cutting                   (0.363)       (3.204)     (0.495)      (0.800)    (0.702)    (0.429)

           Household Characteristics:

           Household Head:

           Household head is male                                    0.096         0.588       -0.065       0.119      -0.185     -0.207

                                                                     (0.108)       (0.557)     (0.152)      (0.360)    (0.167)    (0.163)

           Age                                                       0.025         0.135       0.009        0.004      0.035      0.026

                                                                     (0.021)       (0.107)     (0.027)      (0.077)    (0.035)    (0.032)

           Age, squared                                              -0.000        -0.001      -0.000       -0.000     -0.000     -0.000




68
                                                   (0.000)           (0.001)          (0.000)           (0.001)    (0.000)    (0.000)

Years education                                    0.020             0.115            0.015             -0.023     0.071**    0.042*

                                                   (0.018)           (0.110)          (0.026)           (0.050)    (0.030)    (0.022)

Household Composition :

# of working age male members                      0.021             -0.159           0.169**           0.127      -0.000     0.091

                                                   (0.049)           (0.265)          (0.075)           (0.124)    (0.074)    (0.061)

# of working age female members                    0.004             0.067            0.036             0.061      0.020      -0.072

                                                   (0.054)           (0.330)          (0.079)           (0.202)    (0.078)    (0.067)

# of dependants                                    -0.031            -0.168           0.071*            -0.017     -0.091**   -0.030

                                                   (0.028)           (0.172)          (0.042)           (0.075)    (0.041)    (0.038)

Remittances :

Household receives remittances from abroad         0.253*            2.954***         0.113             -0.091     -0.137     0.098

                                                   (0.132)           (0.985)          (0.194)           (0.346)    (0.190)    (0.176)




                                                                                                                                         Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
Household receives remittances from within Haiti   0.121             1.038*           -0.112            0.251      -0.232     0.176

                                                   (0.111)           (0.599)          (0.152)           (0.305)    (0.170)    (0.172)

Other Economic Activities :

Nonfarm Household Enterprise                       -0.047            0.709            -0.040            -0.085     0.062      0.155

                                                   (0.112)           (0.697)          (0.166)           (0.311)    (0.162)    (0.151)

Other Nonfarm wage                                 -0.314*           -0.447           -0.353            -0.279     -0.386     0.183

                                                   (0.184)           (0.859)          (0.286)           (0.506)    (0.297)    (0.229)

Asset Based Wealth Index                           0.009             -0.021           0.015             0.047      0.013      0.005

                                                   (0.008)           (0.043)          (0.014)           (0.032)    (0.013)    (0.010)

Constant                                           3.474***          -4.218*          6.377***          8.931***   5.924***   7.311***

                                                   (0.561)           (2.645)          (0.772)           (2.060)    (1.407)    (1.048)

Observations                                       1,499.000         117.000          575.000           112.000    418.000    277.000

R-Squared                                          0.457             0.887            0.270             0.342      0.234      0.440



           Table A14a: Summary Statistics and test of mean differences by poverty status


 
                                                    Full       Poor             Nonpoor          Difference

Production:

    Value of total harvest (HTG)                    9504.1     8046.1           13064.7          -5,018.7**

    Value of total harvest per ha (HTG)             71428.7    80718.0          48742.5          31,975.4

    Log value of harvest per ha                     5.8        6.2              5.0              1.2***

Harvested Land Size:

    Harvested hectares                              0.9        0.9              0.9              -0.0

    Harvested hectares squared                      3.1        2.2              5.5              -3.3




                                                                                                                                         69
               Log of Harvested Hectares                    -0.2     -0.3     -0.1     -0.2***

               Log of Harvested Hectares squared            1.3      1.4      1.0      0.5**

           Physical inputs:

               Fertilizer incidence of use (%)              15.2     14.0     18.1     -4.1*

               Fertilizer cost per hectare (HTG)            684.2    517.0    1092.4   -575.4

               Log of Fertilizer cost per hectare           1.0      0.9      1.3      -0.4**

               Pesticide incidence of use (%)               14.6     15.3     12.8     2.5

               Pesticide cost per hectare (HTG)             84.4     90.2     70.3     20.0

               Log of Pesticide cost per hectare            0.7      0.7      0.6      0.1

               Seeds incidence of use (%)                   36.6     38.2     32.9     5.2*

               Seeds cost per hectare (HTG)                 1801.1   2031.2   1239.1   792.1

               Log of seeds cost per hectare                2.4      2.5      2.2      0.3

               Total input cost (HTG)                       3080.6   2540.8   4399.0   -1,858.2**

           Household and NonHousehold Labor:

               Number of NonHH labor used                   3.8      3.6      4.2      -0.6

               Number of NonHH labor used per hectare       13.4     15.9     7.3      8.6

               Log of NonHH labor per hectare               0.8      0.8      0.7      0.1

               Number of HH labor used                      1.7      1.9      1.2      0.7***

               Number of HH labor used per hectare          15.3     20.0     3.8      0.4***

               Log of HH labor used per hectare             0.7      0.8      0.4      16.3***

           Other agricultural characteristics:

               HH owns livestock (%)                        49.1     52.0     41.8     10.2***

               HH grows a cash crop (%)                     32.6     33.6     30.2     3.4

               Number of crops grown                        3.1      3.3      2.6      0.7***
Appendix




               HH owns plot                                 58.8     63.3     48.0     15.3***

               HH received productive input assistance(%)   1.0      1.0      1.0      0.0

           Socioeconomic and demographic Characteristics:

               HH head is male (%)                          61.5     61.8     60.6     1.2

               Age of head                                  49.4     49.7     48.8     0.9

               Age of head squared                          2682.4   2708.4   2618.7   89.7

               Education of head (yrs)                      2.8      2.1      4.5      -2.4***

               Number of working age males                  1.4      1.5      1.1      0.3***

               Number of working age females                1.3      1.4      1.1      0.3***

               Number of dependants                         2.2      2.6      1.2      1.4***

               HH received remittances from abroad (%)      21.4     15.7     35.2     -19.5***

               HH received remittances from Haiti (%)       27.4     27.7     26.6     1.1

               HH member receives pension (%)               0.3      0.3      0.3      -0.0




70
    HH member receives income from real estate
                                                                                       -3.3**
    transaction (%)                                      2.9      1.9        5.3

    HH member receives other income (%)                  5.9      5.1        7.8       -2.7*

                                                                             85.3       

Other Household Characteristics:

    HH is nonpoor (%)                                    29.1     na         na        na

    HH is food secure (FAO measure) (%)                  64.3     55.7       85.3      -29.6***

Nonagricultural Income:

    At least one HH member working in either NFE
                                                                                       -14.9***
    and/or NFW                                           41.2     36.9       51.8

    At least one HH member working in NFE                31.5     28.0       40.1      -12.1***

    At least one HH member working in NFW                13.8     13.2       15.3      -2.1

    Observations (unweighted)                            2261.0   1653.0     608.0      




                                                                                                          Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
                   Table A14b: Summary Statistics and test of mean differences
                               by poverty status- on Farm HH only


                                                   All Farm HH    Poor       Nonpoor       Difference

Production:

   Value of total harvest (HTG)                    14478.0        11450.1    24038.9       -12,588.8***

   Value of total harvest per ha (HTG)             108810.7       114867.4   89685.5       25,181.9

   Log value of harvest per ha                     8.9            8.8        9.2           -0.4**

Harvested Land Size:

   Harvested hectares                              1.3            1.2        1.6           -0.4**

   Harvested hectares squared                      4.8            3.1        10.0          -7.0

   Log of Harvested Hectares                       -0.3           -0.4       -0.2          -0.2*

   Log of Harvested Hectares squared               1.9            2.0        1.7           0.3

Physical inputs:

   Fertilizer incidence of use (%)                 23.2           20.0       33.3          -13.3***

   Fertilizer cost per hectare (HTG)               1042.3         735.8      2010.1        -1,274.3*

   Log of Fertilizer cost per hectare              1.5            1.2        2.4           -1.2***

   Pesticide incidence of use (%)                  22.2           21.8       23.5          -1.7

   Pesticide cost per hectare (HTG)                128.6          128.4      129.3         -0.9

   Log of Pesticide hectare                        1.1            1.0        1.2           -0.1

   Seeds incidence of use (%)                      55.8           54.3       60.6          -6.3*

   Seeds cost per hectare (HTG)                    2743.7         2890.6     2280.0        610.6

   Log of seeds cost per hectare                   3.7            3.6        4.1           -0.5*

    Total input cost (HTG)                         4692.8         3615.7     8094.1        -4,478.4***




                                                                                                          71
           Household and NonHousehold Labor:

               Number of NonHH labor used                        5.7      5.1      7.7      -2.6**

               Number of NonHH labor used per hectare            20.4     22.6     13.5     9.2

               Log of NonHH labor per hectare                    1.2      1.2      1.4      -0.2

               Number of HH labor used                           2.6      2.7      2.2      0.5***

               Number of HH labor used per hectare               23.3     28.5     6.9      21.6***

               Log of HH labor used per hectare                  1.0      1.1      0.8      0.4***

           Other agricultural characteristics:

               HH owns livestock (%)                             74.7     74.0     77.0     -2.9

               HH grows a cash crop (%)                          49.7     47.8     55.6     -7.8*

               Number of crops grown                             4.7      4.6      4.7      -0.1

               HH owns plot                                      89.6     90.1     88.3     1.8

               HH received productive input assistance(%)        1.4      1.3      1.8      -0.5

                                                                 38.2     36.7     42.8     -6.1***

           Socioeconomic and demographic Characteristics:

               HH head is male (%)                               69.6     68.2     74.0     -6.1

               Age of head                                       51.2     50.9     52.3     -1.4

               Age of head squared                               2826.6   2789.5   2943.9   -154.4

               Education of head (yrs)                           2.0      1.6      3.3      -1.7***

               Number of working age males                       1.5      1.6      1.3      0.3***

               Number of working age females                     1.4      1.5      1.0      0.4***

               Number of dependants                              2.3      2.7      1.3      1.3***

               HH received remittances from abroad (%)           18.1     14.6     29.2     -14.6***

               HH received remittances from Haiti (%)            24.7     23.4     28.9     -5.6*
Appendix




               HH member receives pension (%)                    0.3      0.3      0.5      -0.2

               HH member receives income from real estate
                                                                                            -6.1***
               transaction (%)                                   3.6      2.1      8.2

               HH member receives other income (%)               5.9      4.9      9.0      -4.2*

           Other Household Characteristics:

               HH is nonpoor (%)                                 24.1     na       na       na

               HH is food secure (FAO measure) (%)               64.6     57.3     87.8     -30.5***

           Nonagricultural Income:

               At least one HH member working in either NFE
                                                                                            -8.4**
               and/or NFW                                        28.3     26.2     34.7

               At least one HH member working in NFE             23.6     21.3     31.0     -9.7***

               At least one HH member working in NFW             6.8      7.0      6.0      1.0

               Observations (unweighted)                         1499     1180     319       


           Significance denoted *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




72
73
     Rural development in Haiti: Challenges and opportunities
74
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW,
Washington, DC 20433, USA.

www.worldbank.org
