                                  95558




            Making Roads Safer
Learning from the world bank’s experienc e
Making Roads Safer
Learning from the World Bank’s Experience
© 2014 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The
World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

         The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as
long as full attribution to this work is given.
         Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-
mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




ii
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS .................................................................................................................................. V

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................................................ VI

OVERVIEW........................................................................................................................................... VII
            Findings and Lessons ............................................................................................................................ viii
            Proposed Way Forward ............................................................................................................................ x

1.          INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................ 1
            United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety ....................................................................................3
            Purpose of Study ......................................................................................................................................4
            Methodology .............................................................................................................................................5

2.          THE WORLD BANK AND ROAD SAFETY ............................................................................... 8
            The World Bank Support for Road Safety Evolves ...................................................................................8
            Partnership Arrangements ......................................................................................................................11

3.          THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO ........................................................................... 15
            The Road Safety Portfolio Description....................................................................................................15
            The Road Safety Portfolio Performance .................................................................................................23

4.          FINDINGS AND LESSONS ..................................................................................................... 32
            Variable Progress ...................................................................................................................................32
            Project Design and Implementation Shortcomings .................................................................................32
            Insufficient Funding ................................................................................................................................35
            Research Gaps.......................................................................................................................................35
            Strong Government Commitment as a Key to Success..........................................................................35
            Relevant Lessons from High-Income Countries .....................................................................................37
            Change Takes Time ...............................................................................................................................38

5.          THE WAY FORWARD ............................................................................................................. 39

REFERENCES...................................................................................................................................... 42

APPENDIX A. CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES ................................................. 44

APPENDIX B. LIST OF PROJECTS WITH ROAD SAFETY CONTENT DURING STUDY PERIOD... 52




                                                                                                                                                                   iii
CONTENTS


APPENDIX C. LIST OF PROJECT PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT REPORTS RELEVANT TO
THIS STUDY ......................................................................................................................................... 57

APPENDIX D. LIST OF SAMPLE OF NON-LENDING ACTIVITIES .................................................... 58

APPENDIX E. CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES ................................................... 60

Tables
Table 1.1. United Nations Decade of Action Targets ............................................................................................. 3
Table 3.1. Distribution of Road Safety Projects by Region .................................................................................. 20
Table 3.2. Distribution of Types of Intervention by Region (as a percentage of all Interventions) ...................... 21

Figures
Figure 3.1. Growth in Road Safety Projects (approved FY02–13) ....................................................................... 16
Figure 3.2. Road Safety Lending (approved FY02–13)........................................................................................ 16
Figure 3.3. Distribution of Active and Closed Road Safety Project by Region ..................................................... 20

Box
Box 3.1. Argentina’s Flagship Road Safety Demonstration Project ..................................................................... 28




iv
Abbreviations
AFR        Africa Region (Sub-Saharan)
ADB        Asian Development Bank
ANSV       Agencia Nacional de Seguridad Vial (National Road Safety Agency,
           Argentina)
APL        adaptable program loan
AusAid     Australian Agency for International Development
DNV        Dirección Nacional de Vialidad (National Road Agency, Argentina)
DVELA      Driver and Vehicle Examination and Licensing Agency
EAP        East Asia and Pacific Region
EC         European Commission
ECA        Europe and Central Asia Region
EU         European Union
FCT        Federal Capital Territory (Nigeria)
FRSC       Federal Road Safety Corps (Nigeria)
FTSP       Fundamental Traffic Safety Program (Japan)
GEF        Global Environmental Facility
GRSF       Global Road Safety Facility
GRSP       Global Road Safety Partnership
IADB       Inter-American Development Bank
ICR        Implementation Completion and Results Report
IEG        Independent Evaluation Group
iRAP       International Road Assessment Program
ISR        Implementation Supervision Report
LAC        Latin America and the Caribbean Region
LED        light emitting diode
MDGs       Millennium Development Goals
MENA       Middle East and North Africa Region
OECD       Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PDO        project development objective
PPARs      Project Performance Assessment Reports
SAR        South Asia Region
SIDA       Swedish International Development Agency
SSATP      Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program
TTL        task team leader
UK         United Kingdom
UN         United Nations
UP         Uttar Pradesh
WHO        World Health Organization
All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.


                                                                              v
Acknowledgments
This study would not have been possible without the contributions and support of a
great many people. Fang Xu was the evaluation manager, and Peter Freeman was
the main author. Kavita Mathur and Thao Thi Phuong Nguyen compiled and
analyzed the significant amount of road safety material and were involved in all
stages of the report. Thao was also involved in the survey of the implementing
agencies and prepared much of the information in the tables. Peter Freeman and
Fang Xu interviewed task team managers and specialists. Romayne Pereira
provided administrative support and Barbara Rice provided editorial services.

Thanks are also due to Pieter Venter, chief executive officer of the Global Road
Safety Partnership in Geneva, for his valuable peer review comments and to
Anthony Bliss, a road safety specialist based in New Zealand, for his insightful
input. Special thanks are also extended to Tawia Addo-Ashong, Dipan Bose, and
Ramzi Tabbara from the Global Road Safety Facility. Comments and inputs were
also received from Elena Chesheva, Kenneth Chomitz, Radoslaw Czapski, Said
Dahdah, Mohammed Essikali, Ke Fang, Gladys Frame, Fabio Galli, Ben Gericke,
Arturo Gomez, Reda Hamedoun, and Justin Runji, coordinator, Sub-Saharan Africa
Transport Policy Program. Martin Humphries, Eric Lancelot, Midori Makino,
Chanin Manopiniwes, Tesfamichael Mitiku, Caroline Monsalve, Maria Nuñez,
Veronica Raffo, Pia Schneider, Marc Shotten, Natalya Stankevich, and Reindert
Westra.




vi
Overview
Every year, nearly 1.3 million people worldwide are killed in road crashes, which
have become the leading cause of death among people between the ages of fifteen
and twenty-nine. More than 90 percent of the world’s road fatalities occur in
developing countries, and half of the accident victims are pedestrians, cyclists, and
motorcyclists. Road accidents disproportionately affect the poor, making road safety
an economic development issue. Many crash victims are of working age, and their
death or serious injury too frequently leaves their dependents destitute.
Governments in poorer countries have assumed they cannot act to reduce death
rates until they are wealthier. However, many of today’s road safety measures can
be implemented relatively inexpensively to reduce death rates, if managed correctly.

The United Nations (UN) invited the World Health Organization (WHO) to
coordinate a drive to improve road safety globally. It also proclaimed a Decade of
Action for Road Safety (2011–2020) to stabilize and then reduce the level of traffic
fatalities and serious injuries around the world. More than 100 countries as well as
multilateral development banks—including the World Bank—support the
interventions.

For many years, the Bank’s involvement in road safety focused primarily on
engineering aspects on a project-by-project basis. However, in 2004 the Bank and
WHO produced a seminal publication advocating the “safe systems” approach
successfully being used by the 34 member countries of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development. Under a safe system, the whole transport
system—including road engineering, user behavior, vehicle safety, policing, and
accident response—is optimally designed to protect people from death and serious
injury.

In 2008, the Bank made road safety a pillar of its transport sector strategy and
adopted the safe systems approach in one or two projects in each Region. More
recently, the Bank fully adopted the tactic for all roads projects where feasible and
encouraged road safety authorities to adopt this practice nationwide.

The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) is aware of the rapidly worsening road
safety situation in the developing world and efforts by the Bank's transport sector to
encourage the use of best practices in road projects. This study, a pioneering
learning product created by IEG in cooperation with transport operational staff and
the Bank’s Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF), aims to provide useful knowledge to
Bank operational staff involved with road safety, to support Bank and client


                                                                                        vii
OVERVIEW


countries in fine tuning their road safety strategies and practices, and to support the
acceleration of the Bank’s operational road safety agenda.

The study’s central contributions to these goals are summarized below.


Findings and Lessons
          To date, the Bank’s support improved road safety to varying degrees in
           several middle-income countries such as Argentina, China, Colombia,
           Nigeria, and Vietnam. Sierra Leone is an example of a still-fragile, low-
           income country moving in the right direction. Progress was more modest in
           some other countries. A brief client survey showed that most implementing
           agencies, with two exceptions, observed a notable improvement in Bank
           support for road safety matters between 2008 and 2013.
          The Global Road Safety Facility greatly supported the Bank’s progress in
           road safety. GRSF has an oversight and training role in the Bank’s road safety
           portfolio; it also provides grants for road safety activities, allocating $17
           million in grants to date. Since 2006, GRSF promoted the safe systems
           approach globally with support from the World Bank and from other
           multilateral development banks and donors. An independent evaluation of
           the facility in 2009 concluded that it was making a difference with limited
           available resources. However, the evaluation also determined the facility is
           under-resourced. IEG concurs that GRSF is a highly flexible model and makes
           good use of its limited resources.
          There is room to improve the design and implementation of road projects.
           The study found that some projects have a safety objective, but lack specific
           activities to support it. In other cases, complex project designs were beyond
           the capacity of institutions to implement. At times, when financing highway
           improvement or construction, the project design did not include activities for
           improving the behavior of road users and raising their awareness. As a result,
           the accident rate increased when the highway opened to traffic. Some road
           safety projects share the typical implementation difficulties found in most
           other projects, such as problems with bidding, governance, cost estimation,
           consultant nonperformance, and financial constraints. The most common
           implementation issue is that the lead agency is more concerned with
           completing road works and neglects implementing safety subcomponents
           until it is too late to complete them before project closure. The study found
           several allocations of funds from road safety activities to civil works. In
           addition, designing a good results framework and consistently collecting




viii
                                                                          OVERVIEW


    information for road safety indicators have always been challenging. The
    main reason is often a lack of good accident statistics in many countries.
   The funding gap for road safety remains. The Commission for Global Safety
    drew attention to donors’ comparative neglect of road safety and
    recommended that 10 percent of all road infrastructure funding be committed
    to safety in the future. This has not yet happened. IEG’s analysis of World
    Bank funding for road safety finds a commitment figure of about 3.5 percent.
    This figure is growing because of the Bank’s decision to mainstream road
    safety in its projects whenever practical. However, not all governments are
    receptive to spending additional funds on this objective. At times, positive
    rhetoric is not supported by an action agenda.
   Knowledge about road safety in the developing world needs to be
    enhanced. The study identified a comparative lack of research on the cost
    effectiveness of road safety measures in the developing world. Similarly, the
    impact of typical road safety measures in high-income countries is known,
    but scant information is available about the effects of these same measures in
    the developing country context. For example, how well do enforcement
    measures work in countries where petty police corruption is an issue? What
    is the impact on road safety of the widespread use of minibus, taxis,
    motorcycles, and other types of transport more commonly used in developing
    countries?
   Strong government commitment to improving road safety is a key to
    success. A strong coordinating entity for road safety is equally important, one
    that is empowered to make decisions, has sufficient budget and staff capacity,
    and has a mandate to coordinate road safety matters across numerous
    departments and agencies. This is true for both high-income and developing
    countries. Japan is an example where the prime minister leads the national
    initiative to improve road safety. Sweden, the global leader in best practice,
    also has high-level government support. Experience from the Bank’s flagship
    road safety project in Argentina, for example, shows that identifying an
    individual on the borrower’s side who is passionate about road safety and
    having a government that is strongly supportive make a substantial
    difference to the likelihood of success and sustainability. Several countries
    show commitment to varying degrees, including China, Colombia, Georgia,
    Kenya, Poland, Uruguay, and some states in India. But other countries lack
    the necessary level of engagement—these include Mali, Peru, Rwanda, and
    many others.
   Developing countries could learn from high-income countries. The study
    found that although structures may differ, the general characteristics of road
    safety organizations in high-income countries include a strong central lead


                                                                                 ix
OVERVIEW


        agency that coordinates with a broad range of stakeholders. Other key factors
        include secure and sustainable funding, a rigorous results framework to
        measure progress, and a vision for reducing death and injury rates that is
        shared and strongly supported at a political level. Although high-income
        countries have considerable resources to apply to improving road safety,
        developing countries can adopt many of the best practices. They can make
        progress and can improve accident statistics through low-cost measures, even
        when constrained by a lack of capacity. The Bank’s experience suggests that
        for each country, a road safety assessment and investment plan can be
        tailored to the affordability and capacity of the country. The safe systems
        approach, customized to fit each individual case, is being applied in both
        middle-income countries such as China, India, and Vietnam, and in poorer
        countries such as Kenya and Tanzania.
       Sustainable road safety improvements take time. The study observed that it
        took two decades for highly resourced, developed countries to significantly
        reduce accident rates. Conceivably, less well-off countries with weaker
        institutional capacity might take longer to achieve these gains, so the Bank’s
        engagement needs to be focused and persistent. Enhancing the Bank’s own
        knowledge and capacity on road safety is also important. A recent
        requirement calling for all Bank transport practice staff to take a road safety
        training course would enhance their knowledge and would make a
        significant impact. But there is a learning curve for staff before they can
        consistently apply this knowledge and fully adapt to the more holistic safe
        systems approach. In IEG’s assessment, the Bank is headed in the right
        direction overall, and momentum is increasing. But the Bank needs to be
        realistic about what can be achieved with its existing resources and about
        how long the change process takes.


Proposed Way Forward
The year 2015 will be important for the Bank’s reputation as a premier lender in the
road safety field because this is the midpoint year for the UN Decade of Action.
Progress is being made, but it is unlikely that the ambitious goals set for the decade
can be met unless the initiative moves forward swiftly and substantial additional
funding is deployed. The study proposes a way forward:

       Make a bolder commitment to road safety including more financial
        support. Several global initiatives seek funding—climate change, disaster risk
        reduction, and improved water and sanitation, among others, are falling short
        of their targets. Mobilizing funds for road safety is also difficult, despite


x
                                                                           OVERVIEW


    carnage on the roads. Unlike campaigns to stop the spread of infectious
    diseases, where private sector funds are readily available because of the profit
    incentive in the pharmaceutical industry, roads are largely a public sector
    good. Attempts to secure funds from the insurance and motor manufacturing
    industries have had limited success so far, but that does not mean this avenue
    is closed. Bilateral and multilateral development institutions are still the
    obvious source of funds, and the World Bank is seen as the premier
    institution with a strong leadership role. Selecting an arbitrary percentage
    target for road safety funding would be a mechanical solution; however;
    clearly the Bank needs to make a bolder commitment and give GRSF more
    support, including financial support. This step would likely involve high-
    level stakeholder meetings and perhaps engaging professional fundraisers.
   Update the Bank’s transport business strategy. The GRSF strategic plan is
    current, but the transport sector business plan is out of date. A new plan will
    likely reflect the framework of the reorganized Bank in relation to global
    practices and cross-cutting solution areas. The Bank’s next transport business
    strategy could also benefit from considering three things: the implications of
    scaling-up road safety activities; the need for collaboration across Global
    Practices such as Health, Transport, and Urban, Rural and Social
    Development; and the effectiveness of the safe systems approach.
   Improve project design and focus more on the implementation of road
    safety activities. Safety aspects, where applicable, should be included in
    project objectives, and road safety components should be self-standing.
    Appropriate due diligence to mitigate for speed and other factors should be
    mandatory, and the local community should be consulted on the road safety
    aspects of the project. Better project supervision can ensure that safety
    components start early and are not delayed to the point that there is a serious
    risk they might not be completed. A safety components status review could
    receive particular attention during the project’s mid-term review. Designing a
    good results framework is another crucial factor, since progress cannot be
    measured without performance indicators. On the borrower’s side, if the
    country has poor road accident statistics, an immediate priority is to create a
    crash database and train police to improve accident reporting.
   Accelerate toward the road safety “tipping point.” A road safety tipping
    point is reached when governments and the public start to treat road safety as
    a major priority. Experience suggests that often a tipping point is reached
    only after a series of terrible crashes arouses the public’s anger and pressures
    politicians to take action, as evidenced in Argentina and Turkey. In
    developing countries, especially where affected people have less voice, the
    Bank needs to be persistent in advocating for road safety measures and could


                                                                                  xi
OVERVIEW


          discuss the need for improved road safety with its clients at the highest levels
          of government. Engaging nongovernmental organizations could also be
          critical in shaping public opinion and influencing the government.
         Enhance the Bank’s own road safety knowledge. As the Bank mainstreams
          road safety, it is expected that the number of interventions in vehicle safety,
          road user behavior, and post-crash care will increase. The Bank should record
          the experiences of the application of these various road safety measures to
          improve its best practice. This may involve encouraging borrowers to
          continue recording data even after the project is closed. It could also
          encourage partners, clients, and other stakeholders to contribute information
          from non-Bank-financed projects. The Road Safety Observatory being
          implemented in Latin American countries deserves strong support and could
          be replicated in other Regions.
         Set minimum safety requirements. Bank financing should never be used to
          build an unsafe road, even if enhancing safety increases the project’s cost. In
          particular, safety aspects should be part of the acceptance process at the
          detailed design and pre-opening stages. This aim should be emphasized in
          the Guidelines for Road Safety Management Capacity Reviews and Safe
          System Projects (Bliss and Breen 2013). The design should account for
          appropriate due diligence to mitigate for speed and other factors, and the
          local community should be consulted on the road safety aspects of the
          project. Although making road safety a safeguard could be considered, such a
          move may not be feasible at this time. However, a strong argument can be
          made for introducing mandatory road safety audits linked to road investment
          loans or credits. A simplified version may be needed for low-capacity
          countries, but an audit requirement would still be essential. Efforts could also
          be made to ensure that discussions with the public about a proposed road
          project include road safety implications and potential remedial measures.
          Funding for these activities could either be part of the loan or grant or take
          the form of a project preparation facility.
         Copy innovative and effective ideas where appropriate. When innovative
          ideas are proved to be effective to improve road safety, the Bank should
          encourage replicating those ideas where appropriate. For example, an
          important subcomponent of the Argentina Road Safety Project included a $10
          million incentive program that helped participating provinces and
          municipalities finance innovative road safety initiatives that otherwise would
          not have been funded because of competition for limited financial resources.
          A similar Challenge Fund was instituted in India in the Kerala State
          Transport Project 2.




xii
                                                                         OVERVIEW


   Road safety interventions should be appropriate for the country’s
    circumstances. Every country is different, and although the principles behind
    success in road safety are tried and tested, their application must be
    customized to fit each individual case.




                                                                               xiii
1. Introduction
Every year, nearly 1.3 million people are killed in road accidents worldwide (WHO
2013a), and road crashes are the leading cause of death among people between the
ages of fifteen and twenty-nine. More than 90 percent of the world’s road fatalities
occur in developing countries, and half of these deaths are pedestrians, cyclists, and
motorcyclists—the most vulnerable road users. Only 28 countries, or just 7 percent
of the world’s population, have adequate laws to address the main risk factors,
which are excessive speed, drunk driving, and failure to use crash helmets, seat
belts, and child restraints. If no action is taken to reduce this carnage, the annual
number of deaths from road traffic injuries could top 1.9 million by 2030 and
become the fifth highest cause of death globally (WHO 2009).

Road accidents disproportionately affect the poor, making road safety an economic
development issue. Many crash victims are of working age and their death or
disability too frequently leaves their dependents destitute. Most victims of road
crashes are not inside a motor vehicle, as World Bank statistics from the South Asia
Region demonstrate.

For example, in Dhaka, Bangladesh pedestrians comprise almost 75 percent of road
accident fatalities, and in New Delhi, India, and Colombo, Sri Lanka, pedestrians,
pedal cyclists, and motorcyclists account for more than 80 percent of the total road
traffic deaths. Road accidents result in economic burdens that pose major challenges
to health care systems. The economic cost of road crashes and injuries is
conservatively estimated to be between 1 and 3 percent of the gross national product
for low- and middle-income countries, or about $65 billion—which, ironically, is
more than these countries received in development assistance (Peden et al. 2004).

Disability reinforces poverty. Exclusion and marginalization of disabled people
reduce their opportunities to contribute productively to the household and the
community and thus increase the risk of poverty. Studies of the impact of vehicle
accidents on poor communities in Bangladesh and India show that most poor
households went into debt by borrowing money to cope with the additional costs
and lack of income following a road crash. Some also reduced their financial security
by selling an asset, and few chose or were able to take on extra work. Consequences
included reduced household income and reduced food consumption for the victim’s
family (Aeron-Thomas 2004). “Poverty isn’t just a lack of money; it’s a lack of
knowledge and a lack of understanding. Middle-class car drivers believe in cause
and effect, so they buy safe cars and wear seatbelts. Many poor people see life as
something that just happens to them, and that they cannot control. Therefore, to


                                                                                         1
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
poor people, road accidents are simply bad luck, rather than bad management.
Worse, in many country areas, there is no public transport, so the poor often drive
illegal cars that won’t protect the occupants in a collision” (Matthew-Wilson 2014).

Consequently, investment in road safety usually leads to substantial net economic
gains, according to the Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA 2006). In
high-income countries, road safety actions in general yield economic returns ranging
from 9 to 22 percent. Unfortunately, reliable data are not available for low-income
and middle-income countries, but based on reductions in the high level of crashes,
some individual World Bank projects estimate high rates of return. The Vietnam
Road Safety Project showed returns at closure of between 59 and 74 percent,
whereas the active Argentina Road Safety Project, using disability-adjusted life
years, estimates that the economic rate of return will be in the order of 122 percent.

During the past two decades, significant progress was made in in public health
programs to fight infectious diseases in developing countries. Polio is confined to a
handful of countries, HIV/AIDS is gradually being brought under control, and the
incidence of malaria and tuberculosis is being reduced. However, the human-made
epidemic of road crashes has not been treated with the same urgency. Although $4
billion per year was spent on controlling infectious diseases, road safety has not
attracted equal financial support. Even so, building roads is an effective way to
stimulate economic growth that is financed by development banks and donors.
There is no shortage of road projects yielding robust rates of return on investment,
but not all of these roads are safe. The Economist cites the Northern Corridor in
Kenya, one of East Africa’s main trade routes, which was upgraded in 2008 with
European Union funding. Most of the $91 million was spent on asphalt, but little
was spent to address safety issues. Traffic travels at speeds of up to 80 mph, but little
provision is made for passing lanes, and pedestrians are not protected (The
Economist 2014).

Affluent countries made a concerted effort in the 1970s to make roads safer.
Governments in poorer countries assumed they had no option but to follow a
similar path and accept alarming rates of road deaths until they were wealthy
enough to reverse them. However, current thinking suggests that many road safety
measures can be implemented somewhat inexpensively, such as well-sited central
barriers to prevent head-on collisions, speed bumps to slow traffic passing through
villages, and improving public awareness of the importance of wearing seatbelts
and motorcycle helmets. The “low hanging fruit,” where the most impact can be
achieved on reducing accident rates, varies from country to country. The biggest
single constraint to reducing traffic crashes remains a lack of capacity in the entities
responsible for road safety.


2
                                                                                                        CHAPTER 1
                                                                                                     INTRODUCTION

United Nations Decade of Action for Road Safety
Aware of the worsening road safety situation in developing countries and taking
note of the preliminary findings of the Commission for Global Road Safety (2008),
which was founded by the FIA Foundation, the United Nations (UN) General
Assembly adopted a resolution in 2008 on the urgent need to improve road safety
globally (UN 2008). It already recognized the limited capacity of many countries to
address the road safety problem. Accordingly, it invited WHO to coordinate road
safety within the UN (in collaboration with the UN regional commissions) and to
organize Road Safety Weeks as platforms for awareness. The Commission for Global
Road Safety finalized its report in 2009. At the first Global Ministerial Conference on
Road Safety, held in Moscow in 2010, the report was discussed as a basis for the UN
General Assembly’s landmark proclamation of a Decade of Action for Road Safety
(2011–2020). The initiative was formally launched on May 11, 2011. It aims to
stabilize and then reduce the level of road traffic fatalities and serious injuries
around the world. More than 100 countries as well as multilateral development
banks supported the intervention. The ambitious goal advocated by the Commission
for Global Safety and adopted by the UN was to reduce the predicted level of traffic
fatalities by 5 million and the expected number of serious injuries in developing
countries by 50 million by the year 2020 (UN 2011). Targets by Region are shown in
table 1.1.1 The Commission also drew attention to the neglect of road safety by
donors and recommended that 10 percent of all road infrastructure funding should
be committed to safety in the future.

Table 1.1. United Nations Decade of Action Targets
                                                                                                      Serious
                          Actual                                UN Fatality       Lives to be
                                             Estimated                                                Injuries
         Region          Fatalities                             Target for          Saved
                                               (2020)                                                 Avoided
                          (2010)                                  2020           (2011–2020)
                                                                                                    (2011–2020)
 AFR                     248,130                365,000          182,500            937,000          9,370,000
 EAP                     313,317                646,000          323,000          1,640,000         16,400,000
 ECA                      85,979                 97,000           48,500            243,000          2,430,000
 LAC                      95,877                130,000           65,000            325,000          3,250,000
 MNA                     100,655                152,000           76,000            380,000          3,800,000
 SAR                     275,569                590,000          295,000          1,475,000         14,750,000
 Total                 1,119,527              1,980,000          990,000          5,000,000         50,000,000
Source: See statement made on April 19, 2011— “MDB Road Safety Initiative: A Development Priority.”
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTTOPGLOROASAF/Resources/WB_GRSF_MDB_web.pdf.
Note: Excludes high-income countries. AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC =
Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia.

The Commission is now pushing to include road safety in the framework that
replaces the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).2 Since 2000, the MDGs



                                                                                                                   3
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
provided a focus for global development efforts. However, the MDGs did not
include either transport or road safety, although road crashes result in higher levels
of fatalities than communicable diseases such as tuberculosis and malaria. Including
road safety in the MDGs’ successor—the Sustainable Development Goals that will
launch in 2015—is seen as critical for mobilizing sufficient political and financial
support for the UN Decade of Action for Road Safety to achieve its goals. Road
safety currently falls under the proposed theme “Sustainable Cities and Thematic
Settlements,” but this matter is still under debate; 2015 will mark the midpoint of the
Decade of Action for Road Safety.

The 2013 Global Status Report details early trends since the Decade of Action for
Road Safety began (WHO 2013b). It shows no overall reduction in the number of
people killed on the world’s roads (nearly 1.3 million annually). However, this
plateau should be considered in the context of a corresponding 15 percent global
increase in the number of registered vehicles, suggesting that interventions to
improve global road safety mitigated the expected rise in the number of deaths.
Eighty-eight countries—in which almost 1.6 billion people live—reduced the
number of deaths on their roads between 2007 and 2010, showing that
improvements are possible and more lives will be saved if countries take further
action. However, of concern is that 87 countries saw an increase in road trafﬁc
deaths during the same period. The report also shows that the highest road trafﬁc
fatality rates are in middle-income countries, particularly in the Africa Region. More
than three-quarters of all road trafﬁc deaths occur among young males.


Purpose of Study
The Bank has been active in supporting road safety in its client countries and
recognized that it should invest more resources in this area. During the 1980s and
1990s, Bank-financed road projects generally accounted for safety and followed the
accepted wisdom of the time by emphasizing road engineering aspects. In recent
years, the Bank moved to adopt the safe systems approach to road safety developed
by the 34 countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) and increasingly being adopted globally. The aim of safe
systems is to establish a more forgiving road system that accounts for human
fallibility and vulnerability. Under a safe system, the whole transport system—
including road engineering, user behavior, vehicle safety, policing, and post-crash
care—is optimally designed to protect people from death and serious injury.

In 2002–2013, the Bank approved 843 road projects, of which 166 could be
considered road safety projects because they have road safety objectives or road



4
                                                                               CHAPTER 1
                                                                            INTRODUCTION
safety activities. The Bank’s commitment for road safety activities is estimated at
$790 million. Because 2015 will mark the midpoint of the Decade of Action for Road
Safety, it is important for the Bank to take stock of what has been done and how
effective its support to road safety has been. The information and lessons generated
could be used to improve and fine-tune the strategic approach and road safety
practices in both the Bank and its client countries.

The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) was aware of the troubling road safety
situation in the developing world and the Bank transport sector’s efforts to
encourage the use of best international safety practice in road projects. After
discussions with several senior transport sector staff, IEG decided to conduct a
study on road safety because it believed a learning product on issues and
experiences in implementing projects with road safety content could be highly
beneficial to accelerating the operational road safety agenda. The IEG study is a
pioneering learning product conducted in cooperation with transport operational
staff and the Bank’s Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF). The study’s objective is to
thoroughly understand which road safety practices the World Bank supported
during the last decade, the degree of success that was achieved, and which projects
are useful examples of successful implementation going forward. The IEG study
proposal to initiate this work was presented to staff at the State of the Transport
Sector Meeting on October 24, 2013 and further discussed at a Transport Sector
Board meeting on March 19, 2014.


Methodology
The evaluative procedures focus on drawing lessons and experiences relevant for
future operations in the sector. The key elements used for this study include a
portfolio review, interviews with task team leaders (TTLs), a literature review, and a
brief client survey.

 Regarding the portfolio, GRSF conducted its own review of road safety activities
(since its inception in 2006) and made its findings and database available to the IEG
evaluation team. The IEG study expands the scope of this work to cover all World
Bank projects, both active and closed, between FY02 and FY13. A total of 843 road
transport projects were screened and 166 were identified as road safety projects.
Projects were further analyzed to derive the number of projects with road safety
content by type (for example, infrastructure safety, vehicle safety, road user
behavior, capacity building, and post-crash care). Progress in Argentina’s flagship
road safety project and other selected pilots was given special attention and
presented in the case studies. To the extent possible, the study tries to not duplicate



                                                                                          5
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
the GRSF analysis and findings; instead, it builds on this rich knowledge platform
through more in-depth evaluation of implementation experiences in active projects
with case studies supplemented by a review of actual results from closed projects
and active projects. Reviewing the Bank’s non-lending road safety activities and
experiences where relevant from developed countries was also part of the study.
The study also draws on the latest international thinking on road safety where it is
pertinent to developing countries.

The team interviewed transport staff who were involved in major projects with road
safety objectives or components, and in some cases asked TTLs to provide additional
information, especially about mature active projects with significant road safety
components. A total of 25 TTLs and specialists were interviewed. Implementation
Completion and Results Reports, IEG reviews, and lessons learned were used for
closed projects. For active projects, project appraisal documents, implementation
support reports, and aide memoires were reviewed.

IEG also conducted a brief client survey to better understand the implementing
agencies’ perspectives on the effectiveness of the Bank’s support to road safety. The
road safety content of previous evaluations of the World Bank and other multilateral
organizations was also reviewed. These included the IEG transport evaluation (IEG
2007a) and the institutional capability and financial viability evaluation (IEG 2013a).
In particular, work in connection with the steep rise in motorcycle ownership was
studied, especially in Asia such as the effects of the introduction of the compulsory
crash helmets in Vietnam.

The study has four parts. After introducing the deteriorating road safety situation
worldwide in chapter 1, chapter 2 gives the context in which the Bank decided to
ramp up its focus on road safety and how its strategies evolved over time. It then
assesses the portfolio review findings in chapter 3. Chapter 4 examines the effects of
closed road projects, many of which were implemented based solely on engineering
aspects, and then turns to active projects, where an increasing number followed the
safe systems approach. The findings are consolidated in chapter 5 on the learning
over the years and from international best practice, leading to a summary of aspects
on which the Bank needs to focus in the short to medium term. The typology of
interventions discussed in this study that the Bank now follows is:

       To incorporate best practice road safety engineering design to specific road
        segments it finances.
       To apply a safe systems approach to specific road segments financed.
       To apply a safe systems approach to road safety on a corridor, Region, or
        national basis, not restricted to specific Bank-financed investments.


6
                                                                                         CHAPTER 1
                                                                                      INTRODUCTION
Appendix A presents information for high-income countries. A full list of projects
examined with road safety content is provided in appendixes B, C, and D, and
appendix E summarizes the main case studies.


1 The table is drawn from a statement made on April 19, 2011— “MDB Road Safety Initiative: A
Development Priority”—by seven Millennium Development Banks (MDBs): African Development
Bank, Asian Development Bank, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European
Investment Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, and World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTTOPGLOROASAF/Resources/WB_GRSF_MDB_web.pdf
2 The eight Millennium Development Goals, which range from halving extreme poverty rates to
halting the spread of HIV/AIDS by 2015, form a blueprint agreed to by 189 countries and the world’s
leading development institutions.




                                                                                                  7
2. The World Bank and Road Safety
The World Bank Support for Road Safety Evolves
The World Bank stayed informed on developments in road infrastructure safety
during the 1980s and 1990s. The road projects financed generally accounted for
safety and followed the accepted wisdom of the time by emphasizing road
engineering. This involved incorporating road safety measures into highway design
for new construction projects, eliminating accident black spots (sometimes called
hazardous locations) in rehabilitation projects, and applying appropriate safety
measures for workers and road users in the construction zone itself.

An informal best practice approach included information sharing, but the Bank’s
transport policy documents put a limited emphasis on road safety. The 1996 policy
document Development in Practice: Sustainable Transport covered road safety under its
section on environmental sustainability (World Bank 1996). It highlighted the high
injury rates of pedestrians and cyclists in developing countries and advocated safety
audits for new construction and traffic management schemes. The Bank contended
there should be separate rights-of-way for pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles
where possible, as well as improvements where different types of traffic intersect. It
also stressed the need for improved regulations and their enforcement, and better
road user education.

The document further noted that rehabilitated roads often retained poor horizontal
and vertical alignments; new surfaces, wider seals, and straighter alignments tended
to encourage higher speed, which needed mitigation measures to avoid increased
accident severity. In this regard, there was some evidence of occasional
inconsistencies in approach between different projects in different countries. This
was due to borrowers—and perhaps task team leaders (TTLs)—prioritizing the
length of road completed over potential safety concerns, and neglecting to mitigate
for higher traffic speeds after the road improvements. The 2002 Urban Transport
Strategy Review, Cities on the Move, also discussed the importance of enhanced
road safety education and other road safety measures such as better road accident
data collection, improved road design and traffic management, safety audits and
improved medical response (World Bank 2002). Road safety, however, was rarely
center stage, and few projects had objectives or components directed specifically at
road safety.

The picture began to change in the late 1990s when the World Bank perceived that
road safety needed a more focused approach based on the use of safe systems.


                                                                                     8
                                                                             CHAPTER 2
                                                        THE WORLD BANK AND ROAD SAFETY
Under a safe system, the whole transport system, including road engineering, user
behavior, vehicle safety, policing, and accident response, is designed as much as
possible to protect people from death and serious injury. The Bank was active in
helping establish the Global Road Safety Partnership (GRSP) in 1999. GRSP was set
up as a nonprofit organization to bring together government, the private sector, and
civil society. Its role is to create and support multi-sector road safety partnerships
engaged in frontline good practice road safety interventions in countries and
communities throughout the world. Its main work has been more in supporting
road-user-related interventions, instead of the road infrastructure environment
traditionally covered in World Bank highway projects.

In 2004, the World Bank and the World Health Organization (WHO) jointly
produced a report on road traffic injury prevention, followed by specific country
reports on road safety (Peden et al. 2004). This was a turning point for both
organizations when it was realized that the best way to reduce road traffic injuries
was by adopting a holistic approach using safe systems in each country, customized
to the particular circumstances prevailing in each case. Some early attempts to
address road safety more comprehensively were also made at this time in countries
such as Turkey and Vietnam.

In 2008, the Bank adopted a new business strategy: “Safe, Clean, and Affordable
Transport for Development” (World Bank Group 2008). The word “safe” was
introduced to formally reflect the broadening transport agenda, and road safety
became an integral part of the new business plan. In the overview to the business
strategy, “safe transport” acknowledged the prominence of people’s health in the
Millennium Development Goals, including the safety of transport users, transport
workers, and the larger community. The transport business strategy introduced the
safe systems approach as the main approach to address road safety issues in
developing countries. The Bank follows the safe systems approach because it is
thoroughly tested, and there is an opportunity to benefit from experience earned at
great cost in high-income countries over an extended period. However, the Bank
supports a phased approach that requires an initial capacity review to assess the
lead agency role and specify a long-term investment strategy. The detailed
preparation and implementation of safe systems projects are scheduled according to
the available budget, focusing on areas that can achieve the most immediate results.
Ideally, the safe systems approach includes these recommendations:

      Address all elements of the road traffic system in an integrated way.
      Emphasize reducing death and long-term injury instead of crash prevention.
      Accept that road users are fallible and crashes will occur.



                                                                                     9
CHAPTER 2
THE WORLD BANK AND ROAD SAFETY
        Manage energy transfer to ensure that road users are not exposed to crash
         forces likely to result in death or serious injury.
        Emphasize the shared responsibility of road network designers and users for
         achieving road safety results.
        Demand equity in addressing the safety needs of both motorized and non-
         motorized users.
        Align with other sustainable development goals and seek co-benefits such as
         improved air quality, greenhouse gas reduction, energy security, poverty
         reduction, social inclusiveness, and occupational health and safety.
        Strengthen all elements of the road safety management system, especially
         institutional management functions (World Bank 2012).

Internally, the Bank enhanced cross-sector collaboration to support implementing
the safe systems approach. Because of the linkage between road safety and health,
particular attention was paid to health aspects in recent years, including response
time of medical assistance reaching crash victims. These sectors were in completely
different networks in the Bank’s institutional structure and will be in separate global
practices under the Bank’s current restructuring. In April 2013, a meeting was held
between the Health, Nutrition, and Population and Transport Sector Boards. The
meeting intended to raise the profile of the road safety agenda and agree on
common areas to strengthen collaboration between transport and health.
Information sharing grew from virtually zero to the inclusion of health specialists on
transport teams where appropriate. Collaboration improved following a series of
such meetings, according to the TTLs. But in practice, primary authority usually
went to the sector to which the project was mapped, as found in the learning study
on World Bank experience with avian influenza (IEG 2014). When coordination
worked, it was largely because of positive personal relationships between particular
individuals instead of any systematic institutional support in the Bank. This appears
to be less of a problem with urban transport projects, which have a history of
cooperation between the urban and transport sectors.

In June 2013, the safety initiative was expanded and road safety screening (an
analysis of the potential for road safety elements) was introduced for all road
projects. Not all such projects had potential for road safety improvements, but each
was evaluated to determine what was possible. Clearly many factors had to be
considered, including the degree of commitment toward road safety by the
borrower and each country’s institutional capacity. It was important, however, to
ensure there was a consistent approach and that no opportunity was lost to move
forward with the road safety agenda. A recent working paper produced by the Sub-
Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program (SSATP) goes one step further and



10
                                                                             CHAPTER 2
                                                        THE WORLD BANK AND ROAD SAFETY
discusses how to mainstream road safety in a corridor or regional project (SSATP
2013).


Partnership Arrangements
THE GLOBAL ROAD SAFETY FACILITY
The Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF) housed in the World Bank began formal
operations in April 2006. The facility was a direct response by the Bank to the global
call for action by the UN General Assembly. GRSF aims to generate increased
funding and technical assistance for global, regional, and country-level activities
designed to accelerate and scale up the efforts of low- and middle-income countries
to build their scientific, technological, and managerial capacities to prepare and
implement cost-effective road safety programs. The GRSF promotes a global safe
systems approach with support from both the World Bank and from other
multilateral development banks and donors. Since its inception, the GRSF has
helped the Bank in its effort to move from a piecemeal approach to road safety to a
more comprehensive, integrated, systematic safe systems approach in its operations.
Staff training and certification in handling road safety matters is also under way,
and assistance in the road safety sector is often extended beyond immediate projects
by various means.

The Facility Implementation Unit is responsible for oversight of the portfolio of road
safety activities, including preparing the annual Facility Business Plan, screening
and evaluating grant proposals to the facility, approving proposals and deciding on
fund allocations, preparing regular facility performance reports, and supporting
stakeholder consultative meetings. The facility has five full-time staff including a
program coordinator. Though associated with the World Bank, GRSF aims to be a
provider of independent analysis and advice that helps interested parties to
understand the root causes of the road safety crisis and the mechanisms most likely
to shape positive outcomes. It works with client governments to develop specific
interventions designed to encourage local ownership of, and sustained investments
in, road safety programs. GRSF allocated about $17.3 million in grant financing since
2006, which is below expectations. An independent evaluation of GRSF’s first two
and a half years of operation concluded that GRSF was a highly flexible model and
was already making a difference despite its limited resources (Universalia 2009). It
was under-resourced, however, and road safety as a whole failed to attract sufficient
resources. The Bank could raise the profile of GRSF by increasing its contribution,
though, which would signal that it was more serious about road safety and would
likely help attract additional funds from other sources.



                                                                                    11
CHAPTER 2
THE WORLD BANK AND ROAD SAFETY
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Collaboration between the World Bank and WHO culminated in the landmark
publication in 2004 of the World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention. This peer-
reviewed report was developed with input from a professional team of more than
100 experts. The debate on reducing road casualties was strengthened in 2006 by an
independent Commission for Global Road Safety and the discussions culminated
with the declaration of the UN Decade of Action for Road Safety. Subsequently, a
partnership developed with the WHO, the World Bank, the GRSF, the FIA
Foundation (an independent, registered charity), and the GRSP. Under this
partnership a number of practical implementation and enforcement good practice
guidelines were produced, including speed management, crash helmet use, accident
data systems, seat belts and child restraints, and limiting drinking and driving.

MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS
In April 2011, the World Bank and six other development banks committed to a
shared global and regional program of road safety activities. Partners in the
Multilateral Development Banks’ Road Safety Initiative include the Inter-American
Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, African Development Bank,
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Islamic Development Bank,
European Investment Bank, and World Bank. Together these institutions are
expected to provide about $200 billion in road building investments during the UN
Decade of Action for Road Safety. The multilateral initiative calls for an integrated
safe systems approach that promotes shared responsibility for ensuring safe
mobility and begins with countries naming a lead agency to direct a national road
safety strategy. The development banks will help accelerate knowledge transfer,
strengthen institutional capacity, and scale up road safety investment.

INTERNATIONAL ROAD ASSESSMENT PROGRAM
The International Road Assessment Program (iRAP) is a registered charity dedicated
to preventing the more than 3,500 road deaths that occur every day worldwide. It
provides automobile associations, governments, funding agencies, research
institutes, and other nongovernmental organizations in more than 70 countries with
tools and training to make roads safe. Its activities include inspecting high risk
roads, and developing “Star Ratings,” “Safer Roads Investment Plans” and risk
maps, among other things. GRSF is investing in a program to survey 30,000
kilometers of roads and prepare investment and design decisions by local
authorities in partnership with iRAP.




12
                                                                             CHAPTER 2
                                                        THE WORLD BANK AND ROAD SAFETY
FIA FOUNDATION
The FIA Foundation is an independent, registered charity that supports an
international program of activities promoting road safety, the environment, and
sustainable mobility, as well as funding motor sport safety research. It led the
Commission for Global Road Safety and supported several publications providing
road safety guidelines. In February 2014, Commission Chairman Rt. Hon. Lord
George Robertson, of the Make Roads Safe Campaign, led a discussion at the
Brookings Institution on the need to find additional sources of catalytic funding to
support country-led road injury prevention efforts. A number of potential funding
sources were identified, and the FIA Foundation advocated for the motor industry
to become more engaged in road safety issues.

BLOOMBERG PHILANTHROPIES
Bloomberg Philanthropies supports road safety initiatives because it perceives an
urgent need, especially since WHO estimates that road traffic fatalities will be the
fifth leading cause of death by 2030. It also believes traffic crashes are preventable
with effective and evidence-based interventions. Bloomberg Philanthropies works
primarily to advance five areas globally: arts, education, environment, government
innovation, and public health. To date, Bloomberg Philanthropies has invested $125
million in global road safety. Its Global Road Safety Program delivers evidence-
based infrastructure safety and capacity-building interventions through strategic
partnerships (including the World Bank) in 10 selected low- and middle-income
countries.

SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA TRANSPORT POLICY PROGRAM
The SSATP supports creating and strengthening road safety agency action plans and
high impact interventions in SSATP member countries and trade corridors. The
SSATP is an international partnership to facilitate policy development and related
capacity building in the transport sector in Africa. The partnership is funded by a
multi-donor trust fund that includes 38 Sub-Saharan Africa countries, eight regional
communities, two African institutions, the UN Economic Commission for Africa,
and the African Union as well as numerous bilateral and multilateral partners. The
European Commission is the main donor, and the host organization is the World
Bank. SSATP’s road safety program facilitates the exchange of good practice
information between SSATP member countries and stakeholders in general. Its
strategy encourages a process in which information and analysis provide the basis
for consistent policies that can be implemented through member countries’ national
strategies and results-oriented action plans. The results achieved in the field give
feedback to the policy level.



                                                                                       13
CHAPTER 2
THE WORLD BANK AND ROAD SAFETY
The program’s findings are disseminated through workshops, publications, and its
website (http://www.ssatp.org). In 2013, SSATP and GRSP held the International
Road Safety Conference in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, building on a previous year’s
conference on urban road safety held in Lusaka, Zambia. SSATP developed policy
statements, gathers road safety data pertinent to Africa, and encourages member
states to develop strong lead agencies and to support the UN Decade of Action.

The nonprofit GRSP creates and supports multi-sector road safety partnerships
engaged with frontline good practice road safety interventions in countries and
communities throughout the world. GRSP was formed in 1999, and its members are
leading multi-and bi-lateral development agencies, governments, businesses, and
civil society organizations. Hosted by the International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies, GRSP is governed by a constitution approved by a steering
committee. It plays a powerful role in capacity building and training road safety
practitioners, actively engages in advocacy at all levels, provides road safety
program coordination at the global level, and is a recognized expert source of road
safety knowledge and good practice.




14
3. The Bank’s Road Safety Portfolio
This chapter reviews the World Bank’s road safety portfolio and assesses the effects
of specific road safety projects. The portfolio analysis is built on the portfolio review
conducted by the Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF). The analysis of project effects
is based on a review of project implementation documents (Implementation
Completion and Results Reports [ICRs] and Implementation Supervision Reports
[ISRs]) as well as mission aide memoires, task team leader (TTL) interviews, a client
survey, and Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) reports (Project Performance
Assessment Reports [PPARs], Implementation Completion Report Reviews [ICRRs],
and transport sector studies).


The Road Safety Portfolio Description
The selection of road safety projects was based on a text search that included “road
safety,” “blind spots,” “vehicle safety,” “pedestrian walkways,” and “awareness
campaigns.” All intercity highways as well as urban and rural roads projects
assigned to the Transport Sector Board were screened. Transport projects assigned
to other sector boards were included if the projects had more than a 30 percent
transport commitment. Any development policy loans with transport commitments
were covered, and non-lending work in road safety was identified and reviewed.
Between FY02 and FY13, 843 road projects were approved. Applying the screening
criteria above, 166 of the Bank’s lending projects—including trust fund (Global
Environmental Facility and recipient executed) projects—were identified as having
road safety content, that is, road projects with road safety objectives and/or road
safety components or activities.

The Bank’s support to road safety has fluctuated over time, but there is an upward
trend discernable of projects with road safety content. Figure 3.1 shows the support
for road safety in detail. The number of road safety projects is expected to grow
rapidly in the next few years as the mainstreaming of road safety (that began on
June 1, 2013) takes effect.




                                                                                       15
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
Figure 3.1. Growth in Road Safety Projects (approved FY02–13)
                            120

                            100
     Number of Projets



                             80

                             60

                             40

                             20

                              0
                                                                  FY02         FY03      FY04     FY05    FY06    FY07    FY08     FY09   FY10     FY11   FY12   FY13
            Road Projects                                               46         53     59       53     66       91      87       70    108      89       59   62
            Road Safety Projects                                        10         9      18          4    5       20      15        9     27      17       11   21

                                                                                        Road Projects          Road Safety Projects

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.

Figure 3.2 shows that the amounts spent on road safety have steadily increased.
Between FY02 and FY05, the Bank’s total commitment for road safety activities (not
dedicated road safety projects) is estimated at $134.4 million; it then rose to $155.2
million from FY06 to FY09 and further increased to $386.3 million from FY10 to
FY13. GRSF estimates that FY14 road safety commitments are $515 million, which is
greater than the previous four fiscal years combined.

Figure 3.2. Road Safety Lending (approved FY02–13)
                                                                             450                                                                                  80

                                                                             400                                                                                  70
                                  Road Safety Lending (US$, millions)




                                                                             350
                                                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                             300                                                                                        Number of Projects
                                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                             250
                                                                                                                                                                  40
                                                                             200
                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                             150
                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                             100

                                                                              50                                                                                  10

                                                                               0                                                                                  -
                                                                                          2002–2005                 2006–2009                   2010–2013
                         Number of Projects                                                      41                       49                       76
                         Road Safety Lending                                                    134.4                    155.2                    386.3

                            Number of Projects                                                  Road Safety Lending              Linear (Road Safety Lending)

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.


16
                                                                              CHAPTER 3
                                                       THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
The Bank’s approach to road safety has evolved over time. For earlier projects
beginning in 2002 (mostly closed now), the majority of the road safety activities were
to eliminate or improve accident black spot (hazardous) locations through
engineering works. But a few, notably in Turkey, Poland, Romania, and Vietnam,
were first attempts at a more holistic approach to road safety. The Road
Improvement and Traffic Safety Project in Turkey (closed in 2003) was one of the
first attempts to go beyond black spot improvements and tackle road safety in a
more comprehensive way (IEG 2005). The traffic safety component was significant at
$78.9 million (more than 20 percent of the total project cost) and comprised civil
works for the improvement of black spots; provision of equipment and
establishment of an accident data bank for the Turkish traffic police; medical
equipment to improve the emergency response time to Gazi University Hospital;
and road safety campaigns in selected schools.

In Poland, the Bank supported GAMBIT 2000, the country’s integrated road safety
program, through financing road safety components in the three successive road
maintenance and rehabilitation projects (IEG 2013b). However, the bar for
achievement may have been set too low because on accession Poland still had one of
the poorest rates in Europe. The Romania Roads II project aimed to produce a 10-
year traffic safety plan and a framework for supporting traffic safety research and
future programs of traffic safety improvements along with the standard elimination
of black spots (IEG 2009). The Road Safety Project in Vietnam—a $35 million
dedicated project aimed at reducing road accident rates—was one of the first serious
attempts to adopt a safe systems approach in East Asia.

The GRSF study shows that about 66 percent of the active projects feature the safe
systems approach, and the percentage continues to grow following the
mainstreaming of road safety. In FY12 and FY13, 70 percent of the road safety
projects followed the safe systems approach; this number increased to 83 percent by
FY14. The flagship is the Argentina Road Safety Demonstration Project, a $38.5
million dedicated road safety project perceived as the best example of the
implementation of safe systems guidelines in the developing world to date.

The review of 166 projects revealed 325 road safety interventions covering the five
areas from the global plan for the UN Decade of Action: developing institutional
management capacity; building safe road infrastructure; improving road safety
enforcement and education; influencing policy for improved vehicle safety laws
and regulations; and providing for enhanced and more efficient post-crash care.
Most interventions are focused on the institutional aspects (129), followed by the
infrastructure engineering aspects (106), and road user behavior (43). In IEG’s view,
the quality of the institutional interventions improved over time as the safe systems


                                                                                    17
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
approach was gradually adopted. Some of the earlier interventions were more of a
basic training or capacity building nature and not necessarily sustainable.

The Bank is becoming more involved in vehicle safety and post-crash care, areas that
currently receive less support compared with the other three pillars of the safe
systems approach (infrastructure, institutional improvement, and road user
behavior). Of the 325 road safety interventions provided by the 166 projects, 26
interventions concern vehicle safety. The support includes providing facilities for
periodic vehicle inspections (Mexico, Mongolia, and Vietnam) and funding the
introduction of systems to deter heavy vehicle overloading, which has indirect
safety implications (for example, on Cameroon, Mexico, Romania, Tanzania,
Republic of Yemen, and many others). Support also was rendered through SSATP
on best practices in this area. Assistance to establish a driver and vehicle licensing
authority was provided in Ghana. The Bank was a facilitator for the participation of
Argentina in the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations, which
promotes global best practices in vehicle safety standards. This led to Argentina
taking the lead in Latin America by signing an agreement with car manufacturers
and importers for the mandatory inclusion of airbags, rear seat headrests, and anti-
lock braking systems in all cars sold in the country after January 1, 2014. All new
models must also have an automatic lighting system and undergo frontal impact
tests. In this area, the Bank could try to expand its assistance to other countries since
the return on such initiatives is high. Overall, vehicle safety with only 26
interventions is an area where perhaps the Bank could still do more.

When a road crash occurs in a high-income country, there is normally a fairly swift
response from trained emergency services. This is not the case in many developing
countries, however, and accident victims may have to wait much longer for
assistance due to lack of ambulances and trained staff, poor communication between
trauma centers and the police, and traffic congestion severely impeding emergency
vehicles. Consequently, people die unnecessarily during the long wait. Before
trained help arrives, well-meaning members of the public may try to help but do
more harm than good because they are not trained to help. Coordination among the
different agencies must be improved to ensure an effective system.

Though the Bank has been involved in only 21 instances of this type of intervention,
good cooperation between the transport and health sectors has evolved within the
Bank. This started when the Bank and WHO began a dialog and this collaboration
led to the 2004 World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention. The Bank’s support
to road safety continued with interventions in Argentina, Tanzania, Turkey, and
Vietnam. Emergency response capacity improved in Argentina, including a
diagnosis of current capabilities and protocols. In Tanzania, the Southern Africa


18
                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                        THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
Trade and Transport Facilitation Project recently became effective; an effort to
upgrade clinics in the road corridor can serve the dual function of providing
HIV/AIDS-related services and receiving road accident victims.

The Bank applies the safe systems approach mainly on selected corridors in the
client countries due to the limited financial resources it can put into road safety. So
far the Bank has given substantial support for 10 safe corridor demonstration
projects covering all six Regions, with at least one project in each Region, plus one
additional project in the Africa Region and three additional projects in East Asia and
Pacific Region. Five more projects have four of the five possible intervention
categories. Led by the Argentina demonstration project the safe systems approach is
rolling out gradually, but early, positive results are mainly confined to Argentina,
Nigeria, and Vietnam so far.

PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND RESULTS FRAMEWORKS
In a presentation to the Transport Sector Board, GRSF figures showed that More
than two-thirds of projects with road safety content try to include at least one
indicator in the results framework. However, only about 40 percent of road projects
now mention road safety in the project development objective (PDO). There is no
significant upward trend during the time period of the study for projects that
include the road safety component in the PDO and results framework. In a few
instances, other development organizations may be covering the road safety aspects,
but the Bank is the major player in the majority. The GRSF review found that the
inclusion of road safety in the PDO and results framework peaked in FY09 and
FY10. Despite a record year in FY13, there was a decrease in the percentage of
projects that included road safety in the PDO and the results frameworks from FY12
onward. Assessment of road safety issues in the risk matrix and inclusion in the
economic analysis remains comparatively rare.

ECONOMIC ANALYSIS IN ROAD SAFETY PROJECTS

In high-income countries, road safety actions in general yield economic returns
ranging from 9 percent to 22 percent, but regrettably no reliable data are available
for low- and middle-income countries. Incorporating the benefits of road safety
improvement into the economic analysis for Bank projects is also not a common
practice. However, some individual Bank projects estimated economic returns by
incorporating the benefits of reducing the high level of crashes. The Vietnam Road
Safety Project showed returns at closure of between 59 percent and 74 percent; using
disability-adjusted life years, the active Argentina Road Safety Project estimates that
the economic rate of return (ERR) will be about 122 percent. Few projects exist in



                                                                                     19
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
which ERRs are calculated specifically for road safety because, in the majority of
cases, the ERRs are for the main road project itself.

Table 3.1 and Figure 3.3 show that the East Asia and Pacific Region had the most
road safety projects, closely followed by the Africa Region and the Latin America
and the Caribbean Region. Fewer road safety projects were found in the Middle East
and North Africa Region where road safety is not given a high priority. Sub-Saharan
Africa has the highest road-related mortality rate per capita, at 32.2 deaths per
100,000 people in 2011 (SSATP 2012).

Table 3.1. Distribution of Road Safety Projects by Region
             Region                           Active                    Closed                   Total
 EAP                                           25                         17                      42
 SAR                                           13                          9                      22
 LCR                                           13                         16                      29
 ECA                                           17                         15                      32
 AFR                                           27                          9                      36
 MNA                                            1                          1                       2
 OTH                                            1                          2                       3
 Total                                         97                         69                      166
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.
Note: AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LCR = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MNA = Middle East and North Africa; OTH = other global; SAR = South Asia.

Figure 3.3. Distribution of Active and Closed Road Safety Project by Region

                  a. Active Projects                                   b. Closed Projects
               MNA                    OTH                       MNA                  OTH
                1%                    1%                        1%                   3%

                    SAR                                                 SAR
                                EAP                                                  EAP
                    13%                                                 13%
                                26%                                                  25%
             LCR
             13%
                                                                  LCR
                                                                                           AFR
                                                                  23%
                                                                                           13%
                   ECA          AFR
                   18%          28%                                            ECA
                                                                               22%



     EAP    AFR     ECA   LCR    SAR    MNA   OTH         EAP    AFR     ECA   LCR   SAR     MNA         OTH

Source: World Bank Business Warehouse.
Note: AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LCR = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MNA = Middle East and North Africa; OTH = other global; SAR = South Asia.

The road safety situation in East Asia and Pacific is better than the Sub-Saharan
Africa Region, with a death rate of 18.5 per 100,000 people in 2010. The Bank


20
                                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                                        THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
financed 24 road safety projects in China alone, which explains why East Asia and
Pacific has the most road safety projects. On the other hand, the Bank has financed
less road safety-related projects in the Middle East and North Africa than any other
Region for various reasons: there are fewer road projects relative to the other
Regions; roads and road safety were a lower priority for Bank finance than for other
infrastructure; and there is a general lack of road safety expertise in the Region.

With regard to specific road safety interventions, IEG’s review found that the largest
percentage of infrastructure safety interventions are in East Asia and Pacific and
Europe and Central Asia; vehicle safety interventions in Africa and Latin America
and the Caribbean; road user behavior interventions in South Asia and Africa;
institutional capacity strengthening interventions in South Asia and Europe and
Central Asia; and post-crash care in South Asia and East Asia and Pacific (see table
3.2). Results for Middle East and North Africa are not statistically significant because
they are based on only two projects during the study period. Interestingly, the
pattern for low-income countries compared with the average was similar except that
more attention was paid to road user behavior and slightly less to safety
engineering. The latter is surprising and may reflect a desire to maximize road
length improved at the expense of safety.

Table 3.2. Distribution of Types of Intervention by Region (as a percentage of all Interventions)
                        Infrastructure                                        Institutional
                                                               Road User                      Post-Crash
       Region               Safety        Vehicle Safety                        Capacity
                                                               Behavior                         Care
                         Engineering                                         Strengthening
 EAP                          37                 5                 12               38            8
 LCR                          33                 12                12               40            4
 ECA                          37                 3                 11               42            6
 SAR                          30                 6                 18               38            8
 AFR                          26                 13                14               41            5
 MNAa                         29                 14                14               29           14
 All Countries                33                 8                 13               40            6
 Low-Income
                              30                 8                 12             46              4
 Countries
Source: World Bank Business Warehouse and the study team’s analysis.
a. Not statistically significant (based on only two projects).

SECTOR DISTRIBUTION
Of 166 road safety projects, 156 are mapped to the Transport Sector Board
(Transport and Information and Communications Technology Global Practice) and
10 are mapped to other Sector Boards (Global Practices): nine are mapped to the
Urban Development Sector Board (Urban, Rural, and Social Development Global


                                                                                                      21
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
Practice) and one is mapped to the Water Sector Board. It is an indication that road
safety is still viewed (and mapped) as a transport issue. However, there was some
cross-sector cooperation on road safety issues; for example, projects including post-
crash care now typically include a health specialist on the team. The Transport and
Health, Nutrition, and Population sectors are in completely different networks in the
Bank’s institutional structure and are separate global practices under the Bank’s 2014
restructuring. As found in the recent Avian Influenza study, there is significant
cooperation between sectors at the strategic level, but some project TTLs reported
difficulties in working effectively across sectors, based on a lack of incentives to
support this kind of cooperation inherent in the Bank’s operational architecture.

LENDING VERSUS NON-LENDING ASSISTANCE
It is more difficult to find information on non-lending road safety activities such as
technical assistance and economic and sector work. (Information on lending
activities is easily found in the Bank’s business warehouse.) To better understand
what the Bank has achieved in supporting road safety through non-lending
activities, the IEG study team conducted a brief survey of non-lending assistance in
the study period (FY02–13) related to road safety in the Bank. Thirty-seven non-
lending road safety activities were identified through the data warehouse or from
individual TTLs who responded to IEG’s request for information about these
activities. The documentation for non-lending activities could be improved because
in some cases, it could not be found and in others, it contained minimal information,
making evaluation difficult. The non-lending activities which contained sufficient
information for evaluation had funding amounts ranging from $20,000 to $385,000,
with an average of about $100,000; nineteen were in Europe and Central Asia, nine
in Africa, six in East Asia and Pacific, two were global, and one was a joint project
with Bloomberg Philanthropies that involved Europe and Central Asia, East Asia
and Pacific, and South Asia. Many provided funding for road safety capacity
reviews, road safety audits, or improving road safety outcomes (see appendix D).
Twenty-five of the 37 activities reviewed were closed (about 68 percent). Europe and
Central Asia has been particularly active in non-lending activities and more
innovative in the non-lending products, which include policy notes, reimbursable
advisory services, working papers, and co-financing. The big variety in non-lending
products may be due to clients who are more familiar with these types of support,
which are common in Europe.

Most, but not all, non-lending activities translated into tangible follow-on activities.
The global activities culminated in best practices guidelines and more road safety
capacity reviews, and there were specific activities designed to support road safety
in transport corridors in Africa. In Europe and Central Asia, a paper on strategies to



22
                                                                              CHAPTER 3
                                                       THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
reduce accidents through a gender-targeted approach described how a gender
perspective could be introduced into road safety strategies, action plans, and data
collection tools and procedures. But it is not clear how follow-up on the strategies
will occur. There were also road safety action plans, workshop activities, policy
notes, and assistance to strengthen strategic planning in Europe and Central Asia. In
general, the reviews of the client countries’ road safety management capacity
produced a wealth of information that appears to be well regarded, but follow-
through depended on the degree of government commitment, which varied
considerably. The Bank’s then Human Development Department (the Health Global
Practice), the Sustainable Development Department (the Transport and Information
Communication Technology Global Practice), and GRSF produced some joint papers
on road safety (Marquez et al. 2010; Marquez and Bliss 2010).

All of this is useful work, but more could be done. There appears to be considerable
need for additional capacity building and knowledge enhancement through best
practices guidelines. Some areas are still neglected, however. During this study, IEG
identified a comparative lack of research on the cost effectiveness of road safety
measures in the developing world. Although the impact of typical road safety
measures in high-income countries is known, information is scant about the impacts
of these same measures in the developing country context. For example, how well
do enforcement measures work in countries where petty police corruption is an
issue? What is the impact on road safety of the widespread use of minibus taxis,
motorcycles, and other types of transport more commonly used in developing
countries? More cost-benefit analysis of road safety components should also be
encouraged, which likely means conducting further research on the value of life and
time in the developing country context and better understanding the impact of
seriously injured persons on their households.


The Road Safety Portfolio Performance
As of May 15, 2014, 69 road safety projects had closed (about 15 percent of all closed
road projects in the study period), and 97 are still active (about 26 percent of all
active road transportation projects).

ACHIEVEMENTS OF CLOSED PROJECTS
The closed projects (69) focused mostly on improving engineering aspects as the
main approach for enhancing road safety. The Bank’s review of ICRs, IEG PPARs,
and related transport studies found that over time, safety engineering had some
measure of success in specific road infrastructure projects funded by the Bank and
its development partners. Support to develop management information systems,


                                                                                     23
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
road design manuals, and black spot elimination techniques improved road safety in
the vicinity of the projects, but rarely produced the holistic changes needed to
significantly reduce the national accident rates. Human factors were most often
neglected overall. There were occasions of failed cases due to inadequate safety
engineering design such as the Dhaka-Sylhet Highway in Bangladesh, which was
funded primarily by the Bank. The Guardian newspaper published an article
criticizing the highway’s design (The Guardian 2012); the newspaper interviewed the
regional director of the International Road Assessment Program (iRAP), who
pointed to design flaws such as a lack of pedestrian sidewalks, footbridges, traffic
signals, speed controls, and crash barriers in the central median to prevent head-on
collisions. Also, the main national road in the east-west Central Corridor in
Tanzania, which was rehabilitated using Bank financing, has a steep descent in the
Singida district that is an unintended black spot. Severe accidents occur at the
Sekenke Bridge at the foot of the slope because heavy vehicles sometimes fail to
engage low gears, or they simply travel too. The IEG mission in 2011 noted that
railings and crash barriers were missing entirely in areas where the accidents
occurred repeatedly. Local police records examined by IEG showed that 49 fatalities
and 62 injuries occurred at this location since the road was completed in 2008 (IEG
2011).

In spite of that, engineering measures will support the first steps in addressing road
safety in countries with relatively weak management capacity and limited financial
resources, which is where the change process is likely to be slow. But it is no longer
acceptable for the Bank to support highways without appropriate safety features,
especially since straightening, widening, and bitumen surfacing of roads all
encourage smoother rides and higher speeds. This affects the road users and those
living near the road.

Some progress was made in countries that started to adopt a more holistic approach
that goes beyond just black spot (hazardous location) improvements, though
constraints remain. There are some examples of partial success. The Bank’s
involvement in Turkey in the Road Improvement and Traffic Safety project (closed
in 2003) was one of the first attempts to go beyond black spot improvements and
tackle road safety in a more holistic way. By project closure, accidents decreased at
black spot sites by 74 percent, and fatalities dropped by 94 percent. The Vietnam
Road Safety Project—one of the first serious attempts to adopt a safe systems
approach in East Asia—improved accident and fatality rates, but the injury rate
reduction was well short of the target. Less successful cases include projects in
Poland, where in 2003, the country’s safety record ranked 22 out of 25 countries. The
Bank’s Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation (I, II, and III) made progress and
achieved the project target; however, at completion in 2012, Poland failed to reach its


24
                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                        THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
road safety Vision Zero target of a 50 percent reduction in fatalities between 2003
and 2013, and by then the country had the worst fatality rate in Europe (which
means that other countries had improved at a faster rate than Poland).

When road safety activity was a component or subcomponent in a closed project,
IEG observed that the road safety activities or components were completed at a
satisfactory or moderately satisfactory level at least 85 percent of the time, based on
project implementation information in ISRs and ICRs. However, this did not
necessarily have much impact on the national road safety picture.

EARLY RESULTS FROM ACTIVE PROJECTS
Of 97 active projects, 30 were approved before FY10, that is, they were under
implementation for five years or more at the time of this analysis. Therefore, some
early project results should have been observed, but this review found mixed
results. Three of the 30 projects—Bogota Urban Services Project (approved March 13,
2003), Zambia Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project (approved March 9,
2004), and Kenya Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project (approved
June 17, 2004) have been in implementation for more than 10 years. The review of
these three decade-long projects found that road-safety-related activities were
completed, but they have not yet shown any effects because either a good results
framework to track project impact was lacking, or the project activities have not yet
translated into real effects in the field.

Twenty-seven road safety projects are in their fifth year of implementation or
beyond (approved during FY05–09). The projects are in Africa (10), East Asia and
Pacific (8), South Asia (4), Europe and Central Asia (3), and Latin America and the
Caribbean (2). Most of the 27 projects were related to infrastructure engineering
improvements, but it is unclear how many of these improvements would be
translated into an improved road safety situation in the countries concerned.
Inadequate road safety monitoring is a common issue with these projects. Either
they do not report information about road safety (especially projects without road
safety objectives or components), or the data are questionable, as in the case of two
projects in Africa. Although four of 10 projects in Africa have a road safety objective
or dedicated road safety components, only two projects reported on progress in road
safety. The Nigeria road safety project reported that fatalities decreased on the
specified corridors, but according to WHO (and endorsed by IEG), Nigeria’s
national road safety record is not improving because the government-provided
information relates only to recorded deaths at crash scenes. An ISR of the Ghana
Transport Project SIL reported a decrease in fatality rate from 22 deaths per 100,000
people in 2009 to 17.9 deaths per 100,000 people in 2013, but the project team noted
in the ISR that the information provided by the client needs to be reviewed.


                                                                                      25
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
One of eight projects in East Asia and Pacific has a road safety objective, and none
have dedicated road safety components. Four projects have road safety indicators,
but the Vietnam Mekong Delta Transport Infrastructure never collected and
reported fatality rate information. The Cambodia Road Asset Management project
(Asian Development Bank/Australian Agency for International Development)
reported that the Road Data Collection Management Unit is in full operation, but its
impact on road safety improvement is yet to be seen. Only the China Hubei Yiba
Highway project provided information on the improved road safety situation as
measured by the reduced accident rate and fatality rate on the project highway
section. Note that the Bank’s road safety projects in East Asia and Pacific are more
urban in context: they pay more attention to pedestrian safety, especially in the
vicinity of bus, rail, and metro stations; integrate land management and transport
planning into urban transport projects; and promote separated traffic such as buses,
cyclists, and non-motorized transport where feasible and affordable.

In Europe and Central Asia, the Ukraine Road and Safety Improvement Project
(Bank commitment: $400 million) and the Kazakhstan South West Roads Project
(Bank commitment: $2.125 billion) have safety objectives ($44 million) and
standalone safety components ($3.5 million). Road safety indicators were included
in these two projects, and in the Azerbaijan Highway 2 Project. According to the
Ukraine project’s ISR, the project reallocated $55 million from the road safety
component to the civil works component because the road safety component was
moving slowly. Still, the project contributed to improved road safety in Ukraine by
eliminating 10 black spots identified by iRAP and by improving a 25-kilometer road
corridor that had safety issues. The total number of fatalities per 10,000 vehicles is
now five, substantially lower than the revised target and even lower than the initial
target. The Kazakhstan project has not yet reported road safety information because
civil works are still ongoing. Three of four projects in South Asia (two in India and
one in Nepal) reported progress on road safety. The India HP State Roads Project
reported a reduction in the traffic-accident-related death rate from 2 per 1,000
vehicles to 0.24. The Nepal Road Sector Development Project reported that its Road
Safety Action Plan was developed and approved.

To summarize, of 27 road safety projects in implementation for five or more years,
seven have road safety project development objectives or dedicated road safety
components, 11 have at least one road safety indicator, seven reported on road
safety progress in the client countries, and five countries reported an improved road
safety situation in the project areas based on lower accident-related fatality rates.
However, ISRs of road safety projects in Africa Region suggest that the road safety
data’s reliability is questionable. For the rest of the projects, road safety progress



26
                                                                               CHAPTER 3
                                                        THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
cannot be shown until the road improvement activities are completed and the roads
are open for traffic.

Sixty projects approved in FY10 or later were evenly distributed throughout the
Regions, except in the Middle East and North Africa where there is only one project
in the Republic of Yemen. There are several interesting features of the projects
approved during this time:

      There was more emphasis on road safety—especially for projects with at least
       one road safety indicator—even though progress on road safety could not
       always be observed until the highway civil works were completed. This
       feature is more obvious with projects in Europe and Central Asia.
      In general, civil works related to road safety progressed quickly, although
       with contractual issues in some cases; progress on purchasing road safety
       equipment was also satisfactory, but getting the equipment installed and
       operational usually took longer than anticipated.
      The most difficult aspects of projects are developing a road safety policy and
       strategy and building a road safety institution; a few projects could not make
       progress even though the client agreed with the process at the project design
       stage.

Few active projects could report early results on road safety since many are still
ongoing. China reported a reduced accident-related fatality rate associated with one
highway project in NingXia and an increased accident-related fatality rate on project
transport corridors in AnHui due to road user behavior. In time, it is expected that
Chinese authorities will focus greater attention on road user behavior and
enforcement along with increasing the traffic volume and speed on project
highways.

Although work is ongoing in Argentina’s $38.5 million dedicated road safety project
corridors, early results are encouraging. Average driving speed was reduced by 15
percent between 2009 and 2012; drunk driving rates fell by 50 percent; seat belt use
increased by 43 percent; crash helmet use increase by 19.5 percent; the traffic fatality
rate dropped by 40 percent (against a target of 20 percent); and the reported traffic
injury rate decreased by 18 (against a target of 20 percent). All intermediate results
indicators have been met. The innovative nature of the Argentina project is covered
in this report in more detail than for other projects since it provides many lessons
that are relevant to other countries. The project also created interest in other Latin
American countries facing similar challenges (see box 3.1).




                                                                                      27
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO

 Box 3.1. Argentina’s Flagship Road Safety Demonstration Project

 Argentina’s $38.5 million dedicated road safety project was prepared as a collaborative partnership
 between the transport and health teams in the Argentina World Bank Country Office (Bliss and
 Raffo 2013). The project has these components:

        Institutional capacity building to provide technical assistance and equipment to assist with
         the adoption of best international practice;
        The introduction of three demonstration safe corridors ($1.14 million) identified using the
         International Road Assessment Program;
        Road auditing methodology together with an incentive fund program; and
        The establishment of a road safety monitoring and evaluation system.

 In 2008, Argentina created Agencia Nacional de Seguridad Vial (ANSV), a national road safety
 agency. The federal government’s decision to empower and resource ANSV confirmed its position
 as “owner” of the nation’s road safety and manager of related strategic partnerships. The
 institutional capacity-building component was two-thirds of the total project cost.

 The components included: (i) project management; (ii) creation of a national driver license registry
 system and establishment of a national traffic records and infractions registry; (iii) a five-year
 strategic plan for ANSV; (iv) communication, awareness, and education campaigns including a plan
 for national social communications and education campaigns, road safety education kits, grants for
 eligible nongovernment organizations, and provision of training, workshops, and seminars related to
 road safety; (v) improvement of emergency response capacity including a diagnosis of current
 capabilities and protocols and subsequent upgrading, design and implementation of improvements in
 emergency coordination systems among concerned agencies (such as police, ambulance services,
 hospitals, and insurance companies), training for emergency response personnel, and acquisition of
 equipment to facilitate the work of road crash emergency personnel; and (vi) strengthening of the
 capacity of traffic control and enforcement agencies through the development of training modules,
 the acquisition of alcohol meters, speed control radar guns, and other radar technology as well as
 development of a national plan for speed control.

 Activities related to educational curricula for primary and secondary schools are being carried out in
 consultation and cooperation with the Federal Ministry of Education and relevant authorities in
 participating provinces and municipalities. Activities for traffic enforcement agencies are being
 carried out through high-level workshops and twinning arrangements organized by RoadPOL.1
 Major efforts are also being made on the emergency response and traffic control fronts,
 collaborating with other ministries or entities as appropriate. The financial instrument chosen was an
 adaptable program loan since a follow-up project was envisioned based on defined “triggers” to be
 accomplished in the first phase; this recognizes that improving road safety outcomes is a long-term
 process. An important subcomponent was a $10 million incentive program to help participating
 provinces and municipalities finance innovative road safety initiatives that otherwise would not have
 been funded because of competition for limited financial resources. To build the results management
 platform in Argentina’s National Road Observatory, the project invested in road safety monitoring
 systems and tools. The Observatory set up a new data collection system for road crashes, and
 surveys will provide baseline data for seat belt usage, helmet usage, and distractive factors.

 Although the work in the Argentina road safety project corridors is ongoing, early results are
 encouraging. All intermediate results indicators have been met. IEG believes this project is
 important from a learning point of view because the project builds upon and reinforces Argentina’s


28
                                                                                        CHAPTER 3
                                                                 THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
 correct sequential implementation of the World Report recommendations. Implementation has not
 been problem free, however. Originally, three demonstration corridors were selected in discussion
 with the Argentina Roads Agency (DNV). This is a large organization with the largest budget in the
 government, but in juggling its multiple responsibilities the chosen corridors slipped down DNV’s
 priority list, forcing ANSV and the Bank to choose different corridors. Unfortunately, this was a
 backward step because the baseline had been established for the original corridors, which caused
 some difficulties for the team. However, the Argentina project is also founded on some opportune
 circumstances including continuing political will at the presidential and ministerial level that
 followed negative publicity about some major tragic crashes.

 A Memorandum of Understanding was also concluded recently to establish a new database covering
 road safety data for the 20 countries participating in the regional Ibero-American Road Safety
 Observatory. The database will use indicators for monitoring and comparing progress in reducing
 traffic-related deaths and serious injuries from the region, and the data will be publicly available.
 This project is expected to facilitate cooperation among participating countries and serve as an
 important step to progressively improve data collection and analysis in the region. The database
 forms part of a policy for the development of effective, evidence-based road safety plans.2 The Bank
 initiated regional meetings to share experiences. Capacity assessments have begun with funds from
 grants made by GRSF and the World Bank Institutional Development Fund (in cases where this is
 not an existing loan on which to piggyback). Brazil was an early beneficiary. About twenty countries
 are now participating in this south-south cooperation observatory, supported by a grant of $700,000.
 Shared historical links and language helped cement the relationship.


About 20 percent of active road safety projects have shown early results, but most of
those have not yet revealed the impacts on road safety because civil works or
institutional enhancement activities are ongoing. Implementation of civil works
components is, in general, smoother than the institutional component, despite
contractual issues in some cases. The projects could improve their monitoring—less
than 50 percent of the projects have road safety indictors, especially for earlier
projects. Projects with road safety indictors still collect and update the information
inconsistently, suggesting that project teams and the clients could pay more
attention to this area. But enhancing data collection and reporting takes time, so
long-term engagement and support will be useful.

CLIENT SURVEY
 IEG conducted a brief survey about implementing agencies’ views on the Bank’s
support in road safety and received 12 responses. Many respondents (including
Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan, India, Kenya and Tanzania) thought that the
Bank’s support was “much better” than it was five years ago, though some thought
it was “somewhat better.” For example, the Federal Road Safety Corps in Nigeria
said, “There has been a visible impact on the selected corridors in Nigeria with the
injection of modern patrol and rescue equipment. The human capacity development
too has recorded a tremendous boost.” There was also a sentiment that road safety
projects financed with Bank funds yielded better results than projects funded by



                                                                                                   29
CHAPTER 3
THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
other sources, probably because of sustainability. The main problems typically
experienced include insufficient funding, lack of political support, lack of
coordination between departments and agencies, and poor-quality results
frameworks and accident data. Negative responses were received from Bangladesh
and Ghana, where little or no improvement was observed.

A strong leading agency with sufficient funds and human resources is critical for
road safety. However, many developing countries do not have such an agency
capable of prioritizing and coordinating a road safety agenda. For example, Sub-
Saharan Africa has the highest road-related mortality rate per capita in the world,
although less than 4 percent of the world’s vehicle fleet is in Africa. A survey
conducted by WHO reported that although the majority of African countries (88
percent) have a road safety agency, the government endorsed a strategy with targets
and earmarked funding in only 24 percent. In some cases, the lead implementing
agency is more concerned with completing the road works portion of the project and
neglects the implementation of the safety subcomponents until it is too late to
complete them before project closure. The Roads and Bridges Management and
Maintenance Project in Mozambique is a good example. This project included
physical measures such as pedestrian crossings, signs, road markings, and
construction of vehicle inspection centers, along with softer aspects such as road
safety audits, training, information programs, and an accident statistics system. But
because the National Roads Authority (the lead agency) gave priority to the road
civil engineering works, the softer parts of the safety component began too late to
complete much of the necessary procurement. At project closure, the road safety
situation in Mozambique was not improved, and accidents increased at an even
higher rate than the number of vehicles on the roads increased.

In Europe and Central Asia, implementation of the Road Infrastructure and Safety
Project in Bosnia and Herzegovina also suffered from the lack of a strong leading
agency that would view road safety as a priority. Too many stakeholders were
involved in this project, which was later restructured to reallocate funds from the
road safety component to the civil works component. The Vietnam road safety
project in East Asia and Pacific was also less successfully implemented. One reason
was a lack of human capacity in the coordinating National Traffic Safety Committee,
which was not empowered to make decisions and did not have sufficient budget,
staff, or expertise to exercise the oversight required. Only three countries in the East
Asia and Pacific Region have policies that promote walking, cycling, and public
transport, and only five countries have policies that separate the infrastructure for
vulnerable road users such as pedestrians as a way of protecting them. Eight
countries in the Region have a lead agency for road safety, most of which are inter-
ministerial committees.


30
                                                                                        CHAPTER 3
                                                                 THE BANK’S ROAD SAFETY PORTFOLIO
Chapter 4 consolidates the many findings and lessons from this study under broad
headings, and thoughts on the way ahead are presented in chapter 5.


1RoadPOL is a global police network that seeks to achieve accelerated transfer of road safety
knowledge and experience through training arrangements and peer-to-peer agency reviews.
2The International Transport Forum at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development announced this initiative. Participants included the World Bank, the Ministries of
Interior of Spain and Argentina, and the Ministry of Health of Mexico.




                                                                                                 31
4. Findings and Lessons
The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) undertook a study in road safety as a
pioneering effort to create a learning product in cooperation with the World Bank’s
transport operational staff and the Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF). The study’s
aim is to provide useful knowledge to Bank operational staff involved with road
safety, to support Bank and client countries in fine-tuning their road safety strategies
and practices, and to support acceleration of the Bank’s operational road safety
agenda. This report summarizes the study’s central contributions to these goals.
Each section focuses on a key finding and presents lessons learned.


Variable Progress
To date, the Bank’s support improved road safety to varying degrees in several
middle-income countries such as Argentina, China, Colombia, Nigeria, and
Vietnam. Sierra Leone is an example of a fragile low-income country moving in the
right direction. Progress was more modest in some other countries. The brief client
survey with two exceptions showed that most implementing agencies observed
notable improvement in Bank support for road safety matters between 2008 and
2013.

The Global Road Safety Facility was highly supportive of the Bank’s progress in
road safety. GRSF has an oversight and training role in the Bank’s road safety
portfolio; it also provides grants for road safety activities, allocating $17 million in
grants. Since 2006, GRSF promoted the safe systems approach globally with support
from the World Bank and from other multilateral development banks and donors.
An independent evaluation of the facility in 2009 concluded that it was making a
difference with limited available resources. However, the evaluation also
determined the facility is under-resourced. IEG concurs that GRSF is a highly
flexible model and makes good use of its limited resources.


Project Design and Implementation Shortcomings
Many projects were appropriately designed, but in some cases, the project design
was too complex for the capacity of the institutions expected to implement it, such
as the Vietnam Road Safety Project. The project attempted to cover 63 cities scattered
across a wide geographical area—there were too many packages and too many
players. This resulted in a challenging procurement process that, given Vietnam’s
lack of experience with Bank procurement procedures, led to delays and


                                                                                      32
                                                                               CHAPTER 4
                                                                    FINDINGS AND LESSONS
misunderstandings over ineligible expenditures. In other cases, projects had safety
objectives but without sufficient road safety activities to enable achievement of the
objectives. For example, the China ShanXi project has a safety objective, but the
relevant road safety activities were limited to a road safety audit for the road
engineering design without measures to address road users’ behavior. It was not
surprising that when the new expressway built under the project opened, the
accident rate increased due to fast driving.

Implementation of road safety activities, though generally perceived as important,
was not always given the priority it deserved. It is not uncommon that in some
countries, the lead implementing agency is more concerned with completing the
road works portion of the project and neglects implementation of the safety
subcomponents until it is too late to complete them before project closure. There are
cases where the Bank does not sufficiently contest instances where some clients set a
low priority on road safety by maximizing road length completed for civil works
activities from the available budget. The Roads and Bridges Management and
Maintenance Project in Mozambique is a good example (IEG 2012). This project
included physical measures such as pedestrian crossings, signs, road markings, and
construction of vehicle inspection centers, as along with softer aspects such as road
safety audits, training, information programs, and an accident statistics system. But
because the National Roads Authority (the lead agency) gave priority to road civil
engineering works, the softer parts of the safety component began too late to
complete much of the necessary procurement. At project closure, the road safety
situation in Mozambique was not improved, and accidents increased at an even
higher rate than the number of vehicles on the roads increased. In the Europe and
Central Asia Region, implementation of the Road Infrastructure and Safety Project
in Bosnia and Herzegovina also suffered from the lack of a strong leading agency
that would view road safety as a priority. Too many stakeholders were involved in
this project, which was later restructured to reallocate funds from the road safety
component to the civil works component.

A good results framework is a crucial factor for the Bank’s road safety projects. The
GRSF found that about two-thirds of the Bank’s road safety projects included at least
one indicator on road safety; however, there was no clear upward trend of including
road safety in the project development objectives and the results framework. The
IEG review of the active projects also found a few with a road safety objective but
without any road safety indicators, and in many projects, the data were not
consistently collected and reported. In the Second Wuhan Urban Transport Project
in China, a “fatality reduction on the five road safety corridors” was a project
development objective indicator, and the baseline value for this indicator was 38
deaths per 100,000 people in December 2008. However, the value for this indicator


                                                                                        33
CHAPTER 4
FINDINGS AND LESSONS
remained the same in December 2013. The Mali Transport Sector Project has one
road safety indicator—number of pedestrian accidents. Although the data were
collected and reported, the numbers kept changing, which raised questions about
the collection methodology and the usefulness of this information to monitor project
achievement. Monitoring of the Vietnam Road Safety Project received the following
management comment: “The results framework as designed in the PAD is best
practice in the Vietnam portfolio. In the ISR however, some of the good key
performance indicators were dropped—e.g., the intermediate outcome indicators on
road safety behavior, compliance with vehicle standards, as well as road safety
reporting. To enable an objective assessment of progress, it is suggested that all
relevant indicators (and targets) be reported in the ISR.” Sometimes a project added
a road safety component during project restructuring, but the road safety indicator
(fatality rate) was dropped and replaced with output indicators. The Nigeria Federal
Roads Development Project replaced it with two output indicators: “Number of
pedestrian over-bridges constructed” and “FRSC [Federal Road Safety Corps]
implements safe corridor approach in at least two corridors.” The Mali Second
Transport Sector project also dropped its road safety indicator during
implementation.

However, it is unfair to assume that data collection is the Bank’s sole responsibility.
In many cases, road accident statistics in client countries are so poor that it is
difficult, if not impossible, to establish a proper baseline. In such cases, an
immediate priority is to create a crash database and train police to improve accident
reporting. Outputs indicate at least some level of progress, but it is important to
work toward outcome performance indicators because the project has limited value
if results cannot be demonstrated—however good the project may be.

Results frameworks are improving in general. But when there are weak results
frameworks at the project design stage and inadequate project monitoring at the
implementation stage, the result may have attribution issues and lead to a project
claiming an achievement for which it was not responsible. The Romania Roads II
project could be an example. The project aimed to produce a 10-year traffic safety
plan and a framework for supporting traffic safety research and future programs of
traffic safety improvements, along with the standard elimination of black spots.
Although it seemed reasonable at the time to relate a declining national road
accident fatality rate to these measures, IEG pointed out in its evaluation of the
project that there was a serious attribution issue. National fatality rates were already
falling, so it is more likely that engineering measures on 1,000 kilometers of road
funded under a previous Bank transport project were responsible for the drop in
fatalities. But other factors likely had an impact such as less driving due to the
recession. This does not mean that the national fatality rate cannot be used as an


34
                                                                                CHAPTER 4
                                                                     FINDINGS AND LESSONS
outcome indicator—only that it should be measured correctly, and that we should
collect additional data to draw conclusions about attribution.


Insufficient Funding

Road safety still lacks a highly visible profile and does not attract sufficient
funding. Although the Bank’s commitment to road safety activities had an upward
trend in recent years, this review found that on average the Bank commits only
about 3 percent of its transport investments to road safety activities. In a few cases
during the project implementation, road safety funds were reallocated to more civil
works activities either because the client did not view road safety as a priority, or the
progress on road safety activity was too slow at the same time the civil works
activities encountered cost overruns. As the Bank continues to mainstream road
safety, resources devoted to road safety should be increased accordingly. Project
supervision should ensure that safety components start early in the project and not
be delayed to the point that there is a serious risk they might not be completed. This
aspect should receive particular attention at the project’s mid-term review.


Research Gaps
During this study, IEG also identified a comparative lack of research on the cost
effectiveness of road safety measures in the developing world. Road injuries cause
more loss of life and disability-adjusted life years than tuberculosis or malaria, so it
is urgent to explore this area. Although the impact of typical road safety measures in
high-income countries is known, information is scant about the impacts of these
same measures in the developing country context. For example, how well do
enforcement measures work in countries where petty police corruption is an issue?
What is the impact on road safety of the widespread use of minibus taxis,
motorcycles, and other types of transport more commonly used in developing
countries?


Strong Government Commitment as a Key to Success
Despite strong resolutions about the importance of road safety, it is difficult to gain
commitment from developing country governments to allocate sufficient
resources to this complex problem and give it priority over a sustained period. For
example, the Second Wuhan Urban Transport Project in China experienced
continuous slow progress in implementing its public transport and road safety
components due to a change in the city government’s priorities. Another example is



                                                                                      35
CHAPTER 4
FINDINGS AND LESSONS
the Nigeria Federal Roads Development Project, which had a project development
objective “to reduce passenger travel times, vehicle operating costs and traffic
related fatalities on targeted federal roads and assist the government to manage
Nigeria's federal road assets in a sustainable manner.” The project made little
progress for the first two years because “the government continued to show little
ownership for the project, especially for the reform component,” and “in discussions
with the new Minister of Works, it was clear that the Minister was not committed to
the reform program and did not see carrying out the reform programs as a priority
during the current election year.… Yet, without the planned sector reforms, the road
sector in Nigeria will continue to suffer from poor governance and unsustainable
funding arrangement.” The project was later restructured when a $20 million road
safety component was added, which shows that road safety now has a higher
priority on the government agenda.

A strong leading agency with sufficient funds and human resources is critical for
road safety. However, developing country governments are typically not strong on
inter-ministerial coordination. For example, a survey conducted by the World
Health Organization (WHO) reported that although the majority of African
countries (88 percent) have a road safety agency, the government endorsed a
strategy with targets and earmarked funding in only 24 percent. The Vietnam road
safety project was less successfully implemented because the coordinating National
Traffic Safety Committee lacked human capacity, for one reason. The Committee
was not empowered to make decisions and did not have sufficient budget, staff, or
expertise to exercise the oversight required. Overall, in the East Asia and Pacific
Region, only eight countries have a lead agency for road safety, most of which are
inter-ministerial committees.

Effective traffic law enforcement is essential for road safety in developing
countries, but this poses problems for TTLs who are used to interfacing with
traditional transport sector clients such as road agency and works officials. Traffic
police departments fall outside this framework and often resist changes to their
operational activities. In Georgia, a TTL met resistance in this area and found on
investigation that the issue was not that the traffic police department was unwilling
to record additional accident data, but rather they lacked sufficient tablets to
electronically record the required information. In some countries, corruption was
found to be an issue—for example, pocketing unofficial on-the-spot fines. An idea to
combat this type of behavior and strengthen traffic enforcement agencies is being
carried out through high-level workshops and twinning arrangements organized by
the global police network RoadPOL. Still in its infancy and encouraged by the GRSF,
RoadPOL organizes training and peer-to-peer agency reviews to accelerate transfer
of road safety knowledge, culture, and experience. The Bank also assists traffic


36
                                                                               CHAPTER 4
                                                                    FINDINGS AND LESSONS
police by adding equipment subcomponents to projects (in Kiribati, the Russian
Federation, Turkey, and many others).


Relevant Lessons from High-Income Countries
In Europe, the “big four killers” targeted in road safety campaigns are speeding,
jumping red lights, not using seat belts, and drunk driving. These areas are similar
for virtually all countries, according to the Global Status Report on Road Safety
(WHO 2013b). Although structures may differ, the general characteristics of road
safety organizations in high-income countries include a strong central lead agency
that coordinates with a wide range of stakeholders (see appendix A for a summary
of case studies by country). In this structure, there is usually secure and sustainable
funding, progress is measured through a rigorous results framework, and a shared
vision to reduce death and injury rates is strongly supported at the political level.

There are many lessons from high-income countries that can be applied in
developing countries, but the contexts are still dissimilar. The traffic composition
in developing country cities is different and includes a greater number of two-
wheelers (scooters, bicycles, and motorcycles) three-wheelers (rickshaws), and non-
motorized vehicles such as animal-driven carts. There is also a large number of
pedestrians and sometimes stray animals. Safety features such as pedestrian
crossings or dedicated lanes for specific types of vehicle are scarce. The safety of
vehicles is sometimes questionable, and road user discipline may be poor. Workers
frequently ride in open trucks or pickups that are not designed to carry large
numbers of people. Taxi drivers can drive aggressively and stop without warning to
pick up or drop off passengers. Road design standards often originate from those
used in developed countries decades ago and may be unsuitable for developing
country conditions. Parking rules might not exist or are poorly enforced if they do.
There are also competing priorities for scarce funds and insufficiently trained people
in law enforcement, emergency response, and implementing agencies. Governance
issues and lack of project results frameworks are also problems. The situation is
bleak, and it is the reason for the high road accident rates in developing countries.

High-income countries have considerable resources to apply to improving road
safety, but this does not mean that developing countries cannot adopt many of the
best practices. Even when constrained by lack of capacity, it is feasible for
developing countries to move in the right direction, and low-cost measures that are
more easily implemented can result in significant improvement in their accident
statistics. These measure include road reflectors, line stripes, crash barriers, signs,
utility poles that break away on impact, and crash barriers at dangerous spots (for



                                                                                     37
CHAPTER 4
FINDINGS AND LESSONS
example, Uruguay Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project and Zambia Road
Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project (phase 2). Where traffic volumes are high,
the construction of a central median barrier is effective in reducing head-on
collisions (as in Belarus Road Upgrading and Modernization, Peru Lima Transport
Project, and Ukraine Road and Safety Improvements). In urban areas, traffic
management measures include roundabouts and separating different types of traffic
where feasible, such as pedestrians, cyclists, buses, and taxis (the Liaoning and
Anhui Medium Cities projects in China). In larger cities, synchronized traffic signals
(Bangladesh, Urban Transport project) and an appropriate parking policy (as in the
Mauritius Infrastructure Project and the Russian Federation Moscow Urban
Transport) can improve traffic flow and lead to safer travel. In Bangladesh, the
average speed of buses in central Dhaka was improved by 7 kilometers per hour
after traffic signals were introduced at 68 intersections, and rickshaws were banned
on certain routes (IEG 2007b). This improved congested traffic conditions and
attracted more riders to safer public transport modes.


Change Takes Time
Engagement needs to be focused and persistent. It took highly resourced
developed countries two decades to significantly reduce their accident rates, and it
will conceivably take at least as long, if not longer, for less well-off countries to
follow suit. For road safety aspects, the risk to development out-come is often
underestimated because project discussions are frequently more concerned with the
sustainability of larger road works components at the expense of road safety aspects.
Therefore, it is important for the Bank to provide effective and continuous support
to reinforce the progress made in road safety and to introduce new measures.




38
5. The Way Forward
The year 2015 will be important for the Bank’s reputation as a premier lender in the
road safety field because this is the midpoint year for the UN Decade of Action.
Progress is recorded but not in all countries, and it is unlikely that the ambitious
goals set for the decade can be met unless the initiative moves forward swiftly and
substantial additional funding is deployed. The Commission for Global Safety drew
attention to donors’ comparative neglect of road safety and recommended that 10
percent of all road infrastructure funding should be committed to safety in the
future. This study found that the World Bank’s road safety projects committed about
3.5 percent of the project funding on road safety activities (which falls way short of
the 10 percent recommendation). The study proposes the following way forward:

      Make a bolder commitment to road safety that includes more financial
       support. There are several global initiatives seeking funding, including
       climate change, disaster risk reduction, and improved water and sanitation,
       but all are falling short of their targets. Mobilizing funds for road safety is
       similarly difficult, despite the carnage on the roads. Unlike campaigns to stop
       the spread of infectious diseases, where private sector funds are readily
       available because of the profit incentive in the pharmaceutical industry, roads
       are largely a public sector good. Attempts to secure funds from the insurance
       and motor manufacturing industries have had limited success so far, but that
       does not mean this avenue is closed. Bilateral and multilateral development
       institutions are still the obvious source of funds, and the World Bank is seen
       as the premier institution with a strong leadership role. Selecting an arbitrary
       percentage target for road safety funding would be a mechanical solution;
       however; clearly the Bank needs to make a bolder commitment and give
       GRSF more support, including financial support. This would likely involve
       high-level stakeholder meetings and perhaps engaging professional
       fundraisers.
      Update the Bank’s transport business strategy. Although the GRSF strategic
       plan is recent, the transport sector business plan is out of date. A new plan
       will likely reflect the framework of the reorganized Bank in relation to global
       practices and cross-cutting solution areas. The Bank’s next transport business
       strategy could also benefit from considering three things: the implications of
       scaling-up road safety activities; the need for collaboration across Global
       Practices such as Health, Transport and Urban, Rural and Social
       Development; and the effectiveness of the safe systems approach.




                                                                                     39
CHAPTER 5
THE WAY FORWARD

        Improve project design and focus more on the implementation of road
         safety activities. Safety aspects, where applicable, should be included in
         project objectives, and road safety components should be self-standing.
         Appropriate due diligence to mitigate for speed and other factors should be
         mandatory, and the local community should be consulted on the road safety
         aspects of the project. Better project supervision can ensure that safety
         components start early and are not delayed to the point that there is a serious
         risk they might not be completed. This aspect could receive particular
         attention during the project’s mid-term review. Designing a good results
         framework is another crucial factor, since progress cannot be measured
         without performance indicators. On the borrower’s side, if the country has
         poor road accident statistics, an immediate priority is to create a detailed
         crash database of accidents that occur and train police to improve accident
         reporting. On the Bank’s side, the effectiveness of different measures should
         be recorded to improve best practice.
        Accelerate toward the road safety “tipping point.” A road safety tipping
         point is reached when governments and the public start to treat road safety as
         a major priority. Experience suggests that often a tipping point is reached
         only after a series of terrible crashes arouses public anger pressures
         politicians to take action, as evidenced in Argentina and Turkey. In
         developing countries, especially where affected people have less voice, the
         Bank needs to be persistent in advocating for road safety measures and could
         discuss the need for improved road safety with its clients at the highest levels
         of government. Engaging nongovernmental organizations could also be
         critical in shaping public opinion and influencing the government.
        Enhance the Bank’s own road safety knowledge. As the Bank mainstreams
         road safety, it is expected that the number of interventions in vehicle safety,
         road user behavior, and post-crash care will increase. The Bank should
         introduce a database to record the experiences of the application of various
         road safety measures in its projects. This may involve encouraging borrowers
         to continue recording data even after the project is closed. It could also
         encourage partners, clients, and other stakeholders to contribute information
         from non-Bank-financed projects. The Road Safety Observatory being
         implemented in Latin American countries deserves strong support and could
         be replicated in other Regions.
        Set minimum safety requirements. IEG proposes that the Bank should never
         finance an unsafe road, even if this means the project will cost more. In
         particular, safety aspects should be part of the acceptance process at the
         detailed design and pre-opening stages and should be emphasized in the
         Guidelines for Road Safety Management Capacity Reviews and Safe System


40
                                                                            CHAPTER 5
                                                                      THE WAY FORWARD
    Projects (Bliss and Breen 2013). The design should account for appropriate
    due diligence to mitigate for speed and other factors, and the local
    community should be consulted on the road safety aspects of the project.
    Although making road safety a safeguard could be considered, such a move
    may not be feasible at this time. However, there is a strong argument for
    introducing mandatory road safety audits linked to road investment loans or
    credits. A simplified version may be needed for low-capacity countries, but
    an audit requirement would still be essential. Efforts should also be made to
    ensure that discussions with the public about a proposed road scheme
    include road safety implications and potential remedial measures. Funding
    for these activities could either be part of the loan or grant or take the form of
    a project preparation facility.
   Innovative ideas need to be copied where appropriate. An example is an
    important subcomponent of the Argentina Road Safety Project, which
    included a $10 million incentive program that helped participating provinces
    and municipalities finance innovative road safety initiatives that otherwise
    would not have been funded because of competition for limited financial
    resources. A similar Challenge Fund was instituted in India in the Kerala
    State Transport Project 2.
    Road safety interventions should be appropriate for the country’s
    circumstances. Every country is different, and although the principles behind
    success in road safety are tried and tested, their application must be
    customized to fit each individual case. A dedicated road safety project like
    Argentina’s is ideal, but low-income countries (which often have small
    economies) may be able to afford only one transport project at a time, given
    the availability of donor funding and limited in-country capacity. This is
    especially true for fragile states that may have suffered major natural
    disasters (Haiti) or years of civil conflict (Liberia). In some of these countries,
    progress may not be possible until conditions have stabilized, but once this
    happens, the first steps of a safe systems approach may be introduced. This
    includes establishing a coordinating lead agency, assessing the extent of the
    work to be done, and preparing a national plan of action. Politicians want to
    see speedy and visible progress, and it is important for a quick “win.” This
    can be achieved by identifying the low-hanging fruit—find out what
    measures to reduce accidents will be most cost effective, visible, and easy to
    implement.




                                                                                     41
References
Aeron-Thomas, A., G. D. Jacobs, B. Sexton, G. Gururaj, and F. Rahman. 2004. The Involvement and
       Impact of Road Crashes on the Poor: Bangladesh and India Case Studies. Berks, UK: TRL Ltd.
Bliss, A., and J. Breen. 2013. “Road Safety Management and Capacity Reviews and Safe System
         Projects Guidelines,” Global Road Safety Facility, Washington, DC.
Bliss, A., and V. Raffo. 2012. “The Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011 –2020: Lessons from
         Argentina.” En Breve Series No. 180, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Commission for Global Road Safety. 2008. Commission for Global Road Safety: Progress Report 2006–
      2008. London: Commission for Global Road Safety.
      http://www.makeroadssafe.org/publications/Documents/commission_progress_report.pd
      f.
The Economist. 2014. “Driving to an Early Grave.” January 25.
        http://www.economist.com/news/international/21595031-rich-countries-have-cut-deaths-
        and-injuries-caused-crashes-toll-growing.
The Guardian. 2012. “The World’s Deadliest Road.” December 8.
       http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/dec/09/world-most-lethal-road-
       bangladesh
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2005. “Turkey: Road Improvement and Traffic Safety Project.”
        Project Performance Assessment Report 31520, World Bank, Washington, DC.
______. 2007a. A Decade of Action in Transport: An Evaluation of World Bank Assistance to the Transport
        Sector, 1995–2005.
______. 2007b. “Bangladesh: Dhaka Urban Transport Project.” Project Performance Assessment
        Report 39323, World Bank, Washington, DC.
______. 2009. “Romania Roads II Project.” Project Performance Assessment Report 47414, World
        Bank, Washington, DC.
______. 2011. “Tanzania: Central Transport Corridor Project.” Project Performance Assessment
        Report 62433, World Bank, Washington, DC.
______. 2012. “Mozambique Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Project.” Project
        Performance Assessment Report 69813, World Bank, Washington, DC.
______. 2013a. Improving Institutional Capability and Financial Viability to Sustain Transport.
        Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2013b. “Poland Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Projects I, II, and III.” Project
        Performance Assessment Report 83251, World Bank, Washington, DC.
______. 2014. Responding to Global Public Bads: Learning from World Bank Experiences with Avian
        Influenza, 2006–13. Washington, DC: World Bank,
Marquez, Patricio V., and Anthony G. Bliss. 2010. Dangerous Roads: Russia’s Safety Challenge. A World
      Bank Study. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Marquez, Patricio V., George A. Banjo, Elena Y. Chesheva, and Stephen Muzira. 2010. Confronting
      ”Death on Wheels”: Making Roads Safe in Europe and Central Asia. A World Bank Study.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                          42
                                                                                             REFERENCES

Matthew-Wilson, C. 2014. “Poverty Driving Road Deaths.” www.scoop.co.nz/P01405/S0035/povert-
       driving-road-deaths.htm.
Peden, Margie, Richard Scurfield, David Sleet, Dinesh Mohan, Adnan A. Hyder, Eva Jarawan, and
       Colin Mathers, eds. 2004. World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention. Geneva: WHO.
Risavi, A. 2011. “Safety Challenges in Developing Countries.” Institute of Transportation Engineers
        Technical Conference, April 3–6, 2011, Lake Buena Vista, Florida.
SIDA (Swedish International Development Agency). 2006. Road Safety in Development Cooperation.
       Stockholm: SIDA.
SSATP (Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Program). 2012. “Africa: Scaling Up Efforts to Address the
       Road Safety Challenge.” Article 5, SSATP Newsletter No 9, April 2012,
       http://go.worldbank.org/FVX58MQ840.
______. 2013. “Guidelines for Mainstreaming Road Safety in Regional Trade Corridors.” SSATP
        Working Paper 97, World Bank, Washington, DC.
UN (United Nations). 2008. “Improving Road Safety Resolution/62/244,” 62nd Session, Improving
      Global Road Safety, New York. www.un.org/en/ga/62/resolutions.shtml.
______. 2011. Decade of Action for Road Safety. United Nations, New York City.
        http://www.un.org/en/roadsafety.
Universalia. 2009. Independent Evaluation of the World Bank Global Road Safety Facility. Montréal:
       Universalia Management Group.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2009. Global Status Report on Road Safety: Time for Action. Geneva:
     WHO.
______. 2013a. Global Status Report on Road Safety, 2013. Geneva: WHO.
______. 2013b. “Road Traffic Injuries.” Fact Sheet 358, March 2013.
        http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs358/en.
World Bank. 1996. Sustainable Transport, Priorities for Policy Reform. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2002. Cities on the Move: A World Bank Urban Strategy Review. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2012. En Breve Series No 180: “The Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020. Lessons from
        Argentina.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank Group. 2008. Safe, Clean, and Affordable … Transport for Development. The World Bank
       Group’s Transport Business Strategy for 2008–2012. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                      43
Appendix A. Case Studies from High-Income
Countries
Table A.1. Road Traffic Deaths and Motor Vehicle Population for 25 High-Income Countries with
a Population Exceeding 5 Million
         Countries                                           Road traffic death rate          Registered motor
                                     Population
  (population exceeding                                      per 100,000 population               vehicles
                                       (2010)
         5 million)                                                   (2010)                  (millions, 2010)a
 United States                        310.3                       11.4                        259.0
 Japan                                126.5                        5.2                         89.9
 Germany            (5)                82.3                        4.7                         50.2
 France                                62.8                        6.4                         34.3
 United Kingdom (2)                    62.0                        3.7                         35.2
 Italy                                 60.6                        7.2                         52.9
 Republic of Korea                     48.2                       14.1                         19.7
 Spain                                 46.1                        5.4                         31.1
 Canada                                34.0                        6.8                         21.4
 Saudi Arabia                          27.5                       24.8                          6.6
 Australia                             22.3                        6.1                         16.1
 Netherlands         (3)               16.6                        3.9                          9.3
 Greece                                11.4                       12.2                          7.9
 Belgium                               10.7                        8.1                          7.1
 Portugal                              10.7                       11.7                          8.7
 Czech Republic                        10.5                        7.6                          7.3
 Hungary                               10.0                        9.1                          3.6
 Sweden             (1)                 9.3                        3.0                          5.2
 Austria                                8.4                        6.6                          6.1
 Switzerland        (4)                 7.7                        4.3                          5.5
 UA Emirates                            7.5                       12.7                          2.3
 Israel             (5)                 7.4                        4.7                          2.5
 Denmark            (7)                 5.6                        4.8                          3.1
 Finland                                5.4                        5.1                          5.3
 Singapore                              5.1                        5.1                          1.0
Sources: Primarily World Health Organization (WHO) Global Safety Status Report and World Bank data.
Note: The seven best performers are indicated in bold.
a. Excludes two-wheelers.

For the high-income countries, seven (marked in bold) have achieved a road traffic
death rate per 1,000 persons of less than five. Sweden has the best record followed
by the United Kingdom (UK), the Netherlands, Switzerland, Germany, and Israel.
The worst are Saudi Arabia, the Republic of Korea, the United Arab Emirates,
Greece, Portugal, and the United States. With the exception of Saudi Arabia, which
demonstrates that ample financial resources alone do not necessarily lead to good
road safety practice, these results are much better than for the majority of


                                                                                                                  44
                                                                               APPENDIX A
                                                  CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES
developing countries, largely due to the degree of acceptance and implementation of
the safe systems approach.


Australia
Australia has a National Road Safety Strategy (2011–2020), agreed to by all its states
and territories, which was drawn up and is administered by the Australian
Transport Safety Bureau on the basis of the safe systems approach. The Department
of Infrastructure and Regional Development has a range of functions that support
the Australian government's role in road safety. These include administering vehicle
safety standards for new vehicles, administering the National Black Spot Program
and other road funding, administering the “keys2drive”1 and “Seatbelts for Regional
School Buses” programs, producing national road safety statistics, and coordinating
the National Road Safety Strategy.

The state of Victoria, which has the highest density of roads of any state in Australia,
has long been regarded, nationally and internationally in road safety policy. Its
death rate per 100,000 people has dropped from 31 in 1970 to 5.4 in 2012, according
to the Australian Bureau of Statistics. This has been achieved primarily through a
strategy of setting and securing compliance with key road safety rules. Large
numbers of road users are subjected to random breath tests or cameras check their
speed. This has resulted in acceptance over time that the restrictions are in the public
interest. The enforcement regime was supported through the advocacy of opinion
leaders from the medical profession and academia, and especially in the earlier years
by the media. The Victoria Road Corporation manages coordination of road safety
matters and crucially ensures dedicated funding sources for road safety including
the National Road Fund, revenue raised from the compulsory state injury insurance
team, and revenue from speed and camera fines. When the insurance levy was first
introduced, it was set at 3 percent of the injury insurance premium and then raised
to 10 percent, yielding about $20 per motor vehicle.2 Currently the levy brings in
more than $1 billion annually to assist persons with road accident injuries and is
administered by the Transport Accident Commission.3

Unlike Victoria, which has a road authority lead agency, Western Australia has a
stand-alone lead agency in the Premier’s Department. Western Australia is very
different from Victoria in that it is much larger in extent, and has a substantially
lower road density. It moved to a results-orientated focus in 1997 and adopted the
safe system approach in 2003. In 2009, it adopted the Towards Zero strategy along
the same lines as Sweden’s Vision Zero. Output targets are not specified in the road
safety strategy, but are set in the annual performance agreement of the Office of



                                                                                      45
APPENDIX A
CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES
Road Safety. Several sources of road safety funding in Western Australia comprise a
Road Trauma Trust Fund, a sponsorship contribution from the government’s
personal injury insurer and central and local government funding allocations.


Great Britain
As in the Netherlands, Great Britain has a lead road safety department in the
Transport Ministry. It works with governmental partners in Scotland and Wales.
There is a long tradition of systematic road safety work that started in the mid-
sixties to turnaround worsening road accident statistics. By 2010, Britain achieved
the lowest road death rate after Sweden. In recent years, road safety has also been
integrated increasingly into other government objectives concerning, for example,
security and the environment. Great Britain has achieved one of the lowest national
per capita death rates in the world. This safety record is attributed to a long process
of applying a range of engineering, enforcement, and education measures in a cost-
effective manner to clear pre-set targets. National best practice guidelines and codes
of practice have been drawn up based on experience with local authority
implementation. A forty percent reduction in deaths and serious injuries in the
vicinity of high-risk crash sites has been achieved where safety cameras have been
installed. As in Australia, the Netherlands, and Sweden, strong parliamentary
interest and support for road safety has been a key factor in achieving progress in
road safety. There is also an ongoing program of research supported by the business
sector into in-depth investigations into actual car crashes, leading to improvements
in safety design features to help mitigate injuries to occupants and other road users.
As in the other countries mentioned, there is a robust legislative framework, which
is subject to periodic review. There is also a “challenge fund” to assist with the costs
of projects promoting road safety proposed by organizations other than local
authorities.


Japan
According to the WHO Global Status Report in 2010, Japan had a road traffic death
rate of 5.2 per 100,000 persons. Traffic deaths have been declining since 1989 when
there were more than 11,000. In 2011, the number of traffic-related deaths was 4,611.
However, although traffic deaths have declined, traffic accidents have not. The
figure was 661,000 in 1989, but was 691,000 in 2011. More significantly, the number
of traffic-related injuries has increased slightly from 815,000 in 1989 to 854,000 in
2011.4 Japan has a dense population, road network and 90 million registered
vehicles. Administration is through the Bureau of Road Transport within the



46
                                                                               APPENDIX A
                                                  CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport, and Tourism. The Traffic Safety Policies
Law in Japan requires the government to report each year on the status of traffic
crashes, on measures being implemented and on plans for traffic safety measures.
This is contained in the “White Paper on Traffic Safety in Japan.”5 Expert panels
develop “Fundamental Traffic Safety Programs” (FTSP) every five years. The eighth
FTSP (2006 to 2010), for example, acknowledged the need to respond to Japan’s
changing demographics (i.e., declining birthrates and an aging society. The focus
was on improved pedestrian safety and raising people’s awareness of road safety
issues.

The common philosophy of the eighth FTSP was:

      Our aim is a crash-free society.
      Give people precedence: a “people first” philosophy considers those who are
       weaker than others.
      Deal with the issue of human error in public transportation: by improving the
       organizational structures and systems of companies providing transport
       services.
      Encourage participatory traffic safety activities by enabling citizens to
       participate in the planning stages of traffic safety measures run by national
       and local authorities.

“Safer road networks” are implemented in Japan (both for new road construction
and reconstruction). As a result, the extent of the road network with a low crash rate
is constantly expanding. Under a new procedure, a set of target figures for
reductions in crashes is determined first, then the types of countermeasures required
to achieve those annual targets are selected.6 The Japanese road network is targeted
at three different levels by developing routes for the improved coexistence of
pedestrians and vehicles; creating zones where pedestrians and bicycles have
priority and by implementing arterial road measures: including the placement of
right-turn lanes; intersection improvements; securing parking space; regulation of
illegal parking and installing light emitting diode (LED) traffic signals. “Safe
Pedestrian Areas” have been identified and have become the focus of area-wide
crash prevention measures (measures to limit travel speeds, to alert drivers to road
characteristics, and to demarcate sections to be used by traffic and by pedestrians).
Wide sidewalks have also been developed along school routes, around train stations
and other public facilities. Japan tries to eliminate utility poles, construct pedestrian
overpasses with lifts, implement rest areas for pedestrians and facilities to park
bicycles, and improve signs and markings to make them more visible to the elderly.




                                                                                       47
APPENDIX A
CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES

Netherlands
Netherlands has a lead road safety department within the Transport Ministry, which
interacts with the European Union (EU) on European safety matters. However, road
safety is highly decentralized with regional and local governments drawing up
plans for implementation in their jurisdictions, while national government supports
them with road safety knowledge and funding. The Netherlands is a world leader in
road safety performance and for innovation in road safety engineering. The country
has spelt out a vision known as Sustainable Safety, similar in nature to Vision Zero.
It recognizes that the system needs to take into account human limitations. One of
the principal goals of the policy is to achieve a uniform and self-explanatory national
system of speed limits. It has three guiding safety principles, which are:

        Functionality—to prevent unintended use of the infrastructure,
        Homogeneity—to prevent major variations in speed, direction, and mass of
         vehicles at moderate and high driving speeds, and
        Predictability—to prevent uncertainty among road users.

A clear hierarchy in terms of speed management has been established, which
includes changes in rules about priorities for different categories of road user.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) representing cyclists and pedestrians are
encouraged to play a strong role in the planning and promotion of road safety.
Whereas in Sweden Vision Zero was driven by public health considerations in the
first instance, investment in road safety to reduce socio-economic costs is the key
theme of Sustainable Safety. Road safety funding is nowadays based on resources
allocated from the Netherland government’s general tax revenues, but the results
framework including targets to be met ensure that road safety is given a consistently
high priority.


Sweden
Sweden is the global leader in best practice. Among the reasons for this is its long
tradition in road safety work and that road safety is truly a national priority. Road
safety is fully integrated into urban planning and legislation underpins a long-term
goal and interim road safety targets for motivating and involving a broad spectrum
of stakeholders.7 Since 1997, Sweden has been working toward its highly ambitious
goal, known as Vision Zero, to eliminate death and serious injury in its road traffic
system. The strategy is a key driver of innovation and is based on well-established
safety principles and a results focus, which is also being adopted in varying degrees
by other high-income countries. The concept is akin to the approach used in the



48
                                                                               APPENDIX A
                                                  CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES
aviation industry to minimize air crashes. Vision Zero basically says that the loss of
life in road accidents is unacceptable and that the road system must be designed to
take account of human error, which has also become a goal in the Swedish national
transport policy. It is notable that the related aim of the Swedish car company,
Volvo, is that by 2020 nobody will be seriously injured or killed in one of its new
vehicles and that in the longer term cars should not crash at all.

Sweden is unique in that for enforcement of traffic regulations the individual driver
rather than the vehicle must be prosecuted. In practical terms, this means for
speeding it is not sufficient for a camera to capture the offending vehicle’s number
plate; there is a requirement to prove who was actually driving the vehicle at the
time the offence was committed. This means that the driver as well as the number
plate must be recognizable.8 In addition, the cameras are only positioned where they
are required for safety reasons, thus eliminating the perception that the fines are just
another form of tax on the motorist. This has the support of the general public.
Overall adherence to speed limits has improved from 50 percent in the late nineties
to 80 percent currently, and 95 percent or better at camera sites.

This evidence is corroborated by a study in the UK by the Royal Automobile Club
Foundation, which analyzed data from 551 fixed speed cameras in nine areas. The
findings revealed that the average number of fatal and serious collisions near a
speed camera fell on average by more than a fifth after it was installed.9 When
evaluating the financial benefit derived from such cameras, the savings from
preventing accidents and injuries far outweigh the revenue raised by imposing fines
on speeding drivers and the cost of the camera installations.

Vision Zero is relevant to any country that aims to create a sustainable road
transport system and not just wealthy countries.10 Sweden was one of the first
countries to establish a results framework, which included intermediate outcome
targets such as increasing seat belt usage, percentage of vehicle kilometers of driving
exceeding speed limits, percentage of cyclists wearing helmets, and pedestrians and
cyclists using reflective clothing, average response time for emergency services after
a crash, and percentage of drivers above the legal alcohol limit in police checks.
While purchase and maintenance of enforcement equipment may be costly, a
number of relatively inexpensive actions can be taken that will make roads safer.
These are shown in box A.1. Vision Zero is coordinated and promoted by a National
Road Safety Assembly. Responsibility for road safety lies with central government,
which develops the main long-term road safety strategic guidelines. These are
translated into implementation programs at regional level with regional authorities
liaising with local government and municipalities. The National Police Board
coordinates national road safety policing strategy carried out by local police


                                                                                      49
APPENDIX A
CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES
authorities. Organized business and NGOs are encouraged to become involved in
road safety.

 Box A.1. Simple Measures to Save Lives
 1.  Separate categories of road users where possible, especially in urban areas.
 2.  Install central crash barriers at dangerous locations on highways.
 3.  Convert dangerous intersections into roundabouts.
 4.  For older highways, place guard rails at steep cliffs and replace rigid posts and guardrails with
     types that yield.
 5. Review speed limits on national roads and adjust to the safety standard of the road.
 6. Ensure vehicles are fitted with seat belt reminders.
 7. Introduce campaigns to increase use of helmets for two wheeled riders.
 8. Train professional drivers in first aid.
 9. Encourage companies to adopt safe travel policies, demanding that employees abide by the
     speed limit, use seat belts, and not to drink and drive.
 10. Enforce speed limits at dangerous locations.
 11. Introduce legislation to ensure that locally manufactured or imported new vehicles meet
     appropriate safety standards.



Lessons for Developing Countries from High-Income Countries
While structures may differ, the general characteristics of road safety organizations
in high-income countries include a strong central lead agency, which coordinates
with a broad range of stakeholders. There is normally secure and sustainable
funding, progress is measured through a rigorous results framework, and there is a
shared vision strongly supported at political level to reduce the rates of death and
injury. Although high-income countries have considerable resources to apply to
improving road safety, this does not mean that developing countries cannot adopt
many of the best practices. Even when constrained by a lack of capacity, it is feasible
for them to move in the right direction. The more easily implementable low cost
measures can result in a significant improvement in their accident statistics.

In Europe the “big four killers” to be targeted in future campaigns are speeding,
jumping red lights, not using seat belts and drink driving, and these areas are likely
similar for most countries.11 Innovations and improvements in technology will also
eventually trickle down to many developing countries including LED stop signs,
shorter crash cushions and improved vehicle design to prevent rollover accidents.
Argentina has shown through its links with Spain that an appropriate twinning
arrangement can be a significant factor in helping to strengthen its capacity. China
has also demonstrated that a strong policy with regard to children and road safety
can be highly beneficial. Nevertheless, developing countries have different
characteristics and policies need to be adapted to each country’s specific


50
                                                                                          APPENDIX A
                                                             CASE STUDIES FROM HIGH-INCOME COUNTRIES
circumstances. In all countries, though, a strong lead agency is a critical prerequisite
and its establishment and together with adequate resourcing signals recognition by
the government that road safety is important. Road Safety enjoys a high profile, in
most high-income countries, with political support at the highest levels. For
example, the Prime Minister of Japan chairs the Central Committee on Traffic Safety
Measures responsible for formulating its Fundamental Traffic Safety Programs. Such
political support usually translates into funding provision. General awareness
campaigns to influence road user behavior are not the norm anymore. Rather, a
more targeted approach to specific groups is used. Analysis is undertaken to
determine the details of the problem, details of the message, and the target audience,
and how to ensure that audience sees the message.

1
  Keys2drive is a learner driver program run by the Australian Automobile Association and funded
by the Australian government. The program provides one free driving lesson with an accredited
instructor, to learner drivers accompanied by their supervising drivers.
2Parliament of Victoria. 2010. Inquiry into Federal-State Road Funding Arrangements, Road Safety
Committee, Parliamentary Paper No. 361, Victoria Government Printer.
3   Transport Accident Commission. 2013. Annual Report, 2013 Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
4   The Japan Times. 2012. “Road Deaths Hide the Truth,” www.japantimes.jp.
5   Government of Japan. 2006. White Paper on Traffic Safety (abridged), Cabinet Office, Tokyo, Japan.
6   Shoukrallah, R. 2008. Road Safety in Five Leading Countries, Codatu XIII, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
7World Health Organization. 2013. Global Status Report on Road safety, 2013: Supporting a Decade of
Action, Annex 4, Geneva.
8   ITS International. 2014. Sweden’s Tactics Slows Speeding Drivers, January/February edition, 2014.
9Royal Automobile Club Foundation. 2013. Deaths and Serious Injuries Down a Quarter Near Speed
Cameras, June 7, 2013 www.racfoundation.org.
10   World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention, op cit. p. 20.
 ITS international. 2014. EU Tackles Four Driving Offences which Kill Most, Safety and Security for
11

Road Infrastructure, www.itsinternational.com.




                                                                                                        51
Appendix B. List of Projects with Road Safety
Content during Study Period
                                                                                                         Fiscal
      Project                                                                                 Project
No.                                           Project Name                           Region               Year
        ID                                                                                    Status
                                                                                                        Approval
 1    P050623   GH-Road Sec Dev Project (FY02)                                        AFR     Closed     2002
 2    P001785   MZ-Roads & Bridges MMP (FY02)                                         AFR     Closed     2002
 3    P065436   UG-Road Dev Phase 2 APL (FY02)                                        AFR     Closed     2002
 4    P074030   BF-Transp Sec SIM (FY03)                                              AFR     Closed     2003
 5    P074490   CM-Douala Infrastructure (FY03)                                       AFR     Closed     2003
 6    P074963   NG-Lagos Urban Transport Project                                      AFR     Closed     2003
 7    P079351   ML-Transp Corridors Improv (FY04)-(PACT)                              AFR     Closed     2004
 8    P082615   Northern Corridor Transport Improvement Project                       AFR     Active     2004
 9    P082806   TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT PROJECT                           AFR     Closed     2004
10    P071985   ZM-Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project                        AFR     Active     2004
11    P092509   GH-GEF Urban Transport Project                                        AFR     Active     2007
12    P075566   LS-Integr Transp SIL (FY07)                                           AFR     Active     2007
13    P083325   MZ-Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Program - Phase II    AFR     Active     2007
14    P090075   Second Transport Sector Project                                       AFR     Active     2007
15    P079749   3A-W Africa Transp. & Transit Facilitat                               AFR     Active     2008
16    P101434   NE-Transport Sector Program Support Project                           AFR     Active     2008
17    P090135   NG-Federal Roads Development                                          AFR     Active     2008
18    P079414   RW-Transport Sector Development                                       AFR     Active     2008
19    P106872   ET-RSDP Stage IV APL (FY09)                                           AFR     Active     2009
20    P102000   GH-Transport Project SIL (FY09)                                       AFR     Active     2009
21    P089672   MR-Transport Sector Inst'l Dev. TA                                    AFR     Closed     2009
22    P096407   3A-Abidjan-Lagos Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (ALTTFP)    AFR     Active     2010
23    P091828   MU-Infrastructure Project                                             AFR     Active     2010
24    P114762   NG-Lagos Urban Transport Project 2                                    AFR     Active     2010
25    P055120   TZ-Transport Sector Support Project                                   AFR     Active     2010
26    P092837   UG:Transport Sector Development Project                               AFR     Active     2010
27    P106596   ZM-RRMP PHASE II APL                                                  AFR     Active     2010
28    P125915   3A: CEMAC Transport and Transit Facil                                 AFR     Active     2011
29    P124109   KE:Transport Sector Support Project                                   AFR     Active     2011
30    P114880   MZ:APL2 Roads & Bridges Additional Finan                              AFR     Active     2011
31    P126516   Cape Verde - Transport Sector Reform                                  AFR     Active     2013
32    P130422   CEMAC Transp and Transit Facil-3rd Addtl                              AFR     Active     2013
33    P117731   Ethiopia-Transport Sector Project                                     AFR     Active     2013
34    P126321   KE-National Urban Transport Improvement                               AFR     Active     2013
35    P131107   NE - Transp Sect Prog Spt Proj Addit Fin                              AFR     Active     2013
36    P120370   Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project              AFR     Active     2013
37    P070459   CN-Inner Mongolia Hwy Project                                         EAP     Closed     2002



                                                                                                                   52
                                                                                                   APPENDIX B
                                                                    LIST OF PROJECTS WITH ROAD SAFETY CONTENT
                                                                                                            Fiscal
      Project                                                                                    Project
No.                                            Project Name                             Region               Year
        ID                                                                                       Status
                                                                                                           Approval
38    P076714   CN-2nd Anhui Hwy                                                         EAP     Closed     2003
39    P058847   CN-3rd Xinjiang Hwy Project                                              EAP     Closed     2003
40    P070441   CN-Hubei Xiaogan Xiangfan Hwy                                            EAP     Closed     2003
41    P069852   China Wuhan Urban Transport Project                                      EAP     Closed     2004
42    P081749   CN-Hubei Shiman Highway                                                  EAP     Closed     2004
43    P083543   LA-ROAD MAINT APL2                                                       EAP     Closed     2004
44    P075173   TH-HIGHWAYS MGMT                                                         EAP     Closed     2004
45    P075523   WS-Second Infrastructure Asset Management Project                        EAP     Closed     2004
46    P085080   VN-ROAD SAFETY PROJECT                                                   EAP     Closed     2005
47    P093906   CN-3rd Jiangxi Hwy                                                       EAP     Closed     2006
48    P099992   CN-Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure                                 EAP     Closed     2006
49    P075613   CN-Shaanxi Ankang Road Development                                       EAP     Closed     2007
50    P079906   ID-Strategic Roads Infrastructure                                        EAP     Active     2007
51    P107627   TH Community Youth Helmet Use                                            EAP     Closed     2007
52    P083588   VN-MKG DELTA TRANSPORT INFRA DEV                                         EAP     Active     2007
53    P099112   CN-Anhui Highway Rehabilitation and Improvement Project                  EAP     Closed     2008
54    P090335   CN-China-GEF-World Bank Urban Transport Partnership Program Project      EAP     Active     2008
55    P092631   CN-Xi'an Sustainable Urban Transport                                     EAP     Active     2008
56    P106603   KH - Road Asset Mgmt (ADB/AusAID)                                        EAP     Active     2008
57    P079935   PH- Natl Rds Improv. & Mgt Ph.2                                          EAP     Active     2008
58    P083581   VN-HANOI URBAN TRANSPORT                                                 EAP     Active     2008
59    P101258   CN-Hubei Yiba Highway                                                    EAP     Active     2009
60    P112838   China Wuhan Second Urban Transport                                       EAP     Active     2010
61    P111421   CN-Anhui Medium Cities Urban Transport Project                           EAP     Active     2010
62    P119491   CN-Facil Legis Reform Children Rd Safety                                 EAP     Closed     2010
63    P096920   CN-Ningxia Highway                                                       EAP     Active     2010
64    P081615   CN-Taiyuan Urban Transport Project                                       EAP     Active     2010
65    P114133   iRAP Vietnam Staff Costs                                                 EAP     Closed     2010
66    P102398   LA-Road Sector Project                                                   EAP     Active     2010
67    P110632   CN - Sichuan Small Towns Development                                     EAP     Active     2011
68    P122151   Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project                                     EAP     Active     2011
69    P106235   VN-EXPRESSWAY DEVEL DaNang-QNgai                                         EAP     Active     2011
70    P090990   Western Indonesia National Roads Improv.                                 EAP     Active     2011
71    P124978   CN-Changzhi Urban Transport                                              EAP     Active     2012
72    P123133   CN-Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure                                   EAP     Active     2012
73    P119071   CN-Hubei Xiangyang Urban Transport                                       EAP     Active     2012
74    P116398   Medium Cities Development Project                                        EAP     Active     2012
75    P126454   Xinjiang Yining Urban Transport Improve                                  EAP     Active     2012
76    P129347   Lao Road Sector Additional Financing                                     EAP     Active     2013
                Liaoning Coastal Economic Zone Urban Infrastructure and Environmental
77    P126611                                                                            EAP     Active
                Management Project                                                                          2013
78    P123384   VN-Danang Sustainable City Development                                   EAP     Active     2013
79    P066260   ROAD MAINT                                                               ECA     Closed     2002


                                                                                                                      53
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PROJECTS WITH ROAD SAFETY CONTENT
                                                                                                Fiscal
       Project                                                                       Project
 No.                                          Project Name                  Region               Year
         ID                                                                          Status
                                                                                               Approval
 80    P071347   ROAD MGMT SAFETY                                            ECA     Closed     2002
 81    P078170   ROAD MAINT & REHAB                                          ECA     Closed     2004
 82    P086277   Secondary & Local Roads Project                             ECA     Closed     2004
 83    P075207   TRNSPT REHAB (SERBIA)                                       ECA     Closed     2004
 84    P088824   ROAD MAINT & REHAB 2                                        ECA     Closed     2005
 85    P083620   TRANSPORT RESTRUCTURING                                     ECA     Closed     2005
 86    P096214   ROAD MAINTENANCE & REHAB 3                                  ECA     Closed     2006
 87    P083110   HIGHWAY IMPR 1                                              ECA     Closed     2007
 88    P091723   MK Second Trade and Transport Facilitation Project          ECA     Closed     2007
 89    P099894   ROAD INFRASTRUCT REHAB                                      ECA     Closed     2007
 90    P078949   TRANSPORT                                                   ECA     Closed     2007
 91    P100667   HIGHWAY 2 - ADDITIONAL FINANCING                            ECA     Active     2008
 92    P094044   HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT 2                                       ECA     Closed     2008
 93    P100792   ROAD INFRA & SAFETY                                         ECA     Closed     2008
 94    P107610   HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT 2 ADDL. FINANCING                       ECA     Closed     2009
 95    P100580   ROADS & SAFETY IMPROVEMENT                                  ECA     Active     2009
 96    P099270   SOUTH WEST ROADS                                            ECA     Active     2009
 97    P118023   AZ-Third Highway Project                                    ECA     Active     2010
 98    P108005   CORRIDOR X HIGHWAY PROJECT                                  ECA     Active     2010
 99    P112523   EW HIGHWAY IMP 3                                            ECA     Active     2010
 100   P117152   KAKHETI REGIONAL ROADS                                      ECA     Active     2010
 101   P107608   National Road Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana)            ECA     Active     2010
 102   P123291   AF-NATL. ROAD REHAB (Osh-Batken-Isfana)                     ECA     Active     2011
 103   P118375   Road Upgrading and Modernization Project                    ECA     Active     2011
 104   P128863   AF-EAST WEST HWY IMPRVMT 3                                  ECA     Active     2012
 105   P128050   EAST-WEST ROADS                                             ECA     Active     2012
 106   P122204   SLRP II                                                     ECA     Active     2012
 107   P130413   Fourth East West Highway Improvement Project                ECA     Active     2013
 108   P126782   LIFELINE ROAD NETWORK IMPROVEMENT PROJ                      ECA     Active     2013
 109   P127876   ROAD REHABILITATION AND SAFETY PROJECT                      ECA     Active     2013
 110   P127156   SECOND ROAD & SAFETY IMPROVEMENT PROJ.                      ECA     Active     2013
 111   P068968   BO Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project              LCR     Closed     2002
 112   P074726   CO Bogota Urban Services Project                            LCR     Active     2003
 113   P088153   AR National Highway Asset Management                        LCR     Closed     2004
 114   P073985   CL GEF Sus Trans & Air Quality Santiago                     LCR     Closed     2004
 115   P082466   CO Integrated Mass Transit Systems                          LCR     Closed     2004
 116   P035740   PE- Lima Urban Transport Project                            LCR     Closed     2004
 117   P057481   UY-Transport Infrastructure Maintenance and Rural Access    LCR     Closed     2005
 118   P086689   CL-Santiago Urban Transport TAL                             LCR     Closed     2006
 119   P105288   AR APL2 Buenos Aires Infrastructure                         LCR     Closed     2007
 120   P095569   AR APL2 National Highway Asset Mgt                          LCR     Closed     2007
 121   P099051   AR- SANTA FE ROAD Infrastructure                            LCR     Closed     2007



54
                                                                                                   APPENDIX B
                                                                    LIST OF PROJECTS WITH ROAD SAFETY CONTENT
                                                                                                        Fiscal
      Project                                                                                Project
No.                                            Project Name                         Region               Year
        ID                                                                                   Status
                                                                                                       Approval
122   P099585   AR-Cordoba-Road Infrastructure                                       LCR     Closed     2007
123   P007077   EC-RURAL ROADS                                                       LCR     Closed     2007
124   P082026   PY Road Maintenance                                                  LCR     Active     2007
125   P109058   HN Road Rehabilitation & Improvement II                              LCR     Active     2008
126   P113084   CO Disaster Risk Mgmt CAT DDO                                        LCR     Closed     2009
127   P116989   AR-Road Safety                                                       LCR     Active     2010
128   P118410   BR Mato Grosso do Sul Road                                           LCR     Active     2010
129   P106663   BR Sao Paulo Feeder Roads Project                                    LCR     Active     2010
130   P116929   Peru Safe and Sustainable Transport Project                          LCR     Closed     2010
131   P121477   UY Road Safety EDU-CAR Campaign                                      LCR     Closed     2010
132   P120198   AR Norte Grande Road Infrastructure                                  LCR     Active     2011
133   P122007   BO Nat'l Roads & Airport Infrastructure                              LCR     Active     2011
134   P117947   CO Support Nat'l Urban Transit Program                               LCR     Active     2012
135   P123447   NI-Rural Roads Infrastructure Improvement Project                    LCR     Active     2012
136   P121495   BR MST Tocantins Integrated Sust. Reg.                               LCR     Active     2013
137   P130972   CO Productive & Sust. Cities DPL                                     LCR     Closed     2013
138   P127723   Sao Paulo Sustainable Transport Project                              LCR     Active     2013
139   P125803   UY Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project                       LCR     Active     2013
140   P082754   MA-Rural Roads                                                       MNA     Closed     2004
141   P125135   RY-Road Asset Management Project                                     MNA     Active     2013
142   P112296   GRSF: Burden of Injuries in SSA                                      OTH     Closed     2010
143   P114763   IRF Road Safety Training                                             OTH     Closed     2010
144   P126051   iRAP ( Bloomberg RS10)                                               OTH     Active     2011
145   P072539   IN: Kerala State Transport Project                                   SAR     Closed     2002
146   P069889   IN: MIZORAM ROADS                                                    SAR     Closed     2002
147   P050668   IN: MUMBAI URBAN TRANSPORT PROJECT                                   SAR     Closed     2002
148   P067606   IN: UP Roads                                                         SAR     Closed     2003
149   P050649   Tamil Nadu Road Sector Project                                       SAR     Closed     2003
150   P010556   PK: HIGHWAYS REHAB                                                   SAR     Closed     2004
151   P083780   IN: TN Urban III                                                     SAR     Closed     2006
152   P096019   IN: HP State Roads Project                                           SAR     Active     2007
153   P090585   IN: Punjab State Road Sector Project                                 SAR     Active     2007
154   P095977   NP: Road Sector Development Project                                  SAR     Active     2008
155   P096023   IN: Orissa State Roads                                               SAR     Active     2009
156   P096021   IN: Andhra Pradesh Road Sector Project                               SAR     Active     2010
157   P107847   LK: Provincial Roads Project                                         SAR     Active     2010
158   P122371   IN: Mizoram Roads AF II-AF                                           SAR     Closed     2011
159   P121515   IN: NHAI Technical Assistance Project                                SAR     Active     2011
160   P107649   IN:Karnataka State Highway Improv Pro II                             SAR     Active     2011
161   P119735   NP: Road Sector Development Project-AF                               SAR     Active     2011
162   P123311   PK: Highways Rehabilitation Project-AF                               SAR     Closed     2011
163   P096018   IN: Assam State Roads Project                                        SAR     Active     2012



                                                                                                                  55
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PROJECTS WITH ROAD SAFETY CONTENT
                                                                                       Fiscal
       Project                                                              Project
 No.                                          Project Name         Region               Year
         ID                                                                 Status
                                                                                      Approval
 164   P123828   BD: Second Rural Transport Project                 SAR     Active     2013
 165   P130339   IN: India Second Kerala State Transport Project    SAR     Active     2013
 166   P144335   Nepal-India Reg Trade & Transport Prj              SAR     Active     2013




56
Appendix C. List of Project Performance
Assessment Reports Relevant to This Study
 Report                 Document
             Country                                                 Project Name/ID
  No.                     Date


31520     Turkey       2/7/2005     Turkey—Road Improvement and Traffic Safety Project
          Russian
32430     Federation   5/24/2005    Russia Federation—Urban Transport and Bridge Rehabilitation Projects
                                    Brazil—Recife Metropolitan Transport Decentralization Project and Belo Horizonte
36589     Brazil       6/27/2006    Metropolitan Transport Project

39323     Bangladesh   4/4/2007     Bangladesh—Dhaka Urban Transport Project

42868     Ethiopia     3/10/2008    Ethiopia—Road Sector Development Program

47414     Romania      3/3/2009     Romania—Second Roads Project
                                    China—-Tri-Provincial Highway Project, and Hubei Xiaogan- Xiangfan Highway
48966     China        6/17/2009    Project
                                    Tanzania—Second Integrated Roads and Central Transport Corridor; and Uganda—
          Uganda;                   First and Second Phase Road Development and Roads Sector Institutional Support
62433     Tanzania     6/21/2011    Technical Assistance Projects
                                    Mozambique—First Phase of the Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance
69813     Mozambique   6/25/2012    Program Project, and Railways and Ports Restructuring Project
                                    India—Gujarat State Highway Project, and Karnataka State Highways Improvement
70678     India        6/28/2012    Project

83251     Poland       12/18/2013   Poland—First, Second, and Third Road Maintenance and Rehabilitation Project




                                                                                                                       57
Appendix D. List of Sample of Non-Lending
Activities
                                                                                                             Fiscal
       Project                                                                        Product    Project
 No.                                          Project Name                                                    Year
         ID                                                                             Line     Status
                                                                                                            Approval
                  Gender Informed Road Safety Strategies in ECA: Reducing Accidents
 1     P147916    through a Gender Targeted Approach                                             Active      2016
 2     P121046    China Road Safety Roadmap Development                                ESW       Active      2011
 3     P132607    North South Corridor RSMCR and Audit                                 ESW       Active      2014
 4     P078323    VN-Transport Safety Strategy Review                                  ESW       Closed      2003
 5     P079909    CN-Road Traffic Safety                                               ESW       Closed      2003
 6     P077814    LKD 3A ROAD SAFETY AUDIT                                             ESW       Closed      2004
 7     P088145    CN-National Road Safety                                              ESW       Closed      2004
 8     P110301    CN - Road Traffic Safety                                             ESW       Closed      2009
 9     P133300    Road Safety Management Capacity Review                               ESW       Closed      2014
                  EC Strengthening Capacity for Monitoring and Evaluation of Safety
 10    P144798    Program                                                                IDF     Pipeline    2014
                                                                                      Reimburs
 11      NA       Bulgaria: Road Safety Action Plan                                    able TA   Closed      2012
                                                                                      Reimburs
 12      NA       Romania: Strategic Planning in Trans.                                able TA   Closed      2012
 13    P109439    Safety Management Capacity Review                                     TA       Active      2010
 14    P106426    3A-RS Road Safety Policy Dev. (FY12)                                  TA       Active      2014
 15    P126076    Road Safety Capacity Review ( Bloomberg)                              TA       Active      2014
 16    P126849    3A: SSATP - TFF Corridor Facilitation                                 TA       Active      2014
 17    P127981    EC Transport NLTA                                                     TA       Active      2014
                  TFF to Support the implementation of the TOTAL and WORLD-BANK
 18    P130541    Africa Road Safety Corridor Initiative (ARSCI)                        TA       Active      2014
 19    P146529    Poland - Road Sarety TA                                               TA       Active      2015
       P146697/
       P146802/   Romania: Climate Change and Low Carbon Green Growth Program
 20    P146803/                                                                         TA       Active      2015
                  reimbursable Advisory Service (RAS)
       P146821/
       P145943
 21    P091770    SAFE ROAD DESIGN - PILOT TA                                           TA       Closed      2006
 22    P096733    ECA ROAD SAFETY MGT & CAPACITY REVIEWS                                TA       Closed      2006
 23    P099153    CN-Traffic Safety                                                     TA       Closed      2007
 24    P103903    ROAD SAFETY CAPACITY REVIEW (TUDTR)                                   TA       Closed      2007
 25    P105154    Road Safety Mgt Cap Review (ETWTR)                                    TA       Closed      2008
 26    P103912    Road Safety Guidelines                                                TA       Closed      2009
 27    P112274    Road Safety Management Capacity Review                                TA       Closed      2009
 28      NA       Poland: Transport Policy Note                                         TA       Closed      2010



58
                                                                                        APPENDIX D
                                                            LIST OF SAMPLE OF NON-LENDING ACTIVITIES
                                                                                              Fiscal
      Project                                                            Product   Project
No.                                          Project Name                                      Year
        ID                                                                 Line    Status
                                                                                             Approval
29      NA      Russia’s Safety Challenge                                  TA       Closed    2010
30      NA      ECA: Making Roads Safe                                     TA       Closed    2010
31      NA      SSA: Challenge of Road Traffic Inj.                        TA       Closed    2012
32      NA      ECA: Confronting Death on Wheels                           TA       Closed    2012

33    P127916   Poland: Road Safety Report                                 TA       Closed    2012
34      NA      Georgia: Management Cap. Review                            TA       Closed    2013
35      NA      Georgia: Road Safety Workshop                              TA       Closed    2013
36    P120169   6L-Improving road safety outcomes in LAC                   TA       Closed    2014
37    P127916   Road Safety Support                                        TA       Closed    2014




                                                                                                  59
Appendix E. Case Studies from Developing
Countries
Appendix E discusses the case studies from developing countries. Tables E.1–6
present statistics on road traffic death rates for developing countries with a
population exceeding 5 million.


Africa Region
In absolute numbers, the road-related mortality rate per capita in Africa is the
highest in the world at 28.3 deaths per 100,000 people.1 For Sub-Saharan Africa the
rate is 32.2, which is double the rate for Latin America and South East Asia and five
times worse than the best performing nations in Europe. This is although Africa has
less than 4 percent of the world vehicle fleet. Four countries, Nigeria, Ethiopia,
South Africa, and Sudan, account for half of the road injury death toll in Sub-
Saharan Africa.2 Moreover, this death rate has grown by 84 percent since 1990,
almost twice the rate of global increase; pedestrians comprise 44 percent of road
deaths, substantially more than the global average of 35 percent.

 Box E.1. A Personal Tragedy Mirrored in Too Many African Families
 On the eve of the 2010 World Football Cup, former South African President Nelson Mandela
 experienced a tragedy that is all too common in Africa - his great-granddaughter was killed in a car
 crash returning home after a concert in Soweto. The driver was arrested and charged with drunk
 driving. Thousands of African families have experienced the pain of the Mandela family: according
 to WHO data, close to 250,000 people die each year on African roads, representing one-fifth of the
 world's road deaths, while about 500,000 sustain non-fatal injuries. Severe underreporting, though,
 hides the real magnitude of the problem. For example, in Mozambique, 2011 estimates by a Harvard
 University team indicated that road deaths and non-fatal injuries were twice as high as those
 reported in official statistics.

Among the reasons for this grim picture is the poverty prevalent over much of the
continent such that 18 of the 27 nations with a population exceeding 5 million are
classified as low-income countries with a per capita income of under $1,005 a year
(see Table E.1). A few of these states are also fragile in the sense that they have
experienced civil conflicts, disasters, or wars that have seriously weakened their
institutional capacity. In addition access to medical care for injury victims is often
poor and facilities inadequate.

According to Marquez, the reality in Sub-Saharan Africa is the need to painstakingly
build institutions and capacity to plan manage and implement road safety initiatives


60
                                                                                               APPENDIX E
                                                                   CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
on a national scale.3 Although the majority of African countries (88 percent)
surveyed by the World Health Organization (WHO) reported having a road safety
agency, in only 24 percent has the government endorsed a strategy with targets and
earmarked funding. Most countries lack comprehensive road safety laws to address
the main risk factors, but also suffer from sporadic enforcement, where bribery is a
factor. Quality data to assess the problem properly are often unavailable, and
emergency medical services are frequently a peripheral element of road safety
programs.

Table E.1. Road Traffic Death Rates for 27 Countries in the Africa Region with a Population
Exceeding 5 Million
        Countries                                           Road Traffic Death Rate    Registered Motor
                                     Population
 (population exceeding                                      per 100,000 Population         Vehicles
                                   (millions, 2010)
         5 million)                                                 (2010)             (millions, 2010)a
 Nigeria                             158.4                         33.7 (1)                12.6     (1)
 Ethiopia                             83.0                         17.6                     0.4
 Congo, Dem. Rep.                     66.0                         20.9                     0.4
 South Africa                         50.1                         31.9 (2)                 9.6     (2)
 Tanzania                             44.8                         22.7                     1.0     (4)
 Sudanb                               43,6                         25.1                     0.1
 Kenya                                40.5                         20.9                     1.4     (3)
 Uganda                               33.4                         28.9 (3)                 0.6
 Ghana                                24.3                         22.2                     0.8
 Mozambique                           23.4                         18.5                     0.4
 Madagascar                           20.7                         18.4                     0.2
 Côte d’Ivoire                        19.7                         20.9                     0.5
 Cameroon                             19.6                         20.1                     0.4
 Angola                               19.1                         23.1                     0.2
 Burkina Faso                         16.5                         27.7 (5)                 0.9      (5)
 Niger                                15.5                         23.7                     0.2
 Mali                                 15,4                         23.1                     0.2
 Malawi                               14.9                         19.5                     0.2
 Zambia                               13.1                         23.8                     0.3
 Zimbabwe                             12.6                         14.6                     0.9      (5)
 Senegal                              12.4                         19.5                     0.3
 Chad                                 11.2                         29.7 (4)                 0.2
 Rwanda                               10.6                         19.9                     0.1
 Guinea                               10.0                         19.6                     0.1
 Benin                                 8.5                         23.9                     0.1
 Burundi                               8.3                         21.3                     0.1
 Togo                                  6.0                         17.2                     0.1
 Sierra Leone                          5.9                         22.6                     0.1
Sources: Primarily WHO Global Safety Status Report and World Bank data.
a. Excludes two-wheelers.
b. Before establishment of South Sudan.




                                                                                                           61
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
The World Bank operates extensively in the Africa Region, supported by the Sub-
Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program (SSATP), which is an international
partnership to facilitate policy development and related capacity building in the
transport sector in Africa. The platform for the implementation of the Decade of
Action for Road Safety is the Africa Road Safety Policy Framework, which
underpins the African Action Plan.4 SSATP subsequently commissioned an initiative
to support developing country specific road safety strategies in line with the plan, to
identify key mitigation measures, and assist in their implementation. Three locations
were proposed for the initial phase to leverage projects funded by development
partners, namely Ethiopia, Zambia, and the West African Abidjan-Lagos Corridor.
Currently the Bank has 24 active projects with a commitment value of $3.683 billion
and safety content valued at $83 million spread across 16 countries. By type of
intervention, 38 percent are related to institutional capacity strengthening, 30
percent to infrastructure safety engineering, 14 percent to road user behavior, 13
percent to vehicle safety, and 5 percent to post crash care.

MALI
Mali is a landlocked low-income country in West Africa with a population of 15
million and a road injury fatality rate of 23.1 per 100,000 people. The Bank is
financing a project called the Second Mali Transport Sector Project, approved in 2007
and now substantially advanced in implementation, even though it was delayed by
a year due to armed conflict in the country. The closing date is the end of 2014. The
main safety objective was to improve safety in downtown Bamako (the capital city),
which involved segregating bus and minibus traffic in dedicated lanes, rebuilding
pedestrian walkways, constructing two pedestrian overpasses and developing traffic
management capacity (including safety aspects). In rural areas, road designs were
improved to reduce variations in width and to ensure appropriate signage where the
width does change (typically where the road narrows because of a bridge or other
structure). Spot improvements were also made at a relatively low cost. The creation
of a National Road Safety Agency has been a recent development. In addition, two
intercity roads allowing higher speeds (60 kilometers per hour) have also been
improved by spot improvements. The main challenges on these roads have been the
long straight stretches that encourage unsafe speeds and in the dry season dust
hazards that increase the risk of collisions.

In the City of Bamako a major problem is the encroachment of local informal traders
on the four-lane highway where the buses and taxis pick up and set down
passengers. After the coup, civic order broke down and the encroachment became
severe until regular police patrols were restored. Even so, this roadside friction
means that generally only two lanes are usable instead of four and there is a distinct



62
                                                                              APPENDIX E
                                                  CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
road safety hazard. Under the project, 585 little shops were created to house the
traders, but these are often just used as storage as the customers are all accessing
public transport on the highway. This is an unresolved problem at this point
because enforcement is not practical with the resources available and an interesting
lesson for future projects. Typical implementation issues encountered and
eventually resolved have been cost overruns, lack of sufficient counterpart funding,
and a shaky monitoring system. However, the municipal authorities and the
government of Mali have still not (at the time this was written) finalized the
reorganization of traffic management and traffic patterns required for the effective
use by public transport of the new urban infrastructure.

Accident statistics are very unreliable and many incidents are unreported. The
police have limited capacity and training, while corruption is also commonplace.
More needs to be done to improve enforcement for safe zones for pedestrians.
Annual vehicle inspections would also be helpful, but at present this is not feasible.
Nevertheless the two overpasses (pedestrian bridges) are working effectively and
are being used. The number of pedestrian accidents on project roads fell from a
baseline of 81 to 16 at the end of 2011, against a target of 30. Two-wheeled traffic
does not appear to pose as severe a problem as in some other West African
countries. In a country with such low capacity only the initial steps in a safe systems
approach are possible in the short to medium term. In these circumstances it makes
sense to ensure that there is a focus the safe engineering design aspects. This would
enable all sub-standard structures to be properly addressed to ensure a consistent
road width, more crash barriers to be installed and for items such as thermoplastic
paint to be utilized to provide clear and lasting road markings, as well as grooving
to separate the shoulders from the lanes. However, this could add as much as 10
percent to the costs of the infrastructure and this means 10 percent less road length
with limited IDA funds. The politicians in Mali have tended in the past to opt for
quantity, but this attitude could be turned around as a better understanding of the
importance of road safety gains momentum.

NIGERIA
The Federal Republic of Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa with 169
million people and recently became the largest economy on the continent,
overtaking South Africa. It has a road network of 198,000 kilometers of road of
which about 60,000 kilometers are paved. In 2008 the Bank approved the $330
million Nigeria Federal Roads Project, which contained a small $2.5 million road
safety component. The project development objective referred to reducing traffic
related fatalities on targeted federal roads. However, the project faced
implementation problems in both the civil works and institutional development



                                                                                     63
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
components. In February 2011 the project was restructured at the request of the
Nigerian Government, and the road safety component was significantly expanded to
$20 million, with two key beneficiary organizations: the Federal Road Safety Corps
(FRSC), and the Federal Capital Territory (FCT). The project has two sub-
components: first, support to the FRSC at a cost of $10 million to pilot the “safe
corridor” approach on the project roads; the safe corridor approach finances
training, capacity development, vehicles, and other equipment. Second, support to
FCT for physical safety improvements in the FCT at a cost of $10 million to provide
pedestrian over-bridges at six locations, investments in traffic management,
(including street markings, intersection improvements, and street lighting), with the
objective of improving both road safety and traffic flow.

The Global Road Safety Facility (GRSF) conducted a Review of Safety Management
Capacity in Nigeria in 2010.5 The report concluded that the country’s greatest asset
in addressing road safety issues was the Federal Road Safety Commission along
with its delivery entity the FRSC, but that existing capacity in Nigeria was classified
as “basic” pending the fruition of many initiatives to improve road safety. The FRSC
is a strong and somewhat unique agency with a budget that exceeded $180 million
in 2013. It has about 20,000 officers. Its mandate is road safety, vehicle registration,
and the issuing of drivers’ licenses. FRSC has its own road safety command centers,
equipped with intervention vehicles and ambulances. The Project has enabled FRSC
to introduce the Safe Corridor Concept, along several roads rehabilitated under the
project, where enforcement and emergency response equipment with trained FRSC
personnel are deployed. A monitoring and evaluation system shows that fatalities
on those corridors have decreased. One serious issue being addressed under the
project is crash data and fatalities reporting. According to the WHO, Nigeria’s
national road safety record is not improving. The national fatality data reported by
FRSC is questionable as it relates to recorded deaths at crash scenes only, which may
seriously underestimate fatalities. In the circumstances it is difficult to establish
baseline data. For the Bank project the baseline data had to be independently
collected and verified. A safety expert has also been appointed to evaluate the
situation. The dilemma for the Bank is to ensure that the project’s limited resources
are deployed as effectively as possible, hence the focus of the project on piloting the
safe corridor approach supplying equipment and providing large scale training of
FRCS management and officers, as well as enhancing data collection and analysis.
As for important elements of road safety such as road safety audits, they are
rudimentary in Nigeria– there are also at present no national guidelines or training
available. FRSC had conducted road safety audits on the project roads and
developed multi-sector interventions to improve road safety. The Project would
support institutionalizing modern road safety audits in Nigeria.



64
                                                                               APPENDIX E
                                                   CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
The most comprehensive training program covers leadership and management for
managers as well as basic road safety skills for FRSC officers. Emergency response
teams were trained in Abuja’s trauma center. Enforcement training benefited FRSC’s
enforcement officers. A peculiarly Nigerian problem is the control and
administration of its vast road tanker fleet for petroleum products. A train-the-
trainers approach was thus adopted for tanker drivers.

By and large, progress with implementation of the road safety component dedicated
to FRSC has been satisfactory. However, the road safety subcomponent that
benefited the FCT had only limited impact. The locations of a few pedestrian bridges
could have better chosen, as pedestrian traffic estimations relied on old data. The
structures themselves were over-designed, as the local engineering designers were
unfamiliar with typical designs for such structures. Adjustments had to be
introduced to remedy inadequate pedestrian approaches and facilities for disabled
access. The effectiveness of other interventions in the FCT such as the road
horizontal marking was limited, as compliance with the lane markings is low in
Nigeria.

RWANDA
Rwanda is a landlocked, low-income Central African country situated a few degrees
south of the equator. It has a young and predominantly rural population just short
of 11 million, and a road injury fatality rate of 19.9 per 100,000 people. Ten years ago
Rwanda had one of the worst road-safety records in the world, but there has been
improvement as road fatalities fell by around 30 percent.6 This followed road safety
legislation upgrading and improved enforcement of regulations, while WHO
funded some road safety campaigns. Coach drivers ferrying passengers to Kigali
from Kenya and Uganda objected to Rwanda’s introduction of national speed limits
of 60 kilometers per hour, which were 20 kilometers per hour lower than in the
neighboring east African countries of Kenya and Uganda. Notwithstanding,
Rwandan citizens have a low awareness of road safety issues and attach a higher
priority to physical road improvements. The safety statistics are now typical for the
region instead of much worse. Curiously enough the use of helmets by two wheeled
motorcyclists (including passengers) is relatively good.

The current Bank involvement is with the Transport Sector Development Project.
The project was scheduled to be completed by December 31, 2013, but has been
extended by a year, mainly to undertake the road safety aspects - the procurement is
only now under way for this component indicating that preference was given to the
infrastructure aspects of the project. There were no indicators to measure progress in
road safety other than simple outputs. Road safety did not feature in the various



                                                                                      65
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Country Assistance Strategies and transport itself has a lower priority than energy
or urban development.

The original project was approved in 2007. There were no other financiers for the
transport sector at the time and the Bank tried to cover all aspects of the transport
sector in one project. Although Rwanda is small, the capacity of the government
remains fairly weak and fragmented. There is little coordination between
government departments and agencies, and no urban transport strategy. Vehicle
inspections are ineffective and the police still tend to see enforcement primarily as a
source of income. This is although the government instigated a crackdown on police
corruption in 2004, in which more than 100 officers were sacked for taking bribes.
Road safety statistics are generally inadequate so the road safety component of this
project was to develop a road safety action plan cum strategy, improve data
collection, and establish a more reliable database. However, there is little
commitment to work with other departments (such as the police) and thinking
generally remains in a silo mode. The Ministry of Infrastructure and the Road
Agency look at road safety mainly in the context of black spot elimination and road
design. This is unlikely to change until a coordinating road safety nucleus can be
established. No follow-on project is planned at this stage.

TANZANIA
Tanzania is a low-income country in East Africa with a population of 45 million
people. In 2010 the road accident fatality rate was 22.7 per 100,000 people—not the
worst, but still very serious. However, of great concern, the trend of reported
accidents has been worsening at an annual rate of 6 percent since 2000. In 2009
Parliament approved a National Road Safety Policy to provide direction for
addressing in a comprehensive manner multi-facetted road safety issues including
the establishment of a National Road Safety Agency, a Driver and Vehicle
Examination and Licensing Agency (DVELA), a road accident information system,
and training in road safety education and traffic police. Support was to be provided
through the Bank funded Transport Sector Support Project for $6 million (as a
component of a multi sub-sector $214 million transport improvement project).
Progress on the safety component has been slower than expected, with the physical
engineering aspects demanding more attention. A consultant has been appointed for
the accident information system, but NSRA and DVELA are delayed awaiting the
approval of a Road Safety Act. It is possible that support for the new institutions will
not be possible before the project closes.7 However, as the financing instrument is an
adaptable program loan (APL) it may be possible to pick up this issue in a follow on
project.




66
                                                                                APPENDIX E
                                                    CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
In earlier highway projects the Bank has focused on speed reducing measures to
make travel through villages safer. These measures include appropriate signing and
signaling; speed humps proceeded by rumble strips; elevated pedestrian crossings;
and widening of roads through villages with provision for a sidewalk.

An unusual project approved in 2013 and now effective, also using the APL
financing instrument, is the Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation
Project. It comprises the upgrading of part of a transport corridor (the Dar Corridor
connecting Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia, and the Democratic Republic of Congo) and
includes measures to expedite trans- frontier traffic. The project focuses on the
rehabilitation and upgrading of 138 kilometers of the Dar es Salaam corridor in
Tanzania and includes the improvement of the border crossing facilities and the
construction of three one-stop inspection stations. Significantly for this report, there
is an $11 million road safety component comprising a road safety audit to identify
accident “black spots,” and the preliminary design of specific interventions to
address them. In addition, there is the undertaking of a management capacity
review for the corridor and the identification of a 'safe corridor' management
initiative.

This is a pioneering project for other transport corridors elsewhere in Sub-Saharan
Africa. The SSATP has supported the concept through the preparation of a
document outlining institutional arrangements for transport corridor management8
and more specifically for safety guidelines for mainstreaming road safety in such
corridors.9

An HIV/AIDS component involves upgrading clinics in the corridor. Though
focused on HIV, the upgrade could improve response time to accidents. Road safety
indicators identified are reduction in the number of accident black spots, length of
lane kilometer subject to road safety audit, number of improved health centers, and
number of medical personnel trained in these centers. Slower speeds are also
expected in built up areas. The project is in its early stages, but from a safety point of
view, it could be a reasonable alternative while a holistic approach at the national
level in Tanzania is not yet practical. Most road safety projects like this one have a
high rate of return. GRSF has been supportive (grant funding for trauma care).


East Asia and Pacific Region
Road traffic crashes accounted for 334,815 deaths in the South-East Asia Region
during 2010, with a rate of 18.5 per 100 000 population. Vulnerable road users (i.e.,
motorized two or three-wheelers, pedestrians and cyclists) are victims in nearly 50



                                                                                        67
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
percent of the deaths in the Region. Two-thirds of the road traffic in the countries of
South-East Asia are made up of two- or three-wheelers, and one-third of the deaths
is among these road users. None of the countries has comprehensive legislation on
all five key risk factors of road traffic injury—speeding, drunk driving, and use of
motorcycle helmets, seat belts, and child restraints. Only three countries have
policies to promote walking, cycling, and public transport, and only five countries
have policies to separate vulnerable road users as a way of protecting them. Eight
countries in the Region have a lead agency for road safety, most of which are inter-
ministerial committees. By type of intervention, 41 percent are related to
institutional capacity strengthening, 37 percent to infrastructure safety engineering,
9 percent to road user behavior, 8 percent to post crash care, and 5 percent to vehicle
safety. The Bank supports 27 active projects in the Region spread over nine countries
(14 of which are in China and five in Vietnam, but only two in the South Pacific).
The total commitment value is $4.043 billion and the value of road safety content is
$113 million.

Table E.2. Road Traffic Death Rates for 11 Countries in the East Asia and Pacific Region with a
Population Exceeding 5 Million
         Countries                                          Road Traffic Death Rate   Registered Motor
                                    Population
  (population exceeding                                     per 100,000 Population        Vehicles
                                  (millions, 2010)
         5 million)                                                 (2010)            (millions, 2010)a
 China                              1,348.9                        20.5    (4)         207.1 (1)
 Indonesia                           239.9                         17.7                 72.7 (2)
 Philippines                          93.3                          9.1                  6.6
 Vietnam                              87.8                         24.7    (3)          33.2 (3)
 Thailand                             69.1                         38.1    (1)          28.5 (4)
 Myanmar                              48.0                         16.0                  2.3
 Malaysia                             28.4                         25.0    (2)          20.2 (5)
 North Korea                          24.4                         10.7                 N/A
 Cambodia                             14.1                         17.2                  1.7
 Papua New Guinea                       6.9                        13.0                 N/A
 Lao PDR                                6.2                        20.4     (5)          1.0
Sources: Primarily WHO Global Safety Status Report and World Bank data.
a. Excludes two-wheelers.

CHINA
The China Research Institute of Highways, selected 2,500 kilometers that would
benefit from an International Road Assessment Program (iRAP) study. The World
Bank and the government of China also agreed to review the road safety situation in
China and prepare a new road safety engagement strategy. The strategy aims to
facilitate an accelerated transfer of road safety knowledge and scaling up of
investment at national, provincial and city levels to rapidly improve China’s road
safety performance, with an emphasis on strengthening national lead agency


68
                                                                              APPENDIX E
                                                  CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
functions and multi sector coordination arrangements.10 China recognizes that road
safety audits can drastically improve road safety and reduce the number and
seriousness of car accidents at a low cost to benefit ratio.11 In particular China has
been interested in improving school transport safety and consequently the World
Bank and the Pupil’s Transportation Safety Education Activities Office held a
workshop supported by Bloomberg Philanthropies to share best international
practice on school-related transport safety.

Other Bank assistance has been through investment projects, including urban
transport and rural roads and expressway development. In recent years there has
been a shift in the Bank’s portfolio toward urban transport and to other transport
modes, but the speed of urban growth can pose difficulties in implementation as the
pace of city expansion accelerates. For example, the Second Wuhan Urban Transport
Project involved the development of several integrated public transport and road
safety corridors. One of the first of these corridors was to incorporate international
good practice in providing segregated bus lanes, bus priority traffic signaling and
better quality bus stops as well as non-motorized transport facilities. This was part
of a much larger urban development strategy, but was affected by a sudden change
in the city government’s priorities that included metro development and new
expressways. This took the Bank by surprise and delayed the Bank portion of the
scheme because the metro construction directly affected the chosen corridor and the
Bank was asked to consider an alternative corridor. This necessitated a revision of
the components, indicators, and the project closing date. To go forward, the project
will need approval of a second order restructuring. Some other projects have been
delayed by a shortage of counterpart finance (not a safety issue), while others appear
to have gone smoothly without any serious problems. In progress is economic and
sector work to analyze road safety strategic issues in China which is expected to
recommend a dialogue with the borrower, and to help define the Bank’s future
assistance strategy in road safety in that country.


Europe and Central Asia Region
In the Europe and Central Asia Region there are two types of developing countries
that have benefitted from Bank financing, namely those that have been seeking
accession to the European Union (EU) such as Poland and Romania and those that
were part of the former Soviet Union such as Kazakhstan and Tajikistan. Regarding
the former, once accepted into the EU, these countries are eligible for EU financing;
regarding the latter group, most countries have at least one Bank financed road
project with a safety component, although it has apparently not always easy to
persuade the borrower to include safety in the project objective. Currently there are


                                                                                     69
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
16 active projects in nine countries, excluding those that are high income, with a
road safety component and their total commitment value is $5.456 billion and the
road safety content valued at $109 million. By type of intervention 43 percent are
related to institutional capacity strengthening, 34 percent to infrastructure safety
engineering, 7 percent to road user behavior, 7 percent to post crash care, and 3
percent to vehicle safety.

Table E.3. Road Traffic Death Rates for 13 Countries in the Europe and Central Asia Region
with a Population Exceeding 5 Million
         Countries                                          Road Traffic Death Rate   Registered Motor
                                     Population
 (population exceeding                                      per 100,000 Population        Vehicles
                                   (millions, 2010)
         5 million)                                                  (2010)           (millions, 2010)a
 Russian Federation                 143.0                         18.6      (3)         43.3 (1)
 Turkey                              72.8                         12.0                  15.1 (2)
 Ukraine                             45.5                         13.5                  14.4 (3)
 Uzbekistan                          27.4                         11.3                   N/A
 Romania                             21.5                         11.1                   5.0 (4)
 Kazakhstan                          16.0                         21.9      (1)          3.3
 Serbia                               9.9                          8.3                   2.4
 Belarus                              9.6                         14.4      (5)          3.8 (5)
 Azerbaijan                           9.2                         13.1                   1.0
 Bulgaria                             7.5                         10.4                   3.2
 Tajikistan                           6.9                         18.1      (4)          0.4
 Slovakia                             5.4                          9.4                   2.3
 Kyrgyzstan                           5.3                         19.2      (2)          0.4
Sources: primarily WHO Global Safety Status Report and World Bank data.
a. Excludes two-wheelers.

UKRAINE
The road safety situation in Ukraine is of concern because its citizens are four more
times likely to die from road traffic injuries than those in Western Europe, in spite of
the much lower motorization rate and the relatively shorter trip distances. Recent
official statistics indicate that more than 22,000 people died and about 90,000 people
required medical treatment because of road traffic injuries during 2007–2009. The
key factors that contribute to the poor road safety records are poor road conditions
and the lack of safety features in road design, unsafe driving behavior, and
ineffective enforcement of traffic laws and regulations. The World Bank carried out a
Road Safety Management Capacity Assessment for Ukraine in 2006. But, despite
such recent efforts, the country’s road safety management capacity remains
inadequate. The Ministry of Interior—the designated lead agency for road safety—
does not have the legal mandate, funding, or capacity to deliver the necessary
institutional functions for road safety management. Several strategies and action
plans have been developed in the past, but often without the necessary high-level



70
                                                                              APPENDIX E
                                                  CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
political will and support, measurable targets, clear ownership, or realistic funding;
hence they did not lead to successful implementation.

The current World Bank financed active road project, approved in September 2012,
is the $540 million Second Roads and Safety Improvement Project.12 It is intended to
contribute to improved road safety on selected road corridors and decrease the
number of road accidents in them. The road safety component will finance two
types of activities: the safety improvements along several high-risk road corridors
and the introduction of improved road safety features on the existing urban road
sections that will remain even after bypasses have been built around them. For the
former, a comprehensive road safety assessment is being carried out, using the Risk
Mapping and Star Rating approach of the iRAP. This assessment will identify
between two and four high-risk corridors and recommend specific engineering
solutions to be introduced. The component will then finance the actual
implementation of the engineering solutions, which will include civil works and
various types of road safety equipment. For the latter, this component will finance
the re-design of the village sections and the implementation of various measures to
reduce traffic speed (such as traffic calming) and improve pedestrian safety.
However, supervision missions have had to be postponed due to the unrest
followed by potential conflict in Ukraine, but implementation has apparently
proceeded thus far without disruption. The potential impact of the political context
is going to be assessed on an ongoing basis.


Latin America and the Caribbean Region
According to the WHO Global Status Report on Road Safety, there were 19.2 road
fatalities per 100,000 inhabitants in Latin America in 2010, a rate that is more than
three times higher than several European countries.13 The United Nations (UN)
projection for 2020 is 30 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, largely because of the rise in
the number of vehicles. However, the commitment made by countries in the Region
when they agreed to the UN resolution for the Decade of Action for Road Safety is to
bring the rate down to 15 per 100,000.

The World Bank and regional institutions report, however, that in Bolivia, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, and Venezuela traffic accidents have increased since
2011. In the latter two, the increase is as high as 40 percent, in large part due to
accidents involving motorcycles. Pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists account for
70 percent of the victims of urban road accidents.14 The ambitious UN goal can only
be achieved if road safety efforts are intensified substantially and new measures are
introduced. Evidence shows there are some countries that have brought down



                                                                                     71
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
extremely high road fatality rate, especially Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay, but in
many other countries in the region, traffic accidents continue to rise.

Table E.4. Road Traffic Death Rates for 16 Latin America and Caribbean Countries with a
Population Exceeding 5 Million
 Countries                                                Road Traffic Death Rate   Registered Motor
                                 Population
 (population exceeding 5                                  per 100,000 Population    Vehicles
                                 (millions, 2010)
 million)                                                 (2010)                    (millions, 2010)a
 Brazil                                  195.0                22.5    (4)             64.8      (1)
 Mexico                                  113.4                14.7                    30.9      (2)
 Colombia                                 46.3                15.6                     7.2      (4)
 Argentina                                40.4                12.6                    14.2      (3)
 Peru                                     29.1                15.9                     3.2
 Venezuela                                29.0                37.2     (2)             4.1      (5)
 Chile                                    17.1                12.3                     3.4
 Ecuador                                  14.5                27.0     (3)             1.0
 Guatemala                                14.3                 6.7                     2.1
 Cuba                                     11.3                 7.8                     0.6
 Bolivia                                   9.9                19.2                     0.9
 Dominican Republic                        9.9                41.7     (1)             2.7
 Honduras                                  7.6                18.8                     1.0
 Paraguay                                  6.5                21.4                     0.9
 El Salvador                               6.2               21.9 (5)                  0.7
 Nicaragua                                 5.8               18.8                      0.5
Sources: Primarily WHO Global Safety Status Report and World Bank data.
a. Excludes two-wheelers.

ARGENTINA
Argentina’s $38.5 million dedicated road safety project was prepared as a
collaborative partnership between the transport and health teams in the Argentina
World Bank Country Office (Bliss and Raffo 2013). The project has three
components:

        Institutional capacity building to provide technical assistance and equipment
         to assist with the adoption of best international practice;
        The introduction of three demonstration safe corridors ($1.14 million)
         identified using the International Road Assessment Program
        Road auditing methodology together with an incentive fund program; and
        The establishment of a road safety monitoring and evaluation system.

In 2008, Argentina created Agencia Nacional de Seguridad Vial (ANSV), a national road
safety agency. The federal government’s decision to empower and resource ANSV
confirmed its position as “owner” of the nation’s road safety and manager of related
strategic partnerships. The institutional capacity-building component was two-
thirds of the total project cost.


72
                                                                             APPENDIX E
                                                 CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
The component included (i) project management; (ii) creation of a national driver
license registry system, establishment of a national traffic records and infractions
registry; (iii) a five-year strategic plan for ANSV; (iv) communication, awareness,
and education campaigns including a plan for national social communications and
education campaigns, road safety education kits, grants for eligible nongovernment
organizations, and provision of training, workshops, and seminars related to road
safety; v. improvement of emergency response capacity including a diagnosis of
current capabilities and protocols and subsequent upgrading, design and
implementation of improvements in emergency coordination systems among
concerned agencies (such as police, ambulance services, hospitals, and insurance
companies), training for emergency response personnel, and acquisition of
equipment to facilitate the work of road crash emergency personnel; and vi.
strengthening of the capacity of traffic control and enforcement agencies through the
development of training modules, the acquisition of alcohol meters, speed control
radar guns, and other radar technology as well as development of a national plan for
speed control.

Activities related to educational curricula for primary and secondary schools are
being carried out in consultation and cooperation with the Federal Ministry of
Education and relevant authorities in participating provinces and municipalities.
Activities for traffic enforcement agencies are being carried out through high-level
workshops and twinning arrangements organized by RoadPOL15 Major efforts are
also being made on the emergency response and traffic control fronts, collaborating
with other ministries or entities as appropriate. The financial instrument chosen was
an adaptable program loan since a follow-up project was envisoned based on
defined “triggers” to be accomplished in the first phase; this recognizes that
improving road safety outcomes is a long-term process. An important
subcomponent was a $10 million incentive program to help participating provinces
and municipalities finance innovative road safety initiatives that otherwise would
not have been funded because of competition for limited financial resources. To
build the results management platform in Argentina’s National Road Observatory,
the project invested in road safety monitoring systems and tools. The Observatory
set up a new data collection system for road crashes, and surveys will provide
baseline data for seat belt usage, helmet usage, and distractive factors.

Although the work in the Argentina road safety project corridors is ongoing, early
results are encouraging. All intermediate results indicators have been met. The
Independent Evaluation Group believes this project is important from a learning
point of view because the project builds upon and reinforces Argentina’s correct
sequential implementation of the World Report recommendations. Implementation
has not been problem free, however. Originally, three demonstration corridors were


                                                                                    73
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
selected in discussion with the Argentina Roads Agency (DNV). This is a large
organization with the largest budget in the government, but in juggling its multiple
responsibilities the chosen corridors slipped down DNV’s priority list, forcing
ANSV and the Bank to choose different corridors. Unfortunately, this was a
backward step because the baseline had been established for the original corridors,
which caused some difficulties for the team. However, the Argentina project is also
founded on some opportune circumstances including continuing political will at the
presidential and ministerial level that followed negative publicity about some major
tragic crashes.

A Memorandum of Understanding was also concluded recently to establish a new
database covering road safety data for the 20 countries participating in the regional
Ibero-American Road Safety Observatory. The database will use indicators for
monitoring and comparing progress in reducing traffic-related deaths and serious
injuries from the region, and the data will be publicly available. This project is
expected to facilitate cooperation among participating countries and serve as an
important step to progressively improve data collection and analysis in the region.
The database forms part of a policy for the development of effective, evidence-based
road safety plans.16 The Bank initiated regional meetings to share experiences.
Capacity assessments have begun with funds from grants made by GRSF and the
World Bank Institutional Development Fund (in cases where this is not an existing
loan on which to piggyback). Brazil was an early beneficiary. About twenty
countries are now participating in this south-south cooperation observatory,
supported by a grant of $700,000. Shared historical links and language helped
cement the relationship.

BRAZIL
Unlike Argentina and Chile, Road safety management in Brazil is fragmented and
road accident data are unreliable. For example, according to the World Health
Organization 2013 Global Status Report, Brazil’s road fatalities in 2009 were
estimated to be 43,869 against official figures of 35,594. Meanwhile, a study by the
national compulsory insurance provider produced figures of 58,134 in 2011 and
60,752 in 2012, based on insurance claims. There are 27 states in Brazil and many of
the poorer states have a dismal road safety record. Three states are even unable to
provide accident data at all. Nationally, elderly pedestrians are at particularly high
risk and motorcycle fatalities are increasing at a rapid rate. Less prosperous regions
have higher proportions of vulnerable road user deaths.17 Brazil introduced a zero
tolerance law in 2008 for drivers found to have traceable amounts of alcohol in their
blood, yet drivers involved in traffic accidents sometimes receive softer sentences,
such as being made to donate money to charity, as their crimes were not seen as



74
                                                                               APPENDIX E
                                                   CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
deliberate.18 In 2011, The World Health Organization conducted a review of Brazil’s
Federal road traffic safety regulatory system, in which it assessed the
comprehensiveness of existing Federal laws and regulations. Gaps were identified
related to drink–driving and speeding, as well as weak enforcement provisions.

The Bank has an active project in mid-implementation through the Economy and
Planning Secretariat - the São Paulo Feeder Roads. It concerns the rehabilitation of
1,500 kilometers of paved municipal roads in the City of São Paulo. At appraisal the
Bank loan was $130 million, while the borrower contribution was $466 million.
Following a restructuring, the Bank contribution was increased to $166 million.
Safety improvements of a traditional nature (estimated to be $2.5 million) involve
curve realignments and black spot elimination as well as institutional strengthening
of the state road investment program. Thus far no significant safety related
implementation issues have been reported in the implementation supervision
reports (ISRs).

The state faces a grave road safety situation exacerbated by rapidly increasing
motorization and more recently rapid growth in motorcycles especially in the urban
areas. GRSF, however, has prepared a road safety management capacity review and
multi sector strategy for road safety investments for the state.19 The review
concludes that more effective coordination with national and municipal government
is critical, and that technical assistance is necessary inter alia to improve leadership,
management structures, cooperation and appropriate funding to enable the delivery
of a results-focused road safety strategy.

This state is the economic powerhouse of Brazil, containing a disproportionate share
of Brazil’s industrial and agricultural production. It has a population of 45 million
and São Paulo itself has 19 million inhabitants. Despite the poor accident statistics,
road safety has not been a political priority in Brazil; the focus has rather been for
improved infrastructure ahead of the Soccer World Cup and the Olympics. Road
safety is still largely seen in Brazil as a behavioral problem and there has been a lack
of accountability for road safety across the three levels of government. The Bank
wanted to advocate for stronger road safety support at federal level, but currently
there is plenty of federal domestic funding available (limited need for Bank loans),
while no political champion road safety has emerged. Nevertheless, there has been
some progress. An iRAP for Brazil has been completed and two other states are
seeking a capacity reviews. What are needed in the near future are strong political
commitment and the urgent establishment of a key safety coordinating agency. A
positive sign is that President Dilma Rousseff pledged her country’s support for the
UN Decade of Action for Road Safety in a 2012 speech to the UN General Assembly.
The Global Road Safety Partnership, as part of the Bloomberg Philanthropies Global


                                                                                       75
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Road Safety Program, also hosted a meeting of experts to increase advocacy efforts
aligned with the Decade of Action for Road Safety in Brazil.

PARAGUAY
In Paraguay, there has been more enthusiasm for road safety than in Peru to the
point where the government expressed interest in a stand-alone safety project. An
iRAP has also already been conducted there. However, because of the small size of
the economy and the likely limited funding envelope, it was decided instead to
pursue a road safety component within a maintenance/rehabilitation loan and not
to have two separate projects. The reason for this is affordability and that the recent
successes with improved maintenance need to be nurtured. In this case the safety
component is expected to comprise improved institution building, safe corridors,
public education awareness, and improved emergency response times.

PERU
Peru has one of the worst road safety records in the region according to WHO, with
15.9 deaths per 100,000 people. Driver behavior is poor and speeding and alcohol
consumption are major factors in many of the accidents. Government commitment
toward road safety is limited. This is partly because there is little coordination
between the various departments, but also because of the lack of awareness of the
potential impact of road safety. The Bank accordingly introduced a “Safe and
Affordable Transport” project, which had a road safety component. The idea was to
introduce the safe corridor concept, whereby there would be a combination of road
safety improvements including more stringent enforcement, road safety education
initiatives, and more efficient emergency mechanisms. An iRAP assessment has
been completed, with support from GRSF for 3,000 kilometers of Peruvian roads.
The project was approved in December 2009, but was almost immediately
restructured to allow the government of Peru to proceed with two urgent road sub-
components using its own national funds. The timing was no longer opportune for a
Bank loan and although the agreement was signed the remainder of the project was
never made effective as the government was concerned about the deteriorating fiscal
situation and especially the potential for serious inflation following a major
downturn in the economy.

Since then, the Bank has had a difficult time in getting a further project on the table,
but there is the possibility of a bridge project for the national network and/or a
project involving rural and regional roads. In both instances the Bank insists there be
a road safety component in line with its mainstreaming policy for road safety. A
positive aspect in Peru is their insistence on mandatory coordination between the




76
                                                                                               APPENDIX E
                                                                   CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and the World Bank. IADB has focused
more on creating awareness rather than actual projects.


Middle East and North Africa Region
The World Bank has been involved in fewer road safety-related projects in the
Middle East and North Africa than any other Region. Excluding high-income
countries, during 2002–2013, 1.3 percent of road projects with a safety component
were from here compared with 25.3 from East Asia and Pacific, 20.9 from Africa, and
19.6 from Latin America and the Caribbean. There is only one active project with a
commitment value of $40 million of which the safety content is $0.34 million.

Table E.5. Road Traffic Death Rates for 9 Countries in the Middle East and North Africa Region
with a Population Exceeding 5 Million
        Countries                                           Road Traffic Death Rate    Registered Motor
                                    Population
  (population exceeding                                     per 100,000 Population         Vehicles
                                  (millions, 2010)
         5 million)                                                 (2010)             (millions, 2010)a
 Egypt, Arab. Rep.                   81.1                         13.2                    5.9 (2)
 Iran                                74.0                         34.1 (1)               20.7 (1)
 Morocco                             32.0                         18.0                    2.8 (4)
 Afghanistan                         31.4                         19.8                    0.7
 Iraq                                31.7                         31.5 (2)                3.4 (3)
 Yemen, Rep.                         24.1                         23.7 (3)                1.0
 Syria                               20.4                         22.9 (4)                2.1 (5)
 Tunisia                             10.5                         18.8                    1.5
 Jordan                               6.2                         22.8 (5)                1.1
Sources: Primarily WHO Global Safety Status Report and World Bank data.
a. Excludes two-wheelers.

REPUBLIC OF YEMEN
The only active Bank-financed project with road safety components in MNA is the
Republic of Yemen: Road Asset Management Project, which is in its early stages.
There are two components containing road safety aspects. The first component is to
improve road safety by financing engineering improvements such as better road
markings and signage, better and more appropriately positioned speed control
measures in built-up areas, better crash barriers and the removal of other
deficiencies that cause an accumulation of fatal and serious accidents. The second
intends to develop skills and build capacity in road safety by staff training in road
safety audit, inspection and network safety management and the provision of other
non-engineering training programs. This would facilitate the development of a safer
roads investment plan. The project is off to a slow start due to low capacity of PMU
staff, which has had difficulty in attracting and retaining suitable environmental and



                                                                                                           77
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
social specialists. This in turn has delayed capacity building by our safeguard
colleagues. As a result safeguard documentation has not been of a quality acceptable
to the Bank. A similar capacity constraint exists for procurement, so that bidding
documents have been delayed. The Bank team has also been facing issues on
scheduling missions in the country due to limited availability of armored vehicles
and the restriction on the time spent in the country.

 Box E.2. A New Challenge to Road Safety: The Electric Bicycle
 A new phenomenon in East Asia is the electric bicycle. In China the number has grown from a few
 thousand to 22 million in just 10 years, but their popularity is also gaining ground elsewhere in Asia
 as well as in the Netherlands and Germany. Annual sales in China have reached about $11 billion
 and the government is suddenly paying attention—but its urge to regulate is pulling it in two
 different directions. Until recently few laws to regulated electric bikes: they do not need to be
 registered nor do their drivers need a license, but unsurprisingly the electric bikes in use are involved
 in a growing number of accidents. Yet, on the other hand, the government also wants to encourage
 electric bicycles to curb the pollution and congestion created by other vehicles. Conflicting decisions
 by national and municipal authorities in China have demonstrated the difficulty of adapting to the
 new mode of transportation. In Shenzhen, electric bicycles were involved in 15 percent of all traffic
 accidents in 2011, and the city subsequently banned the e-bike. Others have followed suit, while
 some cities and provinces permit them. The Bank does not yet appear to have taken a position on
 this matter.



South Asia Region
Road accident rates are generally poor across South Asia; India has the best at 11.6
per 100,000 population and Pakistan the worst at 18.9. Three quarters of the accident
victims are pedestrians, cyclists or motorcyclists. World Bank supported projects in
South Asia have focused on helping regional governments to improve policies and
regulations and establish road safety agencies. In India, Bangladesh, and Pakistan,
the Bank has assisted government agencies in developing comprehensive road
safety action plans, at both the national and state level as well as for specific cities
like Dhaka and Lahore. The Bank has also assisted in projects, which include the
development of manuals for safety audit, accident black spot investigations, road
signs and markings, and computerized accident recording and analysis systems. In
Bangladesh, nongovernmental organizations have undertaken comprehensive road
safety education and public information campaigns in local communities with the
support of the Bank.20 The Bank supports 13 active projects in four states, with a total
commitment value of $2.781 billion and the value of the road safety content $81
million.




78
                                                                                               APPENDIX E
                                                                   CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Table E.6. Road Traffic Death Rates for 5 Countries in the South Asia Region with a Population
Exceeding 5 Million

       Countries                                            Road Traffic Death Rate    Registered Motor
                                    Population
 (population exceeding                                      per 100,000 Population         Vehicles
                                  (millions, 2010)
       5 million)                                                   (2010)             (millions, 2010)a
 India                              1,224.6                         11.6               115.0   (1)
 Pakistan                            173.6                          18.9   (1)           7.9   (2)
 Bangladesh                          148.7                          15.0   (3)           1.6   (4)
 Nepal                                30.0                          17.4   (2)           1.2
 Sri Lanka                            20.9                          13.7   (4)           4.0   (3)
Sources: Primarily WHO Global Safety Status Report and World Bank data.
a. Excludes two-wheelers.


Regionally, by type of intervention 44 percent are related to institutional capacity
strengthening, 26 percent to infrastructure safety engineering, 16 percent to road
user behavior, 9 percent to post crash care, and 5 percent to vehicle safety. Technical
assistance has focused on the design and construction of better and safer roads. In
India, the Bank has assisted in improving hazardous locations on the national
highway and state highway networks, as well as the installation of safer road
features and devices. In Bangladesh and the Indian states of Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Gujarat, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh, it has provided funding for
improvements of accident black spots, installation of reflective traffic signs and road
markings. However, road safety measures such as black spot elimination are
increasingly seen as reactive as the potential of the safe systems approach is
understood. In India so far it has been individual states that are taking the lead with
the safe systems approach. The reaction from the federal government until recently
has been slow, as it has been distracted by other priorities. Roadworthiness is
another area where the Bank could push for change. Vehicle crash tests of some of
the more popular cars in India have had disappointing results.

Three Indian state projects with significant road safety components are underway.
The Second Karnataka State Highway Project, declared effective in July 2011, has a
$11 million road safety improvement component. It followed the unsuccessful roads
safety component in the preceding highway project in which only 16 percent of the
allocated funds were disbursed due to non-performance by the appointed
consulting firm. The project includes both strategic and institutional measures
consistent with the 2007 Sundar Committee Report on road traffic safety and traffic
management21 and the findings of a road safety management capacity review. The
project loan also contains a covenant to the effect that there will be a safe corridor
demonstration program. However, ISRs report that lack of stakeholder interest and
insufficient staff in the state level traffic and road safety cell, which is supposed to
evolve as the lead agency, has seriously slowed initial progress. Although the


                                                                                                           79
APPENDIX E
CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
infrastructure measures for the demonstration corridors have been finalized, the
component remains behind schedule. Meanwhile two other projects have recently
been made effective. The Second Gujarat Highway Project has a $20 million road
safety component and the Assam State Highway Project a $12 million component.
No issues have yet been reported in Gujarat, but the Assam project is suffering from
delays due to getting project funds released from the Finance Department of the
government of Assam.

Box E.3. Road Safety Workshop in India
After facing criticism for doing little to improve road safety, the Indian Ministry of Transport has
decided to set up an apex body to address all road safety related issues. At present there is only
limited coordination in road safety matters among different ministries in central government and the
states. The ministry also intends through executive order to amend the Motor Vehicles Act to increase
penalties for traffic violations.22 Because India has such a large population as well as a high annual
road fatality rate, it was a priority for GRSF, which is conducting local workshops aimed at
improving multi sector coordination as one of the activities of the “Road Safety in Ten Countries”
program.23 These workshops are founded on the safe systems approach and address the
implementation of specific road safety management systems. The Indian workshop was held in
Lucknow, the capital city of the state of Uttar Pradesh (UP), where there is a growing interest in road
safety. Currently UP has the greatest number of fatalities among all Indian states. In particular, the
road safety management system currently under the aegis of the State Road Safety Council needs to
be improved beyond its advisory role with limited mandatory power. The workshop also focused on
improving post-crash assistance and care in the special context of India and how to engage other
stakeholders such as local volunteers and enforcement officers in this activity. The role that the civil
society can play in reducing death from injuries is significant, but first legal instruments such as a
“Good Samaritan” law need enacting.24 In addition the World Bank through GRSF is applying the
iRAP methodology to assist project corridors in three Indian states—Assam, Gujarat and Karnataka—
to improve road safety on 3,000 kilometers of high-risk roads and develop road investment plans.


1SSATP (Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy Program). 2012. “Africa: Scaling up Efforts to Address
the Road Safety Challenge.” Newsletter No. 9, April 2012, World Bank, Washington, DC.
        School of Public Health. 2013. “Burden of Road Injuries in Sub-Saharan Africa.”
2 Harvard

Department of Global Health and Population, Boston, MA.
3 Marquez,  P. 2012. “Death on Wheels in Sub-Saharan Africa: How to Prevent It?” GRSF (Global Road
Safety Facility), World Bank, Washington, DC. http://web.worldbank.org.
4 UnitedNations Economic Commission for Africa. 2011. “Decade of Action for Road Safety: 2011 –
2020, Africa Action Plan.” African Union, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
5 GRSF.2010. Review of Road safety Management capacity: Nigeria, Integrated Planning Ltd.,
Nottingham, UK.
6 World    Health Organization. 2007. Rwanda’s Rod Safety Transformation, Bulletin 85/6/07, Geneva.
7According    to Aide memoire September 2013 and ISR No.7 February 2014.




80
                                                                                         APPENDIX E
                                                             CASE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

8 SSATP.  2007. “Institutional Arrangements for Transport Corridor Management in Sub-Saharan
Africa.” SSATP Working Paper No. 86, World Bank, Washington, DC.
www.worldbank.org/afr/ssatp.
9 SSATP.2013. Guidelines for Mainstreaming Road Safety in Regional Trade Road Corridors, SSATP
Working Paper No 97 www.worldbank.org/afr/ssatp.
      A., et. al. 2011. China Road Safety Engagement Strategy, Interim Report, World Bank,
10 Bliss,

Washington, DC.
11Deng, Fei, Phillip Jordan, and Mike Goodge. 2012. “Reducing Traffic Accidents in China:
Strengthening the Use of Road Safety Audits.” China Transport Topics No. 7, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
12 World Bank. 2012. “Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Loan in the Amount of US$450
Million to Ukraine for the Second Road and Safety Improvement Project.” Report No. 71738-UA,
World Bank, Washington, DC.
13 World    Health Organization. 2013. Global Status Report on Road Safety 2013, Geneva.
   Guardian. 2014. “Latin America Struggling to Meet 2020 Road Deaths Target, ” January 28,
14 The

www.theguardian.com.
15RoadPOL is a global police network that seeks to achieve accelerated transfer of road
safety knowledge and experience through training arrangements and peer-to-peer agency
reviews.
 The International Transport Forum at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
16

Development announced this initiative. Participants included the World Bank, the
Ministries of Interior of Spain and Argentina, and the Ministry of Health of Mexico.
           A., et al. 2012. Road Traffic Deaths in Brazil: Rising Trends in Pedestrian and Motorcycle
17 Chandron,

Occupant Deaths, Traffic Injury and Prevention, 2012; 13, Supplement 1:11–6.
    News. 2012. Brazil’s Struggle to cut Deaths on Chaotic Roads, September 19, 2012
18 BBC

www.bbc.com/news.
19 Soames,J., et al. 2013. “Report on the State of São Paulo: Road Safety Management Capacity Review
and Multisectoral Strategy for Road Safety Investments.” GRSF, World Bank, Washington, DC.
20   World Bank. 2013. Road Safety: A Development Challenge for South Asia. http://web.worldbank.org.
            of India. 2007. Sundar Committee Report on Road Traffic Safety and Traffic
21 Government

Management, New Delhi, India.
    Times of India. 2013. Government to set up National Body to Oversee Road Safety Issues,
22 The

December 2, 2013, www.timesofindia.com.
23 Theworkshop was formally inaugurated by Madhukar Jetley, adviser, Externally Aided Projects
Department, government of Uttar Pradesh, who on this occasion highlighted the cabinet
consideration of a statewide road safety policy to address the epidemic of road crash injuries in Uttar
Pradesh.
24 Championed    by the Supreme Court of India, a Good Samaritan Law would encourage bystanders
to help road accident victims. A survey in Indian cities found that 88 percent of respondents hesitate
to assist a road crash victim because of fear of police harassment and legal hassles.




                                                                                                     81
