                                               95559




Opportunities and Challenges from Working in
Partnership: Findings from IEG’s Work on
Partnership Programs and Trust Funds
Abbreviations and Acronyms

CGAP                   Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
CGIAR                  Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research
DRM                    Disaster risk management
ESMAP                  The Energy Sector Management Program
FCPF                   The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
GEF                    Global Environment Facility
GFDRR                  The Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction
GPE                    The Global Partnership for Education
GPOBA                  Global Program for Output-Based Aid
IBRD                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IDA                    International Development Association
IEG                    Independent Evaluation Group
IFAD                   International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFC                    International Finance Corporation
ILC                    International Land Coalition
ILO                    International Labor Organization
M&E                    Monitoring and evaluation
REDD                   Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
REDD+                  REDD plus the role of conservation, sustainable management of
                       forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks
TB                     Tuberculosis




Director-General, Evaluation                        :   Ms. Caroline Heider
Director, Independent Evaluation Group, Country ,   :   Mr. Nick York
Corporate, and Global Evaluations
Manager,                                            :   Ms. Geeta Batra
Task Manager                                        :   Mr. Rasmus Heltberg
                                                                            i


Contents
Preface...................................................................................................................................... iii
Summary ................................................................................................................................... v
1. Background and Context....................................................................................................... 1
2. Partnerships Represent Opportunities ................................................................................... 3
3. Partnerships create challenges .............................................................................................. 7
     First challenge: Why can’t the program be supported with existing mechanisms? .......... 7
     Second challenge: How to ensure effective oversight and accountability? ...................... 8
     Third challenge: How will this complement the Bank’s country operations? ................ 11
     Fourth challenge: How will we know what the program has accomplished? ................. 13
4. How to ensure results from partnerships? Summary of recommendations ........................ 15


Boxes
Box 1. Partnerships, global public goods, and trust funds: what they are and how they overlap ........... 3
Box 2. Most Partnerships are hosted by one of the partner organizations ........................................ 10
Box 3. When partnerships are operationally integrated: the Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction
(GFDRR) ................................................................................................................................... 11
Box 4. When Partnerships diminish over time: The World Bank Group and the Global Environment
Facility (GEF) ............................................................................................................................ 12
Box 5. Pushing the envelope on forest carbon .............................................................................. 12
Box 6. Why are programs’ M&E practices so weak? ...................................................................... 13


Tables
Table 1. Examples of Linkages between the Bank and Four Global Partnership Programs ............... 19


Appendixes
Appendix A. Sources............................................................................................................................. 17
Appendix B. Linkages ........................................................................................................................... 19
References ............................................................................................................................................ 21
                                             iii


Preface
As part of IEG’s commitment to promoting learning from evaluation experience, IEG is
supplementing its main evaluation reports with a series of learning-focused notes which aim
to make evaluation evidence easily accessible to key audiences. This note brings together in
short and accessible form findings from IEG evaluations on global and regional partnership
programs and trust funds over the last 10 years, to help inform discussions on how to address
the partnership agenda in the World Bank Group strategy. The note is not a full evaluation of
partnership effectiveness. It focuses on the World Bank’s experience in partnerships.
                                               v


Summary
Partnerships and trust funds are big business for the World Bank Group. It participates in
around 126 global partnership programs and administers more than 1000 trust funds which
have become a significant source of revenue for the Bank Group and its clients. Partnership
and trust funds offer opportunities for the Bank to benefit from partners’ skills and resources,
extend its reach, and innovate. Some programs and funds are complementary to the Bank or
fill gaps, for example on global public goods. IEG has found that most partnership programs
tackle relevant development problems and that the Bank often makes strong contributions.
But there are also risks, for example proliferation of uncoordinated or competing initiatives
and high transaction costs.

A key challenge facing the World Bank Group, therefore, is to make sure that its
engagements in partnerships and trust funds create shared value for its client countries and
support its goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity goals. As
emphasized in the World Bank Group strategy, engaging in strong and well-aligned
partnerships can help the Group enhance its contributions to global development, but the
evaluation experience summarized in this note suggests that there is room to improve.

IEG, in its work on partnerships and trust funds, has found four common challenges related
to selectivity, oversight, linkages to country operations, and results frameworks:

   •   Selectivity: Most donors allocate funds from a fixed envelope for total official aid;
       trust funds have not increased the size of that envelope. As earmarked pots of money
       with separate approval and allocation processes, trust funds tend to increase
       transaction costs for client countries and for the Bank and to impose parallel
       budgeting and approval processes. That is why the Bank needs to be selective in what
       trust funds and what governing procedures it agrees to.
   •   Oversight: Evaluations have found weaknesses in governance and transparency in
       many partnership programs, as well as frictions and conflicts of interest from the
       multiplicity of roles that the Bank typically performs in partnerships. Yet The Bank
       has no routine oversight and tracking of partnerships and of how it engages in them.

   •   Links to country programs: The Bank is uniquely placed to help client countries
       benefit from global programs. However, there are often missed opportunities at the
       intersection of the Bank’s participation in global programs and its country
       engagements. There are no explicit agreements on division of labor between the Bank
       and some major global health programs.

   •   Results are often unknown. Although there has been progress in recent years, many
       partnerships the IEG has reviewed lacked clear goals and indicators. It is often hard to
       attribute results to specific partnerships let alone assess results across the portfolio.

IEG has recommended reforms (summarized at the end of this note) to help the Bank address
these challenges via internal reforms to ensure selectivity, routine corporate oversight, and
                                             vi


policies and standards around partnership governance, engagement strategies for individual
programs, empowerment of staff serving on partnership boards, and results frameworks.
                                             1


1. Background and Context
The rise of many global partnership programs during the last 15 years has transformed
the international aid and development landscape. Partnerships feature prominently in the
new World Bank Group strategy, which recognizes that meeting the World Bank Group
goals “demands deepening partnerships that bring together resources, expertise, and ideas
from actors across the development spectrum”. 1 The strategy notes the rise in demand for
World Bank Group services on behalf of global partners (sovereign countries,
foundations, the private sector), as witnessed by the growth in trust fund, innovative
finance, and financial intermediation business. It calls for an expanded World Bank
Group role in global and regional engagements that complement its country-led business
model.

Yet it is not always clear how well World Bank Group global engagements support its
poverty and shared prosperity goals. The Bank Group strategy notes that “global
engagements represent an important opportunity for the World Bank Group to make an
impact on development, but this rapidly growing role also places additional demands on
the World Bank Group that it must ensure are aligned with the goals”. How does the
organization oversee whether the World Bank Group partners effectively when it chooses
to engage with partners? How does it exploit the fact that The Bank sits on the boards of
more partnership programs than any other development organization (around 91). 2 How
does it make sure that trust funds support rather than distract from the mission? The
strategy prominently highlights the need to ensure better management, oversight, and
selectivity in World Bank Group partnerships and promises to manage global
engagements as “business lines” with policies for budgeting, cost recovery, and results
monitoring. 3 The ongoing change process offers opportunities to deliver on the promise
of the strategy, for example as part of the integration of partnerships and trust funds into
the Global Practices.

IEG has reviewed more than 23 global partnership programs, as well as the Bank’s
approach to the trust funds that finance such programs. 4 These reviews have found that
most partnership programs tackle relevant problems--often making solid contributions to
development—yet confront a pattern of similar weaknesses leading to missed
opportunities and compromised effectiveness. There are four common challenges related
to selectivity, oversight, linkages to country operations, and results frameworks. IEG has
recommended reforms to help the Bank address these challenges.

This learning-oriented note summarizes IEG’s findings and recommendations. The hope
is that better navigating the predictable challenges confronted by partnership programs
will help make programs, and the Bank’s role in them, more effective and deliver results
to clients. We begin by looking at the opportunities that partnerships represent before
drilling down on the four common challenges.
                                                      3


2. Partnerships Represent Opportunities
Collaborating in a partnership is an opportunity to achieve more than what each partner
might accomplish on its own. Partnerships are also a major source of fundraising for the
Bank Group. As collaborative ventures, partnerships are distinct from trust fund which
are vehicles for channeling finance. Some partnerships are concerned with global public
goods, other with national development issues (Box 1).


Box 1. Partnerships, global public goods, and trust funds: what they are and how they
overlap
Partnership programs are collaborative ventures with dedicated funding, multicountry focus, and shared
governance arrangements. The Bank is a member of around 126 global or regional partnership programs.
Most of these receive at least some of their funding from trust funds that are administered by the Bank.
This note deals primarily with this type of partnership, and not with the Bank’s numerous other, less formal
partnerships.
Global public goods produce benefits that are non-rival and non-excludable and accrue across many
countries (for example, polio eradication, mitigation of climate change, or prevention of financial
contagion). About 27 percent of Bank partnership programs, accounting for 89 percent of disbursements,
finance the provision of global and regional public goods; the remainder produce and disseminate
development knowledge and provide technical assistance and financing for national investments.
Trust funds are funds donated by various official and private donors to be administered by the World Bank
Group. The Bank administers more than 1000 trust funds. About 60 percent of these provide funding for
regional and global partnerships; the rest help to finance Bank activities in selected areas or countries.




Source: IEG Staff



The World Bank Group-administered trust fund portfolio has grown significantly in
recent years, becoming a significant source of revenue for the Bank Group and its clients
and almost as big as IDA resources. Some donors, increasingly dissatisfied with the
traditional multilateral and bilateral forms of delivering aid, began in the 1990s to initiate
                                              4


programs and trust funds aimed at earmarking funds for specific purposes. They asked
the Bank Group to administer many of these trust funds. In FY13, recipient-executed
trust funds and Financial Intermediary Funds each made more than $5 billion in new
commitments—substantial amounts compared to the regular IBRD, IDA, and IFC
business. About 60 percent of Bank-managed trust funds support global and regional
partnership programs. Trust funds are also important for knowledge work—they finance
46 percent of the Bank’s knowledge services and 90 percent of IFC advisory services. 5
Trust funds provide 23 percent of the World Bank’s annual expenses (36% when
reimbursable technical assistance is included), a share that has been growing over time.
Without them, the Bank would have a much smaller work program and a lot fewer staff.

Partnerships serve many useful purposes. They enable the Bank to pool its expertize with
that of partner organizations with complementary capacities. In responding to avian flu,
for example, the Bank found it helpful to partner with organizations with expertise in
epidemiology and animal health, expertize that it did not have itself. 6 Partnership
programs also support long-term fund raising as their shared governance arrangements
ensure greater and more lasting donor buy-in. The shared governance feature also helps
ensure legitimacy to efforts, important for example for standard-setting and global public
goods initiatives. Partnership arrangements backed by multi-donor trust funds facilitate
donor coordination and joint dialogue in sectors such as health and education and in
countries recovering from conflict and disaster. Some partnerships offer a forum for
networking and exchange of knowledge.

The World Bank participates in many partnerships that complement it or fill gaps, but
also some that substitute for Bank work. Some partnerships complement the Bank,
allowing it to engage in activities that it could not support on its own—for example by
financing Bank work on global public goods and on non-core or innovative issues and
sub-sectors. Some partnerships fill gaps in the international aid architecture by addressing
new challenges or meeting unmet needs. But there are also some partnership programs
that become the lead agencies in their areas and, arguably, substitute for the Bank.

The perceived need for global public goods, like infectious disease control, climate
change mitigation, and biodiversity conservation has become increasingly urgent.
National action is increasingly insufficient to meet development goals. To grow and
prosper, developing countries also need traction on critical global issues to unlock
opportunities and manage risks—including climate change, infectious diseases, and
global frameworks for trade, finance, and migration. And many smaller or landlocked
countries rely on regional cooperation on trade, infrastructure, security, and water
sharing. The World Bank Group has a unique capability in linking global and regional
issues to action in its client countries, to “work with partner countries at the intersection
of national development priorities and global issues”. 7 The Bank’s work on global public
goods is often done as part of a partnership program and financed by trust funds.

Some partnerships have made substantial contributions to global development in their
respective sectors. For example, CGIAR, a global consortium of 15 agricultural research
centers set up in 1971, helped to spur the green revolution and other productivity-
enhancing agricultural innovations, reducing hunger and poverty for millions. 8 The
GAVI Alliance claims to have immunized an additional 440 million children between
                                            5


2000 and 2014 against leading vaccine-preventable diseases in the world's poorest
countries, preventing approximately six million future deaths. 9 The Stop TB Alliance has
had a significant impact on TB control and research: some 98 percent of the population in
22 countries with a high burden of TB is now covered by the Directly Observed
Treatment-Short-Course, the basic package that underpins the Stop-TB strategy. 10 The
Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR) has contributed to greater risk
reduction in Bank projects and catalyzed an active community of practice around disaster
risk reduction. 11 The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) has been an innovative,
risk-taking program that has helped define modalities for REDD+, and rekindled interest
in addressing chronic forest sector issues (Box 5). 12
                                            7


3. Partnerships create challenges
Partnerships typically start with handshakes between leaders of government, industry,
civil society, and development organizations. Leaders have agreed on a global priority,
acknowledged a need for cooperation, and pledged funds. But the work to deliver results
on the ground can start only after many complicated details have been settled. For
example, full funding must be arranged, governance arrangements negotiated, program
objectives defined, staff hired. Formal partnership programs are complex to set up and in
most cases it has taken several years before they begin their activities and even longer
until they achieve impact. Bank staff are practiced at setting up and managing trust funds
(to channel funds to a particular purpose) but they have not been schooled in structuring
the partnerships that many trust funds support.

The proliferation of partnership programs has resulted in a more complex and fragmented
aid landscape. In the health sector, several large partnerships are focused on
communicable diseases—including the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and
Malaria; the GAVI Alliance (for childhood immunization); Roll Back Malaria; and Stop
TB. It has proven difficult for country officials to mesh these well-funded programs with
their own national health sector priorities. And there are pressures on the World Bank to
increase its engagement at country level with the Global Fund and GAVI. 13

As already mentioned, IEG has identified a pattern of similar challenges and missed
opportunities across a diverse set of partnership programs with Bank participation and
has recommended reforms to strengthen selectivity, corporate oversight, partnership
governance, links to country operations, and results frameworks. The remainder of this
note describes these challenges and recommendations. The hope is that better navigating
the predictable challenges confronted by partnership programs will lead to better
development outcomes for client countries.

FIRST CHALLENGE: WHY CAN’T THE PROGRAM BE SUPPORTED WITH EXISTING
MECHANISMS?

Trust funds, in the aggregate, serve only to reallocate the fixed aid budgets of donors.
Most donors allocate funds from a fixed envelope, and there is no evidence that trust
funds have increased the size of the total official aid envelope. 14 Trust funds are not
programs themselves; rather they are vehicles for channeling aid to particular
organizations and purposes. Donors use them to pool funds for particular programs, tap
into World Bank Group systems and capacities, influence the Bank, and, sometimes, to
distance themselves from a politically-sensitive issue. Their value for the Bank is the
additional finance for its operations, work program, and engagement in regional and
global activities. This value has to be balanced against the risks of proliferation of
uncoordinated initiatives with parallel budgeting and approval processes.

As earmarked pots of money with separate approval and allocation processes, trust funds
tend to increase the transaction costs for the client country, making them inconsistent
with principles of aid alignment and government ownership. The programs they support
may also impose heavy burdens on local resources. Many ‘vertical’ (disease-specific)
global programs, for example, rely on underfunded national health systems for their
                                              8


delivery. And some global programs require country officials to submit redundant plans
and reports, impose ill-suited eligibility criteria, or fail to align with country priorities.
This being said, multi-donor trust funds have provided clear value-added in fragile and
conflict-affected states where they have been used to pool donor resources and
contributed to donor coordination, policy dialogue, and institution building. Those that
had clear governance arrangements and complementarity to Bank country programs were
more successful. 15

IEG’s trust fund evaluation recommended that the Bank Group continue to accept trust
funds because they address limitations in the bilateral and multilateral aid systems and
because they enable the Group to expand its roles and contributions to development.
However, the Bank Group could do a better job to foster effective, efficient, and
accountable use of this instrument. The Bank Group should apply greater selectivity at
entry; conversations with donors on partnerships and fund raising should start by
discussing the best trust fund vehicle and how to avoid aid fragmentation. 16

SECOND CHALLENGE: HOW TO ENSURE EFFECTIVE OVERSIGHT AND ACCOUNTABILITY?

The World Bank has streamlined certain corporate processes for managing trust funds,
but not partnerships. No central unit oversees the Bank’s participation in the governance
of partnerships, and the various Vice Presidential Units vary from proactive to hands-off.
The former Sustainable Development Network, for example, provided active oversight of
partnership programs and trust funds under its purview. But this is not the general rule.
Global and regional engagements are not tracked in any portfolio database, nor expected
to report on results. This hands-off approach makes it possible that major risks—and
major opportunities—in the partnership portfolio have gone unrecognized.

For example, the Bank sits on the boards of 91 partnership programs, far more than any
other bilateral or multilateral donor. The Bank has a unique opportunity to advocate
standards of good global governance in its board work—for example, minimum
acceptable standards of transparency and accountability. Yet this opportunity is being
missed: there has not so far been an institutional position or training on desired practices
and standards in this area. Technical staff that represents the Bank in partnerships are not
offered training or provided terms of reference.

Governance has proven to be a major stumbling block to programs’ effectiveness. An
international partnership needs a governance structure that is legitimate, effective, and
accountable. 17 It has to be clear who takes what decisions. The most common problem is
an unclear division of roles between the governing body – for example, the board or
steering committee – and the management – for example, the secretariat. Oversight and
approval of the work program are not always clearly separated from daily management;
boards sometimes fail to oversee management and set strategic directions.

Some partnership boards are big and cumbersome. The Global Facility for Disaster Risk
Reduction (GFDRR), for example, has more than 40 members and observers in its
Consultative Group, resulting in unwieldy decision-making. 18 Evaluations of several
programs find that board agendas are overcrowded or poorly managed, and tensions
between stakeholders often lead to lengthy impasse with no clear path to resolution.
                                               9


Meetings are taken up by lengthy procedures rather than in-depth discussions of the
effectiveness and relevance of activities. Some programs have evolved ad hoc,
duplicative processes. Global Environment Facility (GEF) projects, for example, are
reviewed and approved both by the GEF and the implementing agencies, resulting in
major delays.

Achieving legitimacy is a challenge for partnership governance. Partnership boards are
often comprised of a mix of donors, beneficiary countries, civil society, and the private
sector. It has proven hard to ensure effective voice and a balanced representation of
competing interests.

Transparency could often be better. Many programs’ websites don’t display their
charters, financial reports, and evaluations. Sometimes, special interests find unfair ways
to influence decisions on grant allocations due to insufficient transparency of grant
making processes and unequal access to information by potential beneficiaries. 19

Going forward, the Bank should require that each partnership program embody the
essential elements of good governance such as a charter, a governing body/board, a
secretariat, periodic independent evaluation, and standards for transparency and handling
of conflicts of interest. The Bank should issue terms of reference for its representatives
on partnership boards and beef up training and in-house capacity on global program
governance.

The Bank plays multiple roles in partnership programs (host of the secretariat, trustee,
implementing partner, funder, and member or chair of the governing body). These roles
give rise to a range of potential strategic, financial, operational, and institutional linkages
between programs and the Bank (Table 1 in Annex B). There are also risks. For example,
the Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR) acts both as a global
partnership program with shared governance arrangements and the institutional home for
the Bank’s disaster risk management practice. The potential conflicts of interest and
reputational risks from this dual role should be acknowledged and confronted proactively
(Box 3). 20 This is one of the motivations behind IEG’s recommendation that the Bank
should develop formal policies for partnership engagements as well as for hosting
secretariats (Box 2). 21

Programs housed in the Bank align and identify with the Bank to varying degrees. The
Energy Sector Management Program (ESMAP), GFDRR, and the Global Program for
Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) are clearly part and parcel of the Bank, and aligned with it
operationally, although each has its own board, secretariat, and approval procedures. The
Global Partnership for Education (GPE, previously known as the Fast Track Initiative)
has a more independent identity and position, as does the GEF.

Frictions can develop between programs and their hosting organizations. The
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP) has had to resist attempts to make it
assume responsibilities for overseeing the Bank’s own work on micro finance. Cities
Alliance completed a move from the Bank to UNOPS, which was found better suited to
handle its small grants program. 22 An evaluation of the International Land Coalition
(ILC, a global program) found that its host organization, the International Fund for
                                                    10


Agricultural Development (IFAD) had assumed governance functions that should have
been performed by the ILC Coalition Council (its board). The legal status of ILC was
unclear and lines of accountability between ILC and IFAD were blurred, compromising
the value of the ILC. 23


Box 2. Most Partnerships are hosted by one of the partner organizations
The Bank is involved in around 85 global and 35 regional programs with shared governance. Of these, 40
percent have secretariats housed in the Bank—including, for example the Climate Investment Funds, the
Global Environment Facility, the Global Partnership for Education, and the Consultative Group to Assist the
Poor. Staff of internally housed programs is subject to Bank policies and benefits, yet sometimes owe their
loyalty more to the program than to the Bank. The dual loyalty and other issues have been resolved on a
case-by-case basis but the growth in the number and complexity of partnership programs may warrant a
more consistent approach. IEG recommends that the Bank formulate a hosting policy to guide its
relationship with internally-housed partnerships.

The Bank Group is also a partner in many programs housed elsewhere. About 35 percent of programs are
housed in other organizations, such as the StopTB Partnership housed in the World Health Organization
and Better Work, a partnership between IFC and the International Labor Organization (ILO) housed at ILO.
About 25 percent of partnerships are independent legal entities, notably GAVI and the Global Fund which
both operate under Swiss law.
There is no clear best practice. Being an independent entity involves major costs for support functions
(legal, human resources, administrative, and so on) but also promotes a distinct brand which can have fund
raising and other advantages. The international community may want to carefully weigh the pros and cons
of creating new independent organizations versus housing partnerships in existing organizations.
Source: IEG, 2011b.



The Bank’s representative on a program’s governing body is responsible for overseeing
program activities, but the Bank lacks selection criteria, terms of reference and reporting
channels for these representatives. Terms of reference and training would help clarify the
roles, responsibilities, and accountabilities of Bank staff serving on the boards of
partnership programs and bring needed clarity. Bank management has proposed (in July
2013) a Management Framework for partnership programs and Financial Intermediary
Funds that articulates principles of engagement. If implemented, this Framework could
provide the basis for more consistent decision-making related to Bank participation in
partnership programs.
                                                      11



Box 3. When partnerships are operationally integrated: the Global Facility for Disaster Risk
Reduction (GFDRR)
GFDRR has experienced rapid growth since its inception in 2006 in the face of evident demand from
developing countries—and satisfied donors—for support for disaster risk management (DRM). GFDRR is
closely identified with the Bank, and the Bank’s regional DRM focal points have effectively channeled
country demands for assistance with DRM to the GFDRR. This way, GFDRR draws on the Bank’s long
experience in post-disaster assistance, but it has also influenced the Bank to elevate disaster risk reduction
in operations. Although attribution is difficult, there has been a clear shift toward risk reduction in Bank-
supported investment projects since 2006; the GFDRR has also catalyzed and sustained an active
community of practice around disaster risk reduction inside the Bank and linked it to other organizations
active in the field. However, GFDRR has been slow to clarify its program objectives and set up effective
M&E frameworks. And its Consultative Group (board) looks unwieldy with 25 voting members and 21
observers.
Source: IEG, 2012a.


THIRD CHALLENGE: HOW WILL THIS COMPLEMENT THE BANK’S COUNTRY
OPERATIONS?

The Bank’s dominant business model is based on partnerships with client countries. This
country-driven model has been hard to reconcile with the global programs and multi-
country trust funds that the Bank is asked to administer. 24 IEG has noted cases where
staff of a global program working in a country don’t communicate well with country
teams, and the country director generally lacks authority over global program activities.

Trust funds supporting a single country tend to better align with the Bank’s country work
than trust funds supporting multiple countries. Multidonor trust funds supporting a single
country have sometimes fostered policy coherence among donors and brought together
what would otherwise be piecemeal contributions. But such positive features are not
consistently encountered in multi-country trust funds.

Global funds and programs that support a particular theme or sector often fall short on
fostering country ownership; developing countries are often not involved in their design
and initiation. Some global funds are plagued by operational inefficiencies, weak
accountability for results, and lack of objective and transparent allocation criteria.
Recipient governments criticize global funds and programs that impose requirements ill-
suited to their country or conduct studies that they don’t consider a priority. IEG has
recommended that trust funds supporting multiple countries be phased out, unless they
support a global or regional partnership program with clear governance arrangements or
can be folded into the emerging umbrella trust funds. 25 Exercising careful selectivity at
entry would help to avoid duplicative efforts. Partnerships and trust funds that provide
co-financing should simplify parallel approval mechanisms.

More can be done to ensure synergies between the Bank as a global partner and the Bank
as a country partner. Recent reviews of the Bank’s engagements with GAVI, GEF, and
the Global Fund all point to challenges and missed opportunities (Table 1 in Annex B).
The GEF Review found ineffective management, slow processing speed, and duplication
of work along the Bank-GEF project cycle (Box 4). The GAVI review highlighted the
                                                      12


Bank’s excellent work on innovative finance on behalf of GAVI but also pointed to
missed opportunities for stronger Bank engagement in health sector finance and
analytical work related to immunization. There was strong interest from both the Global
Fund and GAVI for stronger Bank country-level engagement, but in neither case was
there any explicit agreement on division of labor and accountability between the Bank
and the respective organization. The opposite is true of GFDRR which is housed in the
Bank and well-integrated in Bank operations (Box 3). 26


Box 4. When Partnerships diminish over time: The World Bank Group and the Global
Environment Facility (GEF)
A recent IEG evaluation finds that the mandates and strategies of World Bank Group and GEF have been
mutually relevant since the start of GEF in 1991. The GEF’s focus on global environmental benefits
complements the World Bank’s own environmental priorities. The Bank considers the GEF as a crucial
contributor to innovative and risk-sharing approaches, and the GEF perceives the Bank as having a key
comparative advantage in leveraging GEF funding to generate global environmental benefits in large
projects.
But the Bank Group-GEF partnership has deteriorated over time, driven by a series of changes that made
the GEF less relevant for the Bank Group and more cumbersome to engage with. IEG recommends
adapting the World Bank Group-GEF partnership to evolving realities, for example via a shared project cycle
that makes fuller use of the Bank’s quality assurance mechanisms; agreeing on cost recovery principles for
the implementation of GEF projects; reaching a common vision of the future of World Bank Group-GEF
partnership; addressing the difficulties of the Bank and IFC in working under GEF’s resource allocation
systems; and clarifying mutual expectations for blending World Bank with GEF funding and investigating
options for legitimizing innovation, demonstration, and replication as selection criteria for freestanding
projects.
Source: IEG, 2013b.



Stronger coordination mechanisms between partnerships and the relevant sectors could
help to ensure effective linkages and avoid diminishing relevance over time. The Bank
cannot mandate this—after all, these are partnerships with shared governance. Instead,
the Bank’s representatives on partnership boards could be empowered to work for
operational linkages and coordination. Routine oversight and management of partnership
engagements is warranted, along with support and training for Bank staff representing the
organization on boards.


Box 5. Pushing the envelope on forest carbon
The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), housed in the Bank, was set up in 2007 to assist developing
countries in achieving emissions reductions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD) by building
their capacity to benefit from possible future systems of REDD+ payments and piloting a performance-based
payment system. It has been an innovative, risk-taking program that has helped define modalities for
REDD+, and rekindled interest in addressing chronic forest sector issues. Yet it has struggled to meet high
demand for its services, has been slow to disburse, and found it hard to bring in private sector participation.
And its mission has been complicated by the uncertain prospects for a large-scale compliance market in
REDD credits. The Bank could use a strategic reflection on its overall approach to REDD+.
Source: IEG, 2012c.
                                                      13


FOURTH CHALLENGE: HOW WILL WE KNOW WHAT THE PROGRAM HAS
ACCOMPLISHED?

Imagine a fictional program, the Partnership for Better Aid. It is housed in the Bank, has
existed for seven years, and can point to a good number of studies, workshops, and pilot
projects. However, it lacks a clear results framework and collects no data on the impacts
and outcomes that result from its activities. Its donors are asking for evidence of impact.
An external evaluation is commissioned. The external evaluators, however, face the
challenge that results indicators have not been specified, let alone measured. The
evaluation report describes stakeholders’ perceptions and recommends stronger M&E.

This description fits most partnership programs that IEG has reviewed. The failure to
define and track their results compromises the programs’ credibility with donors (and
possibly their effectiveness). In a sample of 17 independent evaluations of partnership
programs, all were compromised by weak M&E frameworks: objectives and strategies of
programs were ill-defined, and programs’ M&E systems failed to pay attention to
outcomes, or didn’t collect data on them (Box 6). 27


Box 6. Why are programs’ M&E practices so weak?
All Bank-financed lending projects are obliged to define a results framework at their outset. Operational staff
receive training and guidance on results. Lending project self-evaluations (Investment Completion Reports)
are mandatory and validated by IEG. Many trust funds also use self-evaluations but these are not validated
and report success rates that are uniformly high and devoid of credibility.
Partnership programs are not required to have results frameworks at inception and as a result often take
many years to set them up. Moreover, partnership programs by their nature represent compromises
between multiple partners. Partners agree on broad directions but often differ on nuances and priorities. As
a result, programs are settled with vague or excessively broad objectives, resulting in weak links between
programs’ activities and their larger objectives.
IEG found that partnership programs have started to develop a culture of evaluation but that many programs
regard periodic evaluation as a substitute for putting adequate monitoring systems in place. Periodic
evaluations often result more from donor pressure than from program managers’ desire to learn lessons to
improve their effectiveness.
Source: adapted from IEG, 2011b.



The Bank should promote clear goals and indicators in the programs in which it
participates whenever they are approved or restructured. It should also promote periodic
independent evaluation (this is currently mandated but not enforced). Evaluations should
adhere to standards of good practice and, to ensure credibility, be independent of program
secretariats. 28
                                              15


4. How to ensure results from partnerships? Summary
of recommendations
Partnership programs and trust funds will likely continue to proliferate. Many of the
drivers underpinning the growing role of partnerships for development show no sign of
abating. On the supply side, there are political considerations in donor countries leading
to earmarking of aid and the Bank’s push to fund-raise for development. On the demand
side, there is growing attention to addressing global public goods, in particular climate
change, but also a host of other issues such as trade, migration, water scarcity,
infrastructure integration, global standardization and certification, and knowledge and
statistics. The World Bank Group is well-positioned to contribute in many of these areas.

Strong partnerships are about creating shared value—working collaboratively with other
organizations to produce development results that the partners would not be able to create
on their own. The key challenge facing the World Bank Group is to make sure that its
engagements in partnerships create shared value for its client countries. As emphasized in
the World Bank Group strategy, engaging in strong and well-aligned partnerships can
help the Group enhance its contributions to global development, but the evaluation
experience summarized in this note suggests that there is room to improve.

IEG has recommended a set of reforms and initiatives to help the Bank address the most
frequently encountered partnership challenges. We repeat these recommendations in the
following.

First, there are several steps the Bank can take to ensure greater strategic relevance in its
partnership programs:

    •   Conversations with donors on partnerships and fund raising should emphasize
        selective use of the trust fund vehicle and how to avoid aid fragmentation; 29
    •   Apply greater selectivity at entry, channeling resources and institutional attention
        to areas deemed a priority for the institution as a whole (rather than an individual
        department);
    •   Build sunset clauses into new partnership agreements (most trust funds already
        have them).

Second, internal reforms could enhance the effectiveness of partnerships, chiefly via
streamlined processes for managing partnership programs. IEG views partnership reform
as feasible and desirable, and has recommended: 30

    •   The Bank Group should develop a formal policy on engaging with partnership
        programs, including standard approval processes for Bank Group engagement
        with new partnership programs, independent of how they are financed.
    •   For each program in which it is engaged, the Bank Group should have an explicit
        engagement strategy that includes:
                                       16


        o The expected roles of the Bank Group in the program at global and
           country level;
        o How the program’s activities are expected to be linked to the Bank
           Group’s country operations;
        o How the risks to the Bank Group’s participation (including conflicts of
           interest) will be identified and managed.
•   Approval of new programs should be conditional on having satisfactory
    governance arrangements, theory of change, results frameworks, and resource
    mobilization strategies at the outset.
•   The Bank Group should formulate a policy for hosting the secretariats of
    partnership programs inside the Bank Group.
•   Oversight and risk management of programs should be strengthened via:
       o A continuously updated system for tracking the portfolio of partnership
           programs;
       o Standard terms of reference for all Bank Group staff serving on
           partnership boards;
       o Bank Group-wide guidelines for task team leaders of partnership
           programs;
       o Sufficient budgets—and other relevant support, including training—for
           effective oversight and risk management.
                                            17


Appendix A. Sources
IEG evaluations have covered all three major aspects to global engagements:

     •    Global public goods (services that a country-based model would undersupply)
     •    Partnership programs (governance arrangements for cooperation)
     •    Trust funds (vehicles for channeling targeted finance).

IEG/OED started reviewing the Bank’s global work in 2002, and in 2004 published the
first major evaluation of global programs, followed up in 2007 by an evaluation of
regional (multi-country) programs. From 2006-13, IEG conducted 23 in-depth Global
Program Reviews, listed below. These Reviews have covered nearly all of the Bank’s
large global programs as well as a sample of medium-sized and smaller programs, mostly
in health, environment, infrastructure, disaster risk management, and statistics. The
World Bank’s Involvement in Global and Regional Partnership Programs: an
Independent Assessment (2011) summed up the cumulative experience from the Global
Program Reviews while Trust Fund Support for Development: An Evaluation of the
World Bank’s Trust Fund Portfolio (2011) assessed the value of the trust fund vehicle as
a way of delivering aid, the effectiveness of the Bank’s management of trust funds, and
their impact on the Bank’s development role. And the 2008 Annual Review of
Development Effectiveness: Shared Global Challenges reviewed the Bank’s provision of
global public goods.

The impact of IEG’s work in this area is mixed. Individual programs have undertaken
reforms. CGIAR, for example, reformed itself to become less sprawling and more
coherent and responsive to demand. Many programs especially in sustainable
development have improved their results frameworks. The Development Grant Facility
was revamped. And at the corporate level, CFP introduced the umbrella trust fund
concept and a new management framework for partnership reform in response to IEG
evaluations. However, in IEG’s view the Bank still has some way to go, especially on
reforms to the policies, systems, and guidance for participation in partnership programs.

List of IEG’s Global Program Reviews to Date

                                                                             Date
Acronym                Program Name
                                                                             Completed

1.   ProVention        ProVention Consortium                                 2006
2.   DG                Development Gateway Foundation                        2007
3.   MMV               Medicines for Malaria Venture                         2007
4.   CA                Cities Alliance                                       2007
5.   CEPF              Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund                   2007
                       Association for the Development of Education in
6.   ADEA                                                                    2008
                       Africa
APPENDIX A                                                     18


                                                                                                      Date
Acronym                        Program Name
                                                                                                      Completed

                               Population and Reproductive Health Capacity
7.    PRHCBP                                                                                          2008
                               Building Program
8.    ILC                      International Land Coalition                                           2008
9.    CGAP                     Consultative Group to Assist the Poor                                  2008
10.   GDN                      Global Development Network                                             2009
11.   GFHR                     Global Forum for Health Research                                       2009
12.   GISP                     Global Invasive Species Program                                        2009
13.   Stop TB                  Stop TB Partnership                                                    2009
                               International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge,
14.   IAASTD                                                                                          2010
                               Science, and Technology for Development
15.   GWP                      Global Water Partnership                                               2010
                               Multi-Donor Trust Fund for the Extractive Industries
16.   MDTF-EITI                                                                                       2011
                               Transparency Initiative
17.   MBC                      Mesoamerican Biological Corridor                                       2011
18.   MAPS,                    Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics, Partnership in
PARIS21, and                   Statistics for Development in the 21st Century, and                    2011
TFSCB                          Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building
                               Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
19.   Global Fund                                                                                     2012
                               Malaria
20.   FCPF                     Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                     2012
21.   GFDRR                    Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 2012
22.   GEF                       Global Environment Facility                                           2013
23.   GAVI                      GAVI Alliance                                                         2014
Note: All are available on http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org under evaluations=>global program reviews.
                                              19


Appendix B. Linkages
Table 1. Examples of Linkages between the Bank and Four Global Partnership Programs
Types of       Global Fund to         Stop TB               Global             GAVI Alliance
Linkages       Fight AIDS, TB        Partnership         Environment
                and Malaria                              Facility (GEF)
Strategic     The Global Fund       Stop TB and         The mandates          The mandates and
              and Bank              Bank strategies     and strategies of     priorities of the
              strategies are most   are closely         the GEF and the       Bank and GAVI
              closely aligned in    aligned. Bank       Bank Group have       were mutually
              low-income            exercised its       been compatible       relevant and
              countries where       convening           and mutually          compatible at
              fighting              power at Stop       relevant in the       GAVI’s inception
              communicable          TB’s formative      past and today.       but the
              diseases is a high    stage and           However, a            engagement
              priority. However,    seconded staff      number of factors     diminished
              the Bank pursues      to Stop TB.         have over time        starting in 2008
              multisectoral                             diminished the        until recently
              approaches to                             relevance of the      because of
              improve health                            partnership.          unresolved
              outcomes, while                                                 tensions, for
              the Global Fund                                                 example between
              focuses on three                                                the Bank’s
              specific diseases.                                              broader priorities
                                                                              and GAVI’s
                                                                              focused
                                                                              introduction of
                                                                              new and
                                                                              sometimes costly
                                                                              vaccines.
Financial     The World Bank        The Bank has        The Bank is the       The Bank helped
              is the limited        supported Stop      Trustee of the        set up and executed
              trustee of the FIF    TB since            GEF and related       two major
              that supports the     inception           trust funds, and an   innovative
              Global Fund.          through the         implementing          financing
                                    Development         agency of GEF-        mechanisms—
                                    Grant Facility      funded projects.      IFFIm and the
                                    and was the         The Bank’s share      AMC—on behalf
                                    largest financier   of GEF funding        of GAVI that
                                    of TB control       has declined over     contributed to its
                                    until the           time.                 rapid scaling up.
                                    creation of the
                                    Global Fund.
Operational   The Bank does         The Bank has        Reforms to the        Since GAVI was
APPENDIX B                                                  20


              not play an                        multiple lending          GEF’s project                set up, the Bank
              explicit                           operations that           cycle and agency             has reduced its
              operational role                   support TP                fees have                    immunization
              in the Global                      projects in               contributed to               engagement.
              Fund. Global                       countries.                slow processing              Active
              Fund and Bank                                                and duplication              collaboration with
              staff has had                                                of work. GEF and             GAVI is rare.
              some degree of                                               the Bank are now             There are
              engagement,                                                  piloting a project           opportunities for
              from                                                         cycle                        stronger Bank
              information-                                                 simplification.              engagement in
              sharing to active                                                                         immunization
              collaboration, in                                                                         policy and finance
              about 65                                                                                  discussions.
              countries.
Institutional The Bank is a                      The Bank is a             The Bank and                 The Bank is a
              permanent, non-                    member of the             other GEF                    permanent, voting
              voting member of                   coordinating              Agencies have                member of the
              the Global Fund                    board. Stop               little role, as              GAVI Board and
              Board by virtue                    TB’s principle            invited observers,           sits on three
              of its trustee role.               is for partners to        in GEF Council               committees. Since
              The various                        work                      decision making              2008, the Bank
              initiatives                        cooperatively             today. The                   has been less
              associated with                    toward the                Agencies’ roles              engaged and
              the Global                         common goal               in the preparation           decided to stop
              HIV/AIDS                           without                   of GEF policy                receiving GAVI
              Program and the                    renouncing the            and strategic                trust funding for
              International                      independence              documents have               analytical work
              Health                             and individual            become less                  and capacity
              Partnership has                    mandates of               collaborative and            building.
              contributed to                     partners.                 more consultative
              both global and                                              over time.
              country-level
              engagement.
Sources: IEG’s Global Program Reviews on the Global Fund (2012), Stop TB (2009), the World Bank Group’s Partnership with the GEF
(2013), and GAVI Alliance (2014).
                                                  21



References
Bezanson, Keith A. and Paul Isenman. 2012. Governance of New Global Partnerships: Challenges,
      Weaknesses, and Lessons. CGD Policy Paper 014. Washington DC: Center for Global Development.
Goldin, Ian. 2013. Divided Nations : Why Global Governance Is Failing, and What We Can Do About It.
      Oxford: Oxford University Press.
IEG. 2004. Addressing the Challenges of Globalization: An Independent Evaluation of the World Bank's
      Approach to Global Programs,
_____. 2007.Global Program Review of the Cities Alliance.
_____. 2008a. Annual Review of Development Effectiveness: Shared Global Challenges,
_____.2008b.Global Program Review of the International Land Coalition,
_____.2009. Global Program Review of the Stop-Tuberculosis Partnership,
_____.2011a. Trust Fund Support for Development: An Evaluation of the World Bank’s Trust Fund Portfolio,
_____. 2011b. The World Bank’s Involvement in Global and Regional Partnership Programs: An Independent
      Assessment,
_____. 2012a. The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery,
_____. 2012b. The Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and the World Bank's Engagement
      with the Global Fund,

_____. 2012c. Global Program Review of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility,

_____. 2013a. The Matrix System at Work: An Evaluation of the World Bank's Organizational Effectiveness,
_____. 2013b. The World Bank's Partnership with the Global Environment Facility.
_____. 2014a. Responding to Global Public Bads: Learning from Evaluation of the WOrld Bank Experience
with Avian Influenza 2006-13.
_____. 2014b. World Bank Group Assistance to Low-Income Fragile and Conflict-Affected States

_____. forthcoming, Global Program Review of the World Bank’s relationship with GAVI.

OED. 2004. The CGIAR at 31: an independent meta-evaluation of the Consultative Group on International
      Agricultural Research.
Oxford Martin Commission for Future Generations. 2013. Now for the Long Term.
World Bank. 2007. Meeting the Challenges of Global Development: A long-term strategic exercise.
____. 2013. "World Bank Group Strategy,"
World Bank Corporate Scorecard June 2013. Trust Fund Reform: Progress to Date and Future Directions, p.
33.
                                                     22




Endnotes
1
  World Bank. 2013.
2
  IEG. 2011b.
3
  Ibid.
4
  Sources and programs are listed in Annex A and globalevaluations.org.
5
  World Bank Corporate Scorecard September 2013 p. 19; Trust Fund Reform: Progress to Date and Future
Directions, June 2013 p. 33. The IFC figure for advisory services is for FY12, all other for FY13.
6
  IEG, 2014a.
7
  World Bank. 2007.
8
  OED. 2004.
9
  www.gavialliance.org
10
   IEG. 2009.
11
   IEG, 2012a.
12
   IEG, 2012c.
13
   IEG, forthcoming.
14
   IEG, 2011a.
15
   IEG, 2014b.
16
    IEG, 2011a.
17
    Goldin, Ian. 2013.
18
    IEG, 2012a.
19
    Ibid.
20
    IEG, 2012a.
21
   IEG, 2011b.
22
    See also IEG, 2007.
23
    IEG, 2008b.
24
    IEG, 2013a.
25
    Umbrella trust funds are broad facilities such as, for example, the Umbrella Facility for Gender Equality. This
is an example of a multi-donor trust fund that is closely aligned with the World Bank Group’s strategy for
gender equality and regional priorities
26
    IEG, 2012a.
27
    IEG. 2011b.
28
    Ibid.
29
    IEG, 2011a.
30
    IEG, 2011b.
