                                             95560




Results Frameworks in Country Strategies –
Lessons from Evaluations
Abbreviations and Acronyms

AAA                    Analytical and Advisory Assistance
CAS                    Country Assistant Strategy
CASCRR                 Country Assistance Strategy Completion Report Review
CLR                    Completion & Learning Review
CPF                    Country Partnership Framework
PLR                    Performance & Learning Review
SCD                    Systematic Country Diagnostics
TA                     Technical Assistance
VPU                    Vice Presidency Unit
WBG                    World Bank Group




Director-General, Evaluation                        :   Ms. Caroline Heider
Director, Independent Evaluation Group, Country ,   :   Mr. Nick York
Corporate, and Global Evaluations
Manager                                             :   Ms. Geeta Batra

Team                                                :   Luis Alvaro, Xiaolun Sun, Geeta
                                                        Batra, Marcelo Selowsky, Shoghik
                                                        Hovhannisyan.
                                                                      i




Contents
1. Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 1
2. Results Framework ............................................................................................................... 4
   Definition .............................................................................................................................. 4
     STEP 1. Identifying the broad goals for country assistance ........................................... 4
     STEP 2 . What are the key constraints/bottlenecks that need to be removed/addressed in
     order to reach these goals? The role of the SCD............................................................... 4
     STEP 3 Identifying possible areas of WBG engagement from those areas identified in
     the SCD. ............................................................................................................................ 5
     STEP 4 Selecting a subset of objectives as the specific CPS operational objectives. .... 5
     STEP 5 Developing the results chain between the selected CPS (operational)
     objectives and WBG instruments and resources ............................................................... 6
     STEP 6 A monitoring framework to gauge progress and results. ............................... 10
3. Summary and Key lessons .................................................................................................. 11


Boxes
Box 2.1: Examples:.................................................................................................................. 4
Box 2.2: What are country objectives/outcomes and outputs? How are they different from
project outcomes and outputs? .................................................................................................. 6


Tables
Table 2.1: The table below summarizes the type of information that can provide clarity to
each of the above transmission channels: ................................................................................. 9


Figures
Figure 1. Country Engagement Cycle ....................................................................................... 2
Figure 2: Results Framework .................................................................................................... 3
Figure 3.: Using the Results Chain to Develop the WBG Program.......................................... 7


Annexes
ANNEX 1: EXAMPLES OF RESULTS FRAMEWORKS.................................................. 13
ANNEX 2: CPF RESULTS MATRIX ................................................................................... 17
                                              1



1. Introduction

1.1     In 2005, the WBG formally introduced the Results Framework in the CASs as a key
tool for improving the quality of the WBG’s strategy in borrowing member countries,
maximizing the development effectiveness of WBG assistance, and demonstrating
measurable results of international aid in fostering growth and reducing poverty. Since then,
much progress has been achieved in developing a results framework in the WBG’s Country
Assistance Strategies (CASs, including Country Partnership Strategies). Today, all CASs
discussed at the Board of Executive Directors have a results framework, usually in the form
of a matrix in the annex. These Results Matrices define the outcome indicators and
milestones for tracking WBG program progress and mid-course corrective actions, fulfilling
important accountability as well as learning objectives. The results-based CAS approach has
brought several benefits including the focus on results, better alignment between the WBG
country engagement and national priorities, and flexibility in instruments to accommodate
programming for the increasingly diverse set of Bank clients, including IDA, IBRD and
fragile countries.

1.2    Despite this progress, IEG’s country program evaluations and reviews of CAS
completion reports (CASCRs) have discussed a few pitfalls in the results frameworks.
Common deficiencies include a focus on outputs instead of outcomes, a weak link between
designed interventions and outcomes, and the absence of monitoring indicators to track
outcomes. Several recent IEG evaluations and reports, including the 2013 The Matrix System
at Work and RAP 2013, have demonstrated that a weak CAS results framework is a key
determinant of unsatisfactory outcome performance at the country program level.

1.3     The new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) provides an opportunity to
strengthen the results frameworks in CPFs. Replacing the Country Assistance Strategy, the
CPF is the new central tool of World Bank Group Management and the Board for reviewing
and guiding the WBG’s country programs and gauging their effectiveness. It identifies the
key objectives and development results through which the WBG intends to support a member
country in its efforts to end extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity in a sustainable
manner.

1.4     The CPF process has four components (see Figure 1): the SCD, which provides the
analytic underpinnings for the strategy; the CPF, the WBG’s country strategy, which draws
on the SCD; the Performance and Learning Review (PLR), which is used periodically to
update the CPF, monitor its implementation and learn from the findings; and the Completion
and Learning Review (CLR), which is prepared when the CPF is complete, and is used to
inform the next CPF.
                                               2



Figure 1. Country Engagement Cycle



       Systematic             Country              Performance           Completion
        Country              Partnership           & Learning            & Learning
       Diagnostic            Framework               Review               Review




                                   Results Framework




1.5     A Results Framework (RF) is an integral part of all the components of the CPF
process. The RF calls for a clear specification of country and WBG goals, the specific
objectives selected by the country strategy in order to best contribute to those goals, a theory
of change that relates those objectives with the instruments, and finally a monitoring system
that identifies yardsticks of progress and achievements. As noted above, much progress has
been made in specifying the RF in the World Bank Group’s CAS, CPS and Completion
Reports; however the system would benefit from strengthening especially if it is to
contribute to the effective implementation of the new engagement approach that the WBG
has recently launched. The objective of this note is to provide suggestions for improvement
in Results Frameworks for Country Strategies based on an IEG analysis of WBG’s country
strategies approved during FY08-FY14 and the CASCRs prepared by country teams during
FY12-FY14.
                              3




Figure 2: Results Framework
                                                      4



2. Results Framework
Definition
2.1    A Results Framework represents the underlying logic that explains how the
development objectives of a country program are selected and how they are to be achieved.
Within the new CPF framework, the major stages of the Results Framework as shown in
Figure 2 are as follows.

STEP 1. IDENTIFYING THE BROAD GOALS FOR COUNTRY ASSISTANCE

2.2     This first stage broadly defines with the country authorities and stakeholders the main
areas of common interest; that is, the intersection of the twin goals of the WBG and
countries’ own goals. Country development goals are longer-term or higher-order
development objectives identified by the country. They are usually neither achievable in the
CPF period nor solely addressed by the CPF program.

Box 2.1: Examples:
        Country Development Goals                                            Key Constraints

   1.   Reduce mismatch between labor market              1.   Insufficient supply of highly skilled and
                                                               productive people in demand by employers
        demand and supply
                                                          2.   Stagnant or declining agricultural yields
   2.   Revitalization of the Rural Economy
                                                          3.   High rural road transport costs
   3.   Improve agriculture competitiveness
                                                          4.   Credit to SMEs and poor households
   4.   Expand access to credit and other financial            constrained but expansion needs to preserve
        services to priority areas for national                financial stability
        development, infrastructure, small business
        and the populations currently excluded
                                                          5.   High childhood malnutrition
   5.   Improve living conditions, particularly for
        the poor and vulnerable



STEP 2 . WHAT ARE THE KEY CONSTRAINTS/BOTTLENECKS THAT NEED TO BE
REMOVED/ADDRESSED IN ORDER TO REACH THESE GOALS? THE ROLE OF THE SCD.

2.3     The SCD will identify the main policies and institutional reforms that could
contribute most to the achievement of the common goals, independent of whether the WBG
will address them. Both stages one and two are important for the focus and relevance of the
WBG engagement. Also, prioritization of main policies and institutional reforms in the SCD
will set the basis for an effective approach to selectivity. In doing so, the SCD is expected to
help weed out weakly relevant engagements.
                                                5



STEP 3 IDENTIFYING POSSIBLE AREAS OF WBG ENGAGEMENT FROM THOSE AREAS
IDENTIFIED IN THE SCD.

2.4     Not all the key constraints identified by the SCD can be addressed by the Bank in its
assistance strategy. Some of them may be of such an institutional and long-term nature (for
example the instability and uncertainty created by peculiarities of the electoral cycle, the
deep rooted structure of land ownership, etc.) that efforts to address them can be postponed
or undertaken by others. This stage is a first cut at identified areas of engagement where the
WBG could potentially play a role.

STEP 4 SELECTING A SUBSET OF OBJECTIVES AS THE SPECIFIC CPS OPERATIONAL
OBJECTIVES.

2.5     The transition from the previous stage to the current is a complex one and has been a
salient weakness in current Country Assistance Strategies. What subset of the objectives
identified in the SCD should be selected as specific operational objectives of the country
assistance strategy? It calls for selecting those that can be delivered best given the WBG
resources, knowledge, country ownership, and in collaboration with donors. The ability of
the institution to be selective is critical as proliferation of objectives in the CPS may disperse
the institution’s efforts, may tax the capacity of the country and prevent catalytic effects and
transformational impacts. The development of operational results chains (step 5) will be an
integral part of this process.

2.6     Many times the CPS set objectives seem too ambitious given the instruments that the
WGB fields and/or the assumptions are too unrealistic (regarding what is expected for the
government, the development partners, the private sector, for instance) or are simply not
specified. On the other extreme one could have CPS objectives that are very realistic and
basically equal to the project objective, but with no clear catalytic (transformational) impact
that may influence broader objectives and goals. (For example, the CAS objective is equal to
the number of additional irrigated farms, an output from an irrigation project.) See Box 1.
Setting the CPS objective at an appropriate level would help avoid some of the common
problems observed in the current country strategies, where CAS objectives are sometimes
indistinguishable from country goals (hence unrealistic), or taken directly from individual
supporting projects (hence inadequate). The timeframe for delivering the expected CAS
outcomes is a particularly important aspect to consider in defining each CAS objective.
                                                       6




Box 2.2: What are country objectives/outcomes and outputs? How are they different
from project outcomes and outputs?
   •    Outputs are tangible products or services delivered, and outcomes are the use of those products or
        deliverables. Traditionally, outputs and outcomes were referred to in the context of a project. When
        applied at the country level, country outputs are the system or the products or services of the system
        provided on an ongoing basis which are substantial in terms of the size or importance to reflect
        country-level developments.

   •    Examples of country level outputs include (i) road system expanded, improved, and maintained; (ii)
        education system expanded, improved, and maintained; and (iii) electrical system expanded, improved,
        and maintained. The corresponding outcomes are (i) improved movement of people and goods; (ii)
        increased education attainment; and (iii) increased and/or more efficient use of electricity including
        that generated from renewable energy.

   •    An example:

        Outputs: Increased Kilometer of Road
        Outcomes: Reduced Transport Costs, Reduction in Travel time
        A discussion of how the project scaled up and resulted in national level outputs and outcomes, while
        contributing to the twin goals.




2.7     Thus, a CPS objective is a statement of what the WBG intends to achieve, expressed
in terms of an intermediate or final development outcome, as opposed to a financed
deliverable (output). These are the WBG’s objectives that the WBG expects to be held
accountable for achieving during the CPF period.

Examples:

   1.   Improve attainment of market-demanded skills in high education

   2.   Increase agricultural productivity in rice and corn industry

   3.   Reduce road travel time for the rural population

   4.   Increased access to finance for poor households and SMEs


STEP 5 DEVELOPING THE RESULTS CHAIN BETWEEN THE SELECTED CPS
(OPERATIONAL) OBJECTIVES AND WBG INSTRUMENTS AND RESOURCES

2.8     The operational results chain is the most critical and challenging task in developing
the Results Framework of a country strategy. It presents a logical explanation of how the
planned WBG interventions can lead to the expected CAS objectives, beginning with inputs,
moving through activities and outputs, and culminating in outcomes, impacts, and feedback,
and calls for aligning WBG resources with the selected objectives. It needs to make explicit
the underlying assumptions about the actions by the government, the private sector
(households and firms), and other development partners, including the possible impact of
external shocks. It allows to identify risks associated with these assumptions and consider
                                                                  7


changes if these risks materialize. A clear result chain is critical for accountability, mid-
course corrections, learning, and, is integral to exercising selectivity. Specifying the final
result chain and the precise CPS objective may involve a process of iteration and revision
during program design.

2.9 The operational results chains have been the workhorse for the design and evaluation of
strategies. The operational results chains today provide the basis for accountability.
Completion Reports report on the achievement of objectives and IEG reviews the
Completion Reports. In select countries, the Country Program Evaluations takes a deeper
look at the delivery of results, and over a longer time horizon. And yet, as detected by IEG’s
past work, the operational result chain remains perhaps the weakest element of present
country strategies. A common weakness observed is the reporting of outcomes at different
levels; some seem to be project level outcomes and some outcomes are reported at the
national level. However, there is little explanation of the links between the two levels. How
did a specific project influence national magnitudes? (Box 1)


Figure 3.: Using the Results Chain to Develop the WBG Program 1




                                       Key Constraints:                                                     WBG Interventions
                                                                       WBG Strategy and CPF
                                  - Identify key contraints to                Objectives           -Describe WBG's major interventions
          Country Goals:                                                                           towards achieving CPF objectives.
                                  achieving country goals.            -Formulate CPF objectives
      -Identify country's goals                                                                    -Discuss complementary actions by
      the WBG intends to          -Identify key contraints to         which contribute to
                                  achieving the ountry goals          country goals by             other stakekholders -- other donors,
      support.                                                                                     government, beneficiaries, etc. --
                                  the WBG intends to                  addressing one or more key
                                  intervene with.                     constraints.                 necessary for WBG interventions to
                                                                                                   achieve the CPF objectives.




2.9      There must be a clear articulation of a results chain for each CPF Objective (or group
of CPF Objective) including the intervention logic that explains how on-going and planned
activities are translated and scaled up to achieve the CPF Objective and how the CPF
Objective relates to a Country Development Goal (Figure 3). The main development
constraints to achieving the country’s development goal, which issues the WBG is helping to
address and how, the assumptions and risks underlying the WBG’s approach and
assumptions regarding contributions from other development partners or the country, must be
reflected. To the extent several instruments are mobilized (different types of lending
instruments, AAA, TA, etc.) it is important for the Result Chain to first recognize the
synergy between instruments – their joint impact may be larger than the sum of the parts.
This is critical in identifying country-level or transformational impacts. Because the CPF
objectives are usually higher on the Results Chain than the project interventions of the WBG,

1
    World Bank Group Guidance: Country Partnership Framework Products. World Bank Group. July 1, 2014.
                                               8


the Results Chain should specify some minimum catalytic effects which result from the
interventions (Box 1). Thus synergy and catalytic effects are key dimensions of the Result
Chain.

2.10 The various channels through which these synergies or catalytic effects happen
include:

2.11 Synergies between different WBG instruments and among WB, IFC and MIGA
(internal synergies). The complementarity between Analytical Advisory Activities (AAA),
lending, and Technical Advice (TA) and between policy lending and investment operations
may have an important impact for the enabling environment and encourage replicability and
sustainability. This can provide the opportunity to identify a contribution of the WBG that is
larger than the sum of its parts–critical for a country-level or transformational impact. For
example, the Turkey CASCR (CASCR FY08-11) objective on Increasing renewable energy
and energy efficiency demonstrated Complementarity between DPL, credit lines, and AAA;
complementarity between IBRD and IFC credit projects, and pilots on wind farming and
complementarity between supporting improved legislation, providing financing and pilot
approach.

2.12 Complementarity between WBG programs and those of other partners (external
synergies). This can operate through financing, sharing of know-how, and TA. Evidence
shows that complementarity takes a variety of forms, ranging from specialization by sector
and/or within sector to specialization by activity (AAA, etc.) Complementarity with others
may bring risks if supporting arrangements are not in place (SWAPS, etc.). For example, the
Sri Lanka CASCR: (CASCR FY09-12) Objective on Resettlement and reconstruction had a
good explanation of the signaling and convening role of the Bank and a Bank operation
tracked progress in the resettlement process and informed the international community at a
time when the country was under considerable security.

2.13 Scaling-up of projects or individual interventions. These interventions can have
broader effects if the intervention has demonstration effects that induce other public and
private agents to participate through public or local funds or by communities themselves.
Sustainability of the initial efforts and ways to sustain it beyond the WBG project is
important. Scaling up is particularly pertinent for pilot interventions that seek higher impact
through replication. Multiple examples show even successful pilots may fail in having higher
impact when scaling up mechanisms have not been sorted out. For example, the Niger (CASCR
FY08-11) Objective on Improved access of the rural population to basic health and nutrition
had a good but brief account of project providing a minimum package of services targeted to
the poor that eventually was scaled-up. The project contributed to a sector wide SWAP that
helped with a smooth transition from project to project implementation motivating donors to
assist through a pooled account.

2.14 Impact on public policies and legislation that may have a broader impact on the rest
of the economy by improving the enabling environment and incentives for other actors to
commit resources and have a response consistent with the CAS objective. Expected impact
through public policy will depend of the likelihood of the government implementing intended
policy reform; the risks are high when implementing such policy reforms requires overriding
                                                        9


or negotiating with conflicting interests. For example, the Moldova: (CASCR FY09-13)
Objective on Improved competitiveness of the enterprise sector states that a competitiveness
DPL helped reduce the administrative burden of business regulation and facilitated the export
sector through the reduction of non-trade barrier. This was an important agenda supported by
the DPL, however detailed explanations of the mechanism through which the interventions
impact public policy would be useful.

2.15 Impact on public institutions and their impact, which may be particularly
important for institutions providing public goods. Achieving solid institutional gains often
takes longer than a single strategy period; as a result, the challenge is to identify the
intermediate step a given strategy can reasonably propose to achieve. For example, Brazil
(CASCR FY08-11) Objective on Supporting states moving toward a broader PMS focus-
based on results is an interesting and well explained example of Bank efforts at improving
regional institutions through dissemination differentiation of experiences as a response to
independent demands from the state governments themselves. The program consisted
basically of state level DPLs accompanied by TA. The focus of assistance was to achieve
PSM based on results, and the narrative explains the sequence of investments in several
states and hoe the approach was extended to new states and municipalities interested in
replicating the approach

Table 2.1: The table below summarizes the type of information that can provide clarity
to each of the above transmission channels:


WBG internal          How will the WB, IFC and MIGA collaborate at the institutional level and how will the
synergy               various instruments complement and reinforce one another to achieve the expected CPF
                      objective?

                          •    The activities of the three institutions are often presented separately; an effort
                               should be made to integrate them and to discuss how the three institutions will
                               maximize synergies in program planning so as to achieve the CAS objectives.

Working with          How will the WBG work with the government and other development partners to deliver the
partners              expected CPF outcomes?

                          •    It should provide information on: Who does what?
                          •    How is the cooperation organized?
                          •    Who plays the leading role?
                          •    What aspects of the partnership need attention?

Scaling-up of pilot   What mechanism is put in place for the scaling-up to take place?
projects
                          •    It should provide information on the extent that the initial project will provide
                               the incentive for central and local authorities and the private sector (households,
                               firms, and communities) to expand/replicate the initial approach.
                          •    How will it be sustained when the WBG project is completed?
                          •    Going from pilots to broad development outcomes may take more than one CAS.
                               Timing of the anticipated scaling-up should be discussed in sufficient detail as it
                               determines what outcomes can be expected during the CAS period.

Impact on public      How are the WBG’s knowledge work and DPOs expected to have an impact on policies?
policies
                                                    10


                       •    AAAs and Development Policy Operations (DPOs) are often deployed to
                            influence policy changes. Some details are needed, for example, on the policy
                            dialogue generated by the WBG’s activities, the design of policy reforms, and the
                            implementation of the new policies.
                       •    How do AAA and policy lending complement each other in influencing policies?

Impact on public   What do the WBG and other partners plan to do, what are the obstacles, and what results are
institutions       expected by when?

                       •    How do TA and lending complement each other in having an impact on the
                            reform of institutions?
                       •    As institutional building often spans more than one strategy period, it is critical
                            to bear in mind when setting CPF objectives that the full impact of the WBG
                            program may come much later.



STEP 6 A      MONITORING FRAMEWORK TO GAUGE PROGRESS AND RESULTS.

2.16    To assess the success of the WBG program, monitorable indicators are needed to
measure the achievements of the CPS objectives. This last element of the Results Framework
should be a clear result matrix (Annex 2) that identifies a set of outcome indicators that can
be empirically measured and tracked. A CAS results matrix is a tool for assessing the
achievement of the CAS objectives. It summarizes the key country goals, the CAS
objectives (and the medium to long-term WBG objectives as relevant), and the supporting
programs by the WBG, the government and development partners; but most importantly it
defines the outcome indicators to be used for measuring the attainment of the CAS
objectives.

2.17 The importance of good outcome indicators is well understood among WBG country
teams; progress in defining appropriate CAS outcome indicators has been made and reflected
in recent CASs. In general, good CAS outcome indicators should be:

    •   Close proxies of the CAS objective;

    •   Of the same scope as the CAS objective – the appropriate scope may be achieved by a
        set of indicators rather than a single indicator;

    •   Measurable, with a baseline and a target (and target date);

    •   Supported by a data collection system to generate the relevant information by the
        target date.


2.18 In cases where such “ideal” outcome indicators do not exist, or where it is desirable to
assess achievement at a lower level, indicators that measure intermediate outcomes may be
defined. The same general rules apply to ensure that these indicators provide a meaningful
measurement for assessing WBG program achievement. It should be remembered, however,
that the outcomes as measured by these indicators are not sufficient evidence for the
achievement of the CAS objectives; further discussion is needed to draw conclusions and
lessons with regard to the WBG’s success in delivering the CAS outcomes.
                                                      11



Examples:

   1.   Raise IT achievement scores of undergraduates: Baseline: 49 percent in 2010, Target: 60 percent in
        2014, Actual: 56 percent in 2014.

   2.   Raise English language achievement scores of undergraduates: Baseline: 59 percent in 2010, Target:
        67 percent in 2014, Current Value: 69 percent in 2014.

   3.   Increase paddy rice yields (irrigated): Baseline: 2.5 tons/ha in 2010, Target: 3.6 tons/ha in 2014,
        Actual: 3.4 tons/ha in 2014.

   4.   Increase Corn yields: Baseline: 2.5 tons/ha in 2010, Target: 3.6 tons/ha in 2014, Actual: 3.4 tons/ha in
        2014.

   5.   Increase % of people in rural areas provided with access to water supply: Baseline: 60 percent of rural
        population in 2010, Target: 80 percent of rural population in 2014, Actual: 84 percent of rural
        population in 2014,:

   6.   Increase volume of new loans to Small and Medium Enterprises: Baseline: USD 2.9 million in 2010,
        Target: USD 3.4 million in 2014, Actual: USD 3.1 million in 2014.


3. Summary and Key lessons

3.1     The development of a results framework is an important step in the formulation of a
country strategy. It facilitates strategic thinking, helps gain clarity around key objectives,
and promotes learning and accountability. As a management tool, a good CAS results
framework has two interlinked but distinct components that serve different purposes: a
results chain that explains how the WBG program would achieve each CAS objective and
contribute to the country goals that the WBG chooses to support; and a results matrix that
provides the metrics for assessing the achievement of the CAS objectives. Clearly, without a
clear results chain to explain why the WBG pursues a certain set of objectives during a CAS
period, the results matrix loses meaning to measure the achievement of these objectives;
similarly, without a well-developed results matrix, it is impossible to assess the success of a
CAS program, or to draw lessons for the future.

3.2     A strong CAS results chain should be explicit about the underlying assumptions that
the WBG is making with regard to the actions by other development partners and external
factors. It is this clarity about the assumptions, thus the associated risks, which gives
strength to a CAS results chain. In selecting CAS engagement areas and setting CAS
objectives, considerations should be given not just to the country needs and priorities, or
diagnosis of potential solutions, which are clearly important, but also to the time needed to
produce results, the resource constraints of all partners, and other factors that may affect the
delivery of results.

3.3     In particular, the WBG teams should ensure that “the whole is more than the sum of
the parts”; that individual sector and objective level decisions are related to the overall shape
of the program; that there is a dialogue with the country on policy and strategic direction; that
the country context and its own objectives are reflected; that the capacity of the country and
                                              12


the WBG team are taken into consideration; that proper selectivity and sequencing are
applied. The role of other stakeholders – the government, the development partners, the civil
society, the private sector, the beneficiaries – must also be factored in as their involvement
and agreement are critical part of the exercise and ultimately determine the success of the
CAS program.

3.4     Finally, for a CAS results framework to be an effective management tool, it should be
current. All parts of the results framework should be subject to regular review and update.
Issues that were not adequately recognized, assumptions that have become invalid, delays or
advances in the WBG’s and/or partners’ program execution, and many other factors may call
for a revision of the results chain, as well as the metrics for measuring success.
                                                                                         13



ANNEX 1: EXAMPLES OF RESULTS FRAMEWORKS


Example of a Results Framework in Education
     Country                  Key Constraints             CPF Objectives and Objective Indicators           Supplementary Progress Indicators*           Interventions that Achieve
Development Goals                                                                                                                                                Objectives
Reduce mismatch        Insufficient supply of skilled Improve attainment of market-demanded skills   -Complete and implement higher education           -Lending
between labor market   people in IT industry fluent   in high education:                             development                                        -AAA
demand and supply      in English, who are in                                                        strategy                                           -Other Donors
                       demand by employers            -Raise IT achievement scores of
                                                      undergraduates:                                -Implement IT learning programs in universities:

                                                       Baseline: 49 percent in 2010                  Baseline: 0 percent of all universities in 2010
                                                       Target: 60 percent in 2014                    Target: 90 percent of all universities in 2014
                                                       Actual: 56 percent in 2014                    Actual: 80 percent of all universities in 2014
                                                       Source:                                       Source:

                                                                                                     -Implement English language improvement
                                                       -Raise English language achievement scores    programs in universities:
                                                       of undergraduates:
                                                                                                     Baseline: 0 percent of all universities in 2010
                                                       Baseline: 59 percent in 2010                  Target: 90 percent of all universities in 2014
                                                       Target: 67 percent in 2014                    Actual: 80 percent of all universities in 2014
                                                       Actual: 69 percent in 2014                    Source:
                                                       Source:
* Outputs, Actions, or Outcomes to Measure the progress of CPF outcomes
                                                                                      14


Example of a Results Framework in Agriculture
      Country                 Key Constraints      CPF Objectives and Objective Indicators              Supplementary Progress Indicators*                Interventions that Achieve
 Development Goals                                                                                                                                                Objectives

Revitalization of the   Stagnant or declining   Increase agricultural productivity in rice and   -Increase % of clients who have adopted an              -Lending
Rural Economy           agricultural yields     corn industry:                                   improved agricultural technology:                       -AAA
                                                                                                                                                         -Other Donors
                                                -Increase rice yields (irrigated):               Baseline: 10 percent of farmers in 2010
                                                                                                 Target: 50 percent of farmers in 2014
                                                Baseline: 2.5 tons/ha paddy in 2010              Current Value: 60 percent of farmers in 2014
                                                Target: 3.6 tons/ha paddy in 2014                Source:
                                                Actual: 3.4 tons/ha paddy in 2014
                                                Source:                                          -Expand agricultural and rural credit availability:
                                                                                                 Baseline: 10 percent of framers took a credit in 2010
                                                -Increase corn yields:                           Target: 40 percent of framers took a credit in 2014
                                                                                                 Current Value: 35 percent of framers took a credit in
                                                Baseline: 2.5 tons/ha in 2010                    2014
                                                Target: 3.6 tons/ha in 2014                      Source:
                                                Actual: 3.4 tons/ha in 2014
                                                Source:                                          -Number of farmers
                                                                                                 benefiting from agricultural
                                                                                                 extension and other support services:

                                                                                                 Baseline: 10 percent of farmers in 2010
                                                                                                 Target: 50 percent of farmers in 2014
                                                                                                 Current Value: 60 percent of farmers in 2014
                                                                                                 Source:
                                                                                             15


Example of a Results Framework in Infrastructure
 Country Development             Key Constraints           CPF Objectives and Objective Indicators              Supplementary Progress Indicators*         Interventions that Achieve
        Goals                                                                                                                                                      Objectives
Improve competitiveness      High rural road          Reduce rural road transport costs:                     - Rural roads rehabilitated:                 -Lending
of agriculture               transport costs                                                                                                              -AAA
                                                      -Reduce road travel time for the rural population      Baseline: 10 percent of rural roads needed   -Other Donors
                                                                                                             rehabilitation in 2010
                                                      Baseline: average 4 hours to key economic centers in   Target: 80 percent of rural roads needed
                                                      2010                                                   rehabilitation in 2014
                                                      Target: average 2 hours to key economic centers in     Actual: 84 percent of rural roads needed
                                                      2014                                                   rehabilitation in 2014
                                                      Actual: average 2.5 hours to key economic centers in   Source:
                                                      2014
                                                      Source:




Example of a Results Framework in Private Sector Development
 Country Development             Key Constraints           CPF Objectives and Objective Indicators              Supplementary Progress Indicators*         Interventions that Achieve
        Goals                                                                                                                                                      Objectives

Increase the use of credit   Low level of credit to   Increased use of financial services by poor            -TA reports prepared to implement key        -Lending
and other financial          Small and Medium         households and SMEs:                                   aspects of the forthcoming financial         -AAA
services in priority areas   Enterprises (SMEs) and                                                          reform                                       -Other Donors
for national development,    poor households          -Increase number of poor households using
infrastructure, by small     constrained              financial services:                                    Financial inclusion strategy developed
business and the
populations currently                                 Baseline: 5 percent of poor households in 2010
excluded                                              Target: 15 percent of poor households in 2014          Credit bureau operational
                                                      Actual: 10 percent of poor households in 2014
                                                      Source:                                                New products and financial literacy
                                                                                                             campaigns supported by WBG advisory
                                                      -Increase volume of new loans to Small and             and convening services have been
                                                      Medium Enterprises:                                    launched
                                                                                                             Number of new financial products
                                                      Baseline: USD 2.9 million in 2010                      designed
                                                      Target: : USD 3.4 million in 2014
                                                      Actual: USD 3.1 million in 2014
                                                      Source:
                                                                                             16


Example of Results Framework in Health*
Country Development           Key Constraints              CPF Objectives and Objective Indicators              Supplementary Progress Indicators*          Interventions that Achieve
       Goals                                                                                                                                                        Objectives

Improve living conditions, High childhood             Improve childhood malnutrition under 1:               -Increase % infants under 6 months who         -Lending
particularly for the poor  malnutrition                                                                     are exclusively breastfed:                     -AAA
and vulnerable                                        -Reduce percentage of children under the age of                                                      -Other Donors
                                                      one who are underweight, stunted:                     Baseline: 40 percent in 2010
                                                                                                            Target: at least 80 percent in 2014
                                                      Baseline: 40 percent in 2010                          Actual: 85 percent in 2010
                                                      Target: at least 80 percent in 2014                   Source:
                                                      Actual: 85 percent in 2010
                                                      Source:                                               -Increase % of children who receive
                                                                                                            breastfeeding plus adequate
                                                                                                            complementary food (6-9 months):

                                                                                                            Baseline: 40 percent in 2010
                                                                                                            Target: at least 80 percent in 2014
                                                                                                            Actual: 85 percent in 2010
                                                                                                            Source:


                                                                                                            - Pregnant/lactating women, adolescent
                                                                                                            girls and/or children under age one
                                                                                                            reached by basic nutrition
                                                                                                            Services:

                                                                                                            Baseline: 40 percent in 2010
                                                                                                            Target: at least 80 percent in 2014
                                                                                                            Actual: 85 percent in 2010
         *This Results Framework is constructed using “Healthy Development: The World Bank Strategy for Health, Nutrition, and Population Results. WBG, 2007.” and “Core   Sector Indicators
          and Definitions. WBG, 2013”.
                                                               17




ANNEX 2: CPF RESULTS MATRIX
A Results Framework is usually expressed in a Results Matrix in the CPF. The Result Matrix in
the CPF document has the CPF objectives, defined as country outcomes with outcome indicators
that the WBG expects to influence during the CPF period, and their links to the relevant
development goals for the country and the twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity.
The CPF Results Matrix includes high priority CPF objectives and should not attempt to record
every expected effect of WBG interventions. The matrix is meant to communicate the key
relationships in the results framework to readers of the CPF document, commit the WBG to
specific outcomes against which it will be held accountable, and provide a

CPF Results Matrix Template

“Focus Area A”
Definition of Focus Areas and description of the links between the Focus Area and the Twin goals and how the CPF
Objectives contribute to achieve one or several specific Country Development Goals within the Focus Area.

Statement of CPF Objective

Intervention Logic
How does the indicative WBG portfolio listed in the right-hand column contribute to the CPF Objectives? What
were the criteria for selecting the on-going portfolio? What are the criteria for developing the part of portfolio under
preparation? Highlights obstacles to be overcome, logical causality, assumptions and risks.

       CPF Objective Indicators                     Supplementary Progress                         WBG Program
                                                          Indicators

               Indicator 1                           Milestone or Indicator 1              List of Bank Group interventions
           Baseline: xx (2014)                        Baseline: xx (2014)                  that contribute to CPF Objectives
           Target:   xx (2020)                        Target:    xx (2020)                           including TFs
               Indicator 2                           Milestone or Indicator 2
           Baseline: xx (2020)                        Baseline: xx (2020)
           Target:   xx (2020)                        Target:    xx (2020)

CPF Objective

Intervention Logic

CPF Objective Indicators                         Supplementary Progress                   WBG Program
                                                 Indicators


Sources: World Bank group Guidance: Country Partnership Frameworks Products. WBG. 2014.
