APRIL 2015 | VOLUME 11
                                                            95729




                         An analysis of issues shaping Africa’s economic future




                                  u 	 Sub-Saharan Africa’s growth
                                      will slow in 2015 amid falling
                                      commodity prices.
                                  u 	 Weakening terms of trade
                                      present headwinds for the
                                      region’s commodity exporters;
                                      gains for importers.
                                  u 	 The rise of new types of
                                      conflict and the potential for
                                      disease epidemics are risks to
                                      the region’s prospects.




                                  AFRICA’S PULSE TEAM:
                                  Punam Chuhan-Pole and
                                  Francisco H.G. Ferreira (Team Leads),
                                  Cesar Calderon, Luc Christiaensen,
                                  David Evans, Gerard Kambou,
                                  Sebastien Boreux, Vijdan Korman,
                                  Megumi Kubota, Mapi Buitano

                                  With contributions from
                                  John Litwack, Cristina Savescu,
                                  Fulbert Tchana Tchana




                                      This document was produced by
                                      the Office of the Chief Economist
                                      for the Africa region
               Summary
               u	The global recovery remains slow-paced amid a sharp drop in oil prices, divergent monetary policy in
                   advanced economies, and varying economic performance across countries.

               u	Sub-Saharan Africa’s growth is projected to slow in 2015 to 4 percent, before picking up moderately
                   in 2016. Slower expansion of economic activity largely reflects the region’s vulnerability to falling
                   commodity prices, since it is a net exporter of oil and other commodities.

               u	The initial terms-of-trade deterioration is estimated at 18.3 percent for the region, with declines of
                   about 40 percent for oil-exporting countries. The drop in terms-of-trade is 0.6 percent for countries
                   exporting agricultural goods, while exporters of metals and minerals show a modest gain of 1.2
                   percent. Fourteen African countries are more vulnerable, that is with terms-of-trade decline greater
                   than 10 percent, to the slide in commodity prices; 22 countries are less vulnerable, that is, with a
                   negative movement in the terms of trade of less than 10 percent; and 12 countries are more resilient.

               u	Lower commodity prices will weigh heavily on exporters of these commodities, putting pressure
                   on current account and fiscal balances. Countries that stand to lose the most are the less diversified
                   oil exporters, such as Angola and the Republic of Congo. Other commodity exporters, such as the
                   Democratic Republic of Congo and Mauritania, are also being negatively affected by lower prices for
                   their main traded commodity. By contrast, net oil importers, such as Kenya and Senegal, are set to see
                   modest gains from cheaper energy prices.

               u	Monetary and fiscal policy responses will affect macroeconomic outcomes, but policy adjustment
                   to the adverse terms-of-trade shock will be especially challenging in countries with depleted policy
                   buffers. Overall, countries that are more vulnerable to the decline in commodity prices have weaker
                   quality of policies and institutions as measured by the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional
                   Assessment indicators.

               u	Risks to the economic outlook are tilted to the downside. On the domestic front, a new generation
                   of violent conflict poses security risks with the potential to undermine development gains; and the
                   Ebola epidemic serves to highlight the preexisting weaknesses in the health systems of much of the
                   continent and the potential for systemic risks from communicable diseases. On the external front, a
                   sharper-than-expected slowdown in China, a further decline in oil prices, and a sudden deterioration
                   in global liquidity conditions are the main risks.




2   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Section 1: Recent Developments and Trends
   The global economy is expected to grow by around 2.9 percent in 2015 and 3.2 percent in 2016,
  u	
    signaling a subdued but ongoing recovery. The divergence in economic performance across
    major advanced economies is narrowing, and developing-country growth is expected to remain
    stable in 2015, before strengthening in 2016.
   Economic activity in Sub-Saharan Africa is projected to expand at a slower pace in 2015, with real
  u	
    GDP growth averaging 4 percent, substantially below the 4.4 percent annual average growth rate
    of the last two decades. Growth in per capita GDP is expected to be around 1.5 percent, below
    recent levels. The pullback in output growth reflects the exposure of the region’s economies to
    adverse terms-of-trade shock. Starting in 2016, growth should gradually pick up to 4.5 percent, as
    external demand strengthens and commodity prices partially recover.


GLOBAL ECONOMY
The global recovery is continuing, although at a slow pace and with continued uncertainties. Divergences
across major economies are expected to narrow this year, as growth levels off in the United States
while recovering in the Euro Area. Following an exceptionally strong third quarter, growth in the United
States decelerated to 2.2 percent in the final quarter of 2014, and was 2.4 percent for the year. A strong
pickup in consumption was consistent with tailwinds from declining oil prices and strong labor market
conditions, but a slowdown in exports points to a dampening impact of a stronger U.S. dollar. Mixed
data so far this year point to growth of around 2 percent in the first quarter, partly held back by harsh
weather conditions. In Japan, a technical recession ended in the fourth quarter with growth at 1.5 percent,
supported by a recovery in both consumption and exports. However, the strength of that rebound has
been disappointing, and investment has continued to stagnate. In the Euro Area, growth picked up in the
final quarter of 2014, albeit to a still modest 1.3 percent. Conditions are in place for further improvements
in the first half of the year, as manufacturing and exports are supported by a weakening euro, favorable
financing conditions due to the European Central Bank’s (ECB’s) quantitative easing, and lower oil prices.

Growth in most emerging and frontier markets fell short of expectations in 2014, and forecasts for 2015
continue to be downgraded. Among major oil-importing emerging economies, China grew by 7.4 percent.
Growth slowed in the fourth quarter, and recent data point to further softening in the first quarter of 2015,
with strong retail trade only partly offsetting the weakness in the real estate sector and manufacturing
activity. In India, growth softened in the fourth quarter of 2014 to 7.5 percent year-on-year. In India, growth
softened in the fourth quarter of 2014 to 7.5 percent year-on-year. Despite lower oil prices, inflation in Brazil
has been ticking upward, weakening consumer confidence and retail sales, adversely impacting industrial
production levels, and pushing the real to record lows. Among oil-exporting emerging economies, Russia
has been particularly hard hit, as declining oil prices have compounded the impact on economic activity
of sanctions imposed over the crisis in Ukraine. In Mexico, sentiment and activity have improved from a
subdued third quarter, and prospects for the start of the year remain favorable.

Diverging monetary policy in major economies is becoming increasingly apparent. The ECB launched
its Quantitative Easing program in March 2015, with monthly asset purchases of 60 billion euro until


                                                                                                   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   3
                 at least September 2016, contributing to maintaining favorable financing conditions globally; and the
                 Bank of Japan has maintained its commitment to aggressive policy easing. The U.S. Federal Reserve
                 (the Fed), however, is expected to move in the opposite direction later this year as it starts normalizing
                 policy interest rates, albeit at a gradual pace. While global interest rates remain at historically low levels,
                 the expectation of divergent monetary policies has already led to a significant appreciation of the U.S.
                 dollar, increased volatility in financial markets, and renewed pressure on emerging and frontier market
                 currencies. Despite these pressures, central banks in several large oil-importing developing countries
                 (such as China and India) were able to cut interest rates since the start of the year as inflation moved
                 closer to policy targets, current account deficits decreased, and growth remained soft. In oil-exporting
                 developing countries, policy considerations are different, with central banks having to balance the need
                 to support growth against maintaining stable inflation and investor confidence in the face of more
                 significant currency and capital flow pressures.

                 Global growth is expected to gain momentum in the second and third quarter, as the United States
                 comes out of a soft growth patch at the start of the year, the Euro Area continues to recover, and oil-
                 importing emerging economies gather strength. The global economy is expected to grow by 2.9 percent
                 in 2015 and by 3.3 percent in 2016. Growth in high-income economies is expected at 2.1 percent in
                 2015, up from 1.7 percent in 2014, and 2.4 percent in 2016. Developing-country growth is expected to
                 stabilize at around 4.5 percent in 2015 before picking up to 5.2 percent in 2016.

                 Risks to the economic outlook remain tilted to the downside. While the effect of the upcoming Fed
                 tightening remains uncertain, slowing growth in many developing economies, especially oil exporters,
                 is eroding their resilience to external shocks. A sudden rise in borrowing cost or further downgrades in
                 emerging market credit ratings could cause a reappraisal of risk assets that spreads across emerging and
                 frontier markets. Unresolved geopolitical tensions, such as the crisis in Ukraine, also present a downside risk.


                 RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
                 GDP growth in Sub-Saharan Africa averaged 4.5 percent in 2014, up from 4.2 percent in 2013,
                                                                                                          supported by continuing infrastructure
Growth is        FIGURE 1: GDP growth                                                                     investment, increased agricultural
expected to                                                                                               production, and buoyant services
                  Percent
slow in the        8                                                                                      (figure 1). Although this pace is in line with
region in 2015
                    7
and pick up                                                                                               the 4.4 percent annual average growth
                    6
moderately in                                                                                             rate of the last two decades, it is weaker
2016–17             5
                    4
                                                                                                          than the peak average rate of 6.4 percent
                    3                                                                                     during 2002-08. Per capita GDP growth
                    2                                                                                     was 1.9 percent in 2014. Performance in
                    1                                                                                     the three largest economies of the region
                    0
                         2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017                           was uneven, with robust growth in Nigeria
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa excluding South Africa     Sub-Saharan Africa   offset by subpar growth in South Africa
                                                     Developing countries excluding China
                                                                                                          and a slowdown in growth in Angola.
                 Source: World Bank.
                                                                                                          Elsewhere, economic activity remained


  4   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
strong in Côte d’Ivoire,
Mozambique, and Tanzania.                         FIGURE 2: Commodity prices                                                                                                                 Oil has led
                                                                                                                                                                                             the decline in
The Ebola-affected countries                                               130                                                                                                               commodity
of Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra                                             120                                                                                                               prices,
Leone saw sharply weaker                                                   110                                                                                                               falling by




                                                  December 31, 2013 =100
                                                                           100                                                                                                               57 percent
growth, as activity in mining,
                                                                            90                                                                                                               between
services, and agriculture                                                   80                                                                                                               June 2014
contracted.                                                                 70                                                                                                               and January
                                                                            60                                                                                                               2015
                                                                            50
Economic activity in the
                                                                            40
                                                                                 Dec-13 Jan-14 Feb-14 Mar-14 Apr-14 May-14 Jun-14 Jul-14 Aug-14 Sep-14 Oct-14 Nov-14 Dec-14 Jan-15
region is being impacted by
                                                                                                All Commodities      Agriculture     Energy        Metals       Crude Oil (WTI)
the sharp fall in commodity
                                                  Source: Bloomberg.
prices. Oil prices fell by                        Note: WTI = West Texas Intermediate.


an astounding 57 percent
                                                  FIGURE 3: Export earnings and fiscal revenues from oil, 2014                                                                               Oil accounts
between June 2014 and
                                                                                                                                                                                             for over
January 2015 (figure 2).                                                   100                                                                                                               70 percent
Although they have                                                          90                                                                                                               of export
                                                                            80                                                                                                               revenues
recoverd from the lows, the                                                 70                                                                                                               and over
cumulative drop between                                                     60                                                                                                               50 percent
                                                   Percent




                                                                            50
June 2014 and March 2015                                                                                                                                                                     of fiscal
                                                                            40                                                                                                               revenues for
still exceeds 50 percent.                                                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                             many of the
Other commodity prices                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                             region’s oil
                                                                            10
have also weakened sharply                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                             exporters
                                                                                 Equatorial Guinea   Angola        Nigeria         Chad       Congo, Republic    Gabon            Cameroon
between June 2014 and
                                                                                                     Export earnings from oil (% of merchandise export)
March 2015: for example,                                                                             Government revenue from oil (% total government revenue)
                                                                                                     Government revenue from oil (% of GDP)
iron ore by 37 percent,
copper by 13 percent,                             Source: IMF Country Reports.



rubber by 24 percent, and
cotton by 17 percent. As a
net exporter of oil and other commodities, Sub-Saharan Africa is vulnerable to the adverse commodity
price shock. Falling commodity prices will weigh heavily on exporters of these commodities, putting
pressure on the current account and fiscal balances.

The region’s oil exporters,1 which accounted for nearly half of the region’s GDP in 2014, have been
especially hard hit by weakening terms of trade. Their economies depend heavily on oil for export
receipts and fiscal revenues and are especially vulnerable to oil price movements. Oil accounts for
around 90 percent of merchandise exports in Angola, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, and Nigeria (figure
3). The contribution of oil to fiscal revenues is likewise large—over 50 percent in most oil producers.
Although Nigeria has a more diverse economy than other oil exporters, with the oil sector accounting
for about 13 percent of GDP, 65 percent of government revenues are derived from oil. Not surprisingly,
the sharp decline in oil prices since June 2014 has put substantial pressures on the fiscal and current

1	 Country groupings are defined in Appendix 1.




                                                                                                                                                                     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E     >   5
                                                                                                                                    account balances of oil
Minerals and      FIGURE 4: Export earnings and fiscal revenue from nonoil extractives, 2014
                                                                                                                                    exporters. Among nonoil
metals are a
                     100                                                                                                            commodity exporters,
substantial
                      90
source of                                                                                                                           minerals and metals are a
                      80
export
earnings,
                      70                                                                                                            substantial source of export
                      60
but their                                                                                                                           revenues, as well. But unlike
                 Percent




                      50
contribution to       40                                                                                                            oil, their contribution to
fiscal revenue is     30
limited
                                                                                                                                    fiscal revenues is limited
                      20
                      10                                                                                                            (figure 4). A detailed
                       0
                            Congo, Dem. Rep. Guinea      Botswana       Zambia        Mali       Namibia       Niger   Mauritania   analysis of the vulnerability
                                                Resources earnings from extractives ( % of merchandise export)                      of the region’s countries to
                                                Government revenue from extractives (% total government revenue)
                                                                                                                                    the terms-of-trade shocks
                                                Government revenue from extractives (% of GDP)
                 Source: IMF Country reports.
                                                                                                                                    is presented in Section 2
                                                                                                                                    of the report.


                 RESPONSE TO THE COMMODITY PRICE SHOCK
                 The transmission of the commodity price shock will be through the current account. Thus, sharply lower oil
                 prices will reduce export earnings of oil exporters and put pressure on the current account balance and the
                 exchange rate (by contrast, lower oil prices will reduce pressure on the current account of oil importers).
                 If the nominal exchange rate is allowed to adjust, that is depreciate, this will make other exports more
                 competitive and boost activity in the tradable goods sector. The depreciation of the currency, in turn, raises
                 the price of imported goods, pushing up inflation. The implications for second-round effects of higher price
                 of imported goods will depend on the stance of monetary policy. Lower oil prices will also reduce fiscal
                 revenues from oil, putting pressure on fiscal balances. Where fiscal buffers are strong, fiscal policy will be
                 better positioned to support demand and stabilize output.

                 Oil exporters have started to adjust in response to the oil price shock. Sharp currency depreciations
                 and substantial foreign reserve losses have prompted adjustments in monetary, exchange rate, and
                 fiscal policies in a number of oil exporters (figure 5). In Nigeria, the fall in oil prices led the central bank
                 to raise the policy rate from 12 to 13 percent and to devalue the naira by 8 percent in November 2014.
                 However, with oil prices declining, the naira continued to depreciate against the U.S. dollar, falling
                 by more than 20 percent in February 2015. In response, the central bank ended its managed float
                 exchange rate regime, closing down the Dutch Auction System window. The exchange rate is now set
                 solely by the interbank market. However, the naira remains overvalued in real effective terms (figure 6).

                 In Angola, the central bank hiked its key interest rate by 50 basis points to 9 percent in the fourth quarter
                 of 2014 to anchor inflation expectations. Since the start of 2015, the Angolan kwanza has depreciated
                 by more than 8 percent against the U.S. dollar, indicating that the central bank is allowing the currency
                 to move more flexibly, following many years of sustaining a peg to the U.S. dollar. Many of the region’s
                 oil exporters (Cameroon, Chad, Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon) are part of the Central
                 Africa Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) and have a common currency—the CFA franc—
                 which is pegged to the euro. With the euro depreciating against the dollar, because of divergent prospects
                 for monetary policy in the two regions, the CFA franc has also depreciated against the dollar. This has


  6   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
helped smooth adjustment to the oil price
shock for CEMAC oil exporters by boosting            FIGURE 5: Exchange rates                                                                                                                   The region’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                major
export earnings in domestic currency.                LCU/US$, percent change, year-to-date                                                                                                      currencies
                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                continue to
Several of the region’s oil exporters have              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                depreciate
started to adjust their budgets, including             -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                against the
                                                      -10
lowering or removing fuel subsidies (these                                                                                                                                                      U.S. dollar
                                                      -15      Angola
subsidies accounted for 3.8 percent of                -20      Ghana
                                                               Kenya
GDP in Angola in 2014 and 2.1 percent                 -25      Nigeria
                                                      -30      Uganda
in Cameroon). In Angola, the oil price                         South Africa
                                                      -35      Zambia
assumption in the 2015 budget was
                                                      -40
revised down to $40 per barrel (bbl)



                                                              Jan-14

                                                                         Feb-14

                                                                                  Mar-14

                                                                                           May-14

                                                                                                    Jun-14

                                                                                                               Jul-14

                                                                                                                           Aug-14

                                                                                                                                         Oct-14

                                                                                                                                                       Nov-14

                                                                                                                                                                   Dec-14

                                                                                                                                                                              Feb-15
from the original assumption of $81/
                                                     Source: Bloomberg.

bbl. In Nigeria, it was reduced to $52/              Note: LCU = local currency unit.


bbl from the earlier forecast of $65/bbl.
The corresponding downward revision in               FIGURE 6: Real effective exchange rates                                                                                                    Despite
                                                                                                                                                                                                depreciation,
revenues has prompted plans to cut public            In percent, year-on-year
                                                                                                                                                                                                some
                                                     140
spending. Angola’s parliament approved                                                                                                                                                          currencies
                                                     130
a 25 percent reduction in spending                                                                                                                                                              remain
                                                     120                                                                                                                                        overvalued in
from the original plan for 2015, covering            110                                                                                                                                        real effective
public investment projects and current               100                                                                                                                                        terms
expenditures, including subsidies. In Nigeria,        90
the government announced a range of                   80               Ghana        Uganda
                                                                       Nigeria      Zambia
expenditure measures that are designed                70
                                                                       South Africa
                                                      60
to sharply reduce public investment. With
                                                           Jan-10

                                                                       Jul-10

                                                                                  Jan-11

                                                                                           Jul-11

                                                                                                      Jan-12

                                                                                                                  Jul-12

                                                                                                                                Jan-13

                                                                                                                                                  Jul-13

                                                                                                                                                                Jan-14

                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-14

                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-15
lower oil prices depressing government
                                                     Source: Bloomberg.
spending, the nonoil economy in many of
these countries is faltering, especially in the
least diversified economies (Angola, Republic of Congo, and Equatorial Guinea). By contrast, Nigeria’s nonoil
economy, the main engine of growth in recent years, remains fairly robust. Although it slowed in the fourth
quarter, nonoil output grew by 7.3 percent in 2014, compared with 8.3 percent in 2013, led by services.

Lower oil prices are containing inflationary pressures in some countries. In contrast to oil exporters, the
oil price plunge has provided support to real incomes in oil-importing countries. Cheaper fuel prices
helped lower inflation and improve current accounts in these countries in the first quarter of 2015. In
Kenya and South Africa, inflation rates moved back within their target range, allowing central banks
to keep interest rates on hold or to raise them at a slower pace than otherwise. In South Africa, the
beneficial effects of low oil prices on consumer purchasing power are being offset by higher fuel levies, a
weaker rand, and electricity shortages which continue to hamper economic activity and export growth.

But not all countries are seeing lower inflation. The pass-through from the naira devaluation and the
election-related stimulus have added to price pressures in Nigeria, while Ghana has continued to battle
double-digit inflation, at 16.5 percent in February (figure 7). With the broad-based U.S. dollar appreciation
since mid-2014, depreciation pressures in some oil-importing countries also continued, with the


                                                                                                                                                           A F R I C A’ S P U L S E                   >   7
                                                                                                                                                              Zambian kwacha and Ugandan shilling
Inflation rates FIGURE 7: Target and actual inflation (percent)                                                                                               falling sharply in recent months, pushing
in Kenya and
                   18                                                                                                                                         up inflation in those countries.
South Africa
are back within    16
                   14                                                                                                                                         In financial markets, sovereign
central banks’
targets            12                                                                                                                                         credit default swap spreads for oil
                   10                                                                                                                                         exporters rose sharply as oil prices
                   Percent




                    8
                                                                                                                                                              declined, suggesting that investors
                    6
                    4                                                                                                                                         are discriminating among the region’s
                    2                                                                                                                                         frontier markets based on their economic
                    0
                                       Angola            Ghana             Kenya              Nigeria South Africa Uganda                       Zambia        outlook. The spreads also became more
                                                                                    Target               Actual                                               volatile while remaining elevated. The
                    Source: World Bank.                                                                                                                       sovereign spreads for Angola, Gabon,
                    Note: Upper bound of inflation target band.
                                                                                                                                                              Ghana, and Nigeria have remained
                                                                                                                                                              high—well above the peak of the 2013
Sovereign           FIGURE 8: Sovereign bonds spreads
spreads of
                                                                                                                                                              taper tantrum (figure 8). The spreads for
                    Basis points
oil exporters                                                                                                                                                 Zambia have also remained elevated,
                    900
have widened                               Emerging markets                         Nigeria
                                                                                                                                                              reflecting investors’ concerns about
sharply                                    Angola                                   South Africa
                    800
                                           Gabon                                    Zambia                                                                    soft copper prices and uncertainty over
                                           Ghana
                    700                                                                                                                                       government policy.
                    600
                                                                                                                                                              At the same time, many of the region’s
                    500                                                                                                                                       frontier markets are continuing to
                    400
                                                                                                                                                              take advantage of relatively low global
                                                                                                                                                              interest rates and issue Eurobonds to
                    300
                                                                                                                                                              finance infrastructure projects. Eurobond
                    200                                                                                                                                       issuance in the region has remained
                    100                                                                                                                                       robust—totaling $13.3 billion and $12.9
                                                                                                                                                              billion in 2013 and 2014, respectively—
                         0
                                                                                                                                                              and has become increasingly attractive,
                             Jan-13
                                       Feb-13
                                                Apr-13
                                                         Jun-13
                                                                  Aug-13
                                                                           Oct-13
                                                                                     Dec-13
                                                                                               Feb-14
                                                                                                        Apr-14
                                                                                                                 Jun-14
                                                                                                                          Aug-14
                                                                                                                                   Oct-14
                                                                                                                                            Dec-14
                                                                                                                                                     Feb-15




                                                                                                                                                              with financing costs in the Euro Area
                    Source: Bloomberg.
                                                                                                                                                              falling to lower levels as the ECB
                                                                                                                                                              embarked on an ambitious program of
Eurobond         FIGURE 9: Eurobond issuance
issuance in the
                                                                                                                                                              quantitative easing in March 2015 (figure
                         Total value of Eurobonds issued since 2009 (US$, billions)
region is on                                                                                                                                                  9). The appetite for Sub-Saharan African
                14
the rise                                                                                                                                                      bonds remains strong, as demonstrated
                12
                                                                                                                                                              by Ethiopia’s oversubscribed debut 10-
                   10
                                                                                                                                                              year $1 billion bond issue in December
                     8
                                                                                                                                                              2014 and Côte d’Ivoire’s return to the
                     6
                                                                                                                                                              market with a $1 billion issue in February
                     4
                                                                                                                                                              2015. Several of the region’s countries
                     2
                                                                                                                                                              are planning to access markets this year.
                     0
                                      2009               2010                2011                   2012                  2013               2014
                                                                                                                                                              Debt-to-GDP ratios for the countries
                    Source: Bloomberg.
                                                                                                                                                              with increased bond market access have


  8   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
picked up in recent years. While some countries (Ghana) are more exposed, overall debt burdens remain
manageable. In countries where currencies are weakening, the local currency cost of servicing foreign-
denominated debt is rising. For the region as a whole, however, debt burdens remain moderate, though
trending upward.

ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
A pullback in growth is expected in 2015, with real GDP growth averaging 4 percent, from 4.5 percent
in 2014 (a downward revision of 0.6 percentage points relative to the October 2014 issue of this report).
Slower expansion of economic activity is largely driven by the slide in commodity prices. Prospects of
oil exporters, such as Angola and Nigeria, are especially hard hit by sharply lower oil prices. In South
Africa, growth will continue to be curtailed by electricity constraints and policy uncertainty. Starting
in 2016, however, growth should gradually pick up in the region as commodity prices partially recover
and/or economies diversify, strengthening to 4.5 in 2016 and 4.7 percent in 2017. The uptick in growth
will be underpinned by infrastructure investment and healthy private consumption buoyed by low oil
prices. Activity in the nonoil sector is projected to strengthen, boosted by rising government spending.
External demand is also expected to be supportive of growth in the region in 2016–17, owing to
stronger economic prospects in high-income economies.

Consumption dynamics will differ for oil exporters and importers. Private consumption growth is expected
to slow in oil-exporting countries as fiscal measures, such as successive cuts to subsidies to alleviate
budgetary pressures, push fuel costs higher. Purchasing power is also expected to decline due to currency
weakness, which will push up the cost of imports in local currency terms. Support from remittances
will be muted, as remittance inflows in the region are projected to rise at a slower pace of 2.8 percent
annually during 2015-17 (below the 2014 growth rate of 3.2 percent), reflecting mainly a slowdown of
remittances to Nigeria. Weak consumer confidence amid economic slowdown will weigh on spending, as
consumers hold back. By contrast, lower fuel prices are expected to boost consumer purchasing power
in oil-importing countries, which should help boost spending in these countries and support domestic
demand, although the inflationary impact of currency depreciation could offset some of these effects.

In some oil-exporting countries, the banking sector is exposed to oil price declines, through bank loans
extended to the oil sector. With oil prices having declined sharply, some companies may struggle to
service these loans. In addition, a depreciation of the currency will increase companies’ cost of servicing
foreign-currency-denominated loans that have been made by domestic banks. Nonperforming loans may
rise, requiring capital injections. These developments could erode business confidence.

China’s investment slowdown and low commodity prices suggest that foreign direct investment
(FDI) flows will not provide much support to stronger growth in the region, although some countries
(Mozambique, Tanzania) may benefit from continued foreign investments in the mining sector.
Furthermore, governments’ plans in net oil-exporting countries to reduce budget deficits are likely to hit
capital expenditure more than current expenditure, as governments seek to limit cuts in public sector
wages or social spending. However, governments in most low-income countries are expected to maintain
a focus on expanding public infrastructure in priority sectors such as electricity, roads, and water and
sanitation. Frontier markets are expected to continue to take advantage of low global interest rates to
issue Eurobonds to finance key infrastructure projects.


                                                                                             A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   9
                The fiscal policy stance is expected to remain tight throughout 2015 in most net oil-exporting countries
                across the region. Finance ministries in many of these countries have already taken measures to rein in
                spending in light of anticipated lower revenues. The revised budgets in Angola and Nigeria indicate that
                while capital expenditures will bear the brunt of expenditure measures, recurrent expenditures will also
                be reduced. Nevertheless, despite these adjustments, fiscal deficits in these countries are likely to remain
                high because of low revenues. Fiscal deficits are also expected to remain elevated in net oil-importing
                countries. Spending on goods and services in these countries will continue to expand. With many of
                these countries holding presidential elections in 2015 and 2016, pressures on governments to increase
                wages and salaries are also likely to build.

                Net exports are projected to make a negative contribution to real GDP growth. Current account deficits
                are expected to deteriorate significantly for oil exporters. Lower prices will depress export receipts even
                as export volumes rise in some countries. The current account surplus in Angola and Nigeria is expected
                to reverse as their terms of trade deteriorate sharply. Countries with an already high current account
                deficit, such as Equatorial Guinea, would come under additional pressure. Among oil importers, current
                account balances are generally expected to improve, although import growth will remain strong, since
                capital goods imports will be needed for infrastructure projects. Overall, the region’s current account
                deficit will widen from an estimated 3.6 percent of GDP in 2014 to around 4.8 percent in 2015.

                The baseline forecast shows mixed trends across the region.

                u	Among large economies, Nigeria is expected to grow at a slower pace in 2015, as fiscal policy
                    tightens in response to lower oil prices and domestic demand contracts, but picks up in 2016, as the
                    services sector, which now accounts for more than 50 percent of GDP, rebounds. Despite the fall in
                    oil prices, growth is expected to improve only moderately in South Africa, as electricity shortages and
                    policy uncertainty weigh on investment sentiment, partly offsetting the expected rebound in activity
                    from prolonged labor strikes in 2014, and fiscal policy continues to consolidate. Growth is expected
                    to weaken substantially in Angola, reflecting its vulnerability to lower oil prices, and remains modest
                    in 2016–17, as purchasing power declines and lower government revenue leads to cuts or delays in
                    capital expenditures.
                u	Among frontier-market economies, Kenya and Senegal are expected to grow at a robust pace,
                    supported by strong infrastructure investment and consumer spending buoyed by low oil prices.
                    In Ghana, the agreement reached with the IMF will help stabilize the cedi (which has already
                    depreciated by 19 percent this year), but still high inflation and fiscal consolidation will weigh on
                    growth. In Zambia, growth will slow owing to soft copper prices and fiscal consolidation, and as
                    regulatory uncertainty in the mining sector dampens the outlook for investment.
                u	Growth should remain robust in a range of countries, driven by infrastructure (Côte d’Ivoire, Rwanda)
                    and mining (Mozambique, Tanzania) investment, and consumer spending (Uganda), although
                    continued weaknesses in the prices of their main exports (base metals and agricultural commodities)
                    will limit the benefits of the oil-price decline. In Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, the Ebola crisis will
                    continue to constrain economic activity. Although the danger has receded, the risks of renewed spread
                    of the disease will continue to exert downward pressure on economic growth in the short term.

10   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
RISKS
The balance of risks to the outlook remains tilted to the downside. On the domestic front, a new
generation of violent conflict poses security risks. In addition, the Ebola crisis remains a major concern for
the most affected countries and for the subregion, and this epidemic serves to highlight the preexisting
weaknesses in the health systems of much of the continent and the potential for systemic risks from
communicable diseases. On the external front, a sharper-than-expected slowdown in China, a further
decline in oil prices, and a sudden deterioration in global liquidity conditions are the main risks.

The region’s economic outlook faces risks from deep-running domestic fragilities. Among these are
violent conflict, natural disasters, and disease epidemics. These risks exacerbate policy challenges,
especially in countries that are also struggling to adjust to the terms-of-trade shock from falling
commodity prices.

After years of decline, conflict is on the rise again
While the first decade of the 21st century proceeded in relative peace, in more recent years, there has
been an upsurge in violence. Compared with the end of the 1990s, it is especially the number of violent
events that has increased (by more than a factor of 4 for violent events against civilians), even though
the number of casualties per event has declined (to 4 compared with 20 per violent event against
civilians at the end of the 20th century) (figure 10). This partly reflects a change in the nature of the
violence. The conventional and large-scale
conflict events and civil wars of the 1990s
have receded in scale and intensity. Yet                FIGURE 10: Frequency of violent events and fatalities in                                                            Violent events
                                                        Africa, 1997–2014                                                                                                   against civilians
election-related violence, extremism and                                                                                                                                    in Africa are on
terrorist attacks, drug-trafficking (West



                                                                                                                                                  10000 20000 30000 40000
                                                                                                                                                                            the rise again
                                                                                                   4000




Africa has emerged as a key transit point



                                                                                                                                                    Number of fatalities
in the trafficking of narcotics between
                                                                                           Number of events
                                                                                                     3000




Latin America and Europe), maritime
piracy (piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
                                                                                           2000




risen), and criminality have been on the
                                                                                                   1000




rise. In addition, wars are increasingly
                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                   1995                2000              2005             2010             2015
being fought by armed insurgents on the                                                                  Year
periphery of factionalized and militarily                                        Frequency of events                   Sum of fatalities
weak states. Examples include Boko                      Source: Armed Conflict Location and Events Dataset (ACLED) Conflict Patterns Across Africa, Real

Haram in Nigeria and the Tuareg and Arab                Time Analysis of Africa Political Violence, version 5 (http://www.acleddata.com/).


uprisings in Mali.

This reemergence of conflict raises important concerns about whether Africa can sustain the progress of
the last two decades, especially in the affected countries. After stress-testing Africa’s growth and poverty-
reducing performance, Devarajan et al. (2013) concluded that it is civil conflicts and violence that will
pose by far the greatest threat to the region’s economic performance. Regressing annual economic
growth on an annual indicator variable of the number of casualties from violence against civilians
(1 if > 100; 0 otherwise)2 suggests, for example, that countries suffering more than 100 casualties

2	 Data are from the annual Armed Conflict Location and Events Data from Africa (ACLED) (1997–2014).




                                                                                                                                     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E                      >   11
                in a particular year experience a decline in their economic growth of 2.3 percentage points (this
                demonstrates an association and not necessarily causality). And the welfare effects can be long-lasting.
                While economic growth in Burundi hovered around 4 percentage points after the civil war ended in
                the early 2000s, panel data analysis indicates that the share of households that reported being poor
                increased from 21 percent in 1993, to 46 percent in 1998 (just before the civil war), to 64 percent in 2007
                (four to five years after the civil war). Though much ignored, displaced persons often suffer especially,
                with returning refugee households in Burundi taking 8 to 10 years before they reached the welfare levels
                of their neighbors who were not displaced (Verwimp and Munoz-Mora 2013).

                The close interconnectedness among countries, for example, in West Africa, also means that localized
                conflicts can spill over. And returning to growth after conflict often poses particularly thorny political
                and distributional challenges. While household consumption growth in villages in Burundi affected
                by violence was, for example, 9 percent lower during 1999–2007, for every 25 casualties experienced,
                households of which at least one member had joined an armed rebel group experienced 41 percent
                higher growth in their welfare (Verwimp and Bundervoet 2009) .

                Reducing conflict risks and promoting stability should be especially high on the agenda of policy makers,
                as should helping countries escape cycles of conflict and instability. This requires countering the drivers of
                fragility through, for example, making investments in lagging regions, reforming and improving the security
                sector, addressing land issues, creating greater openness regarding public matters, and broadening the
                scope of governance in the extractive sector to incorporate issues such as political bargaining at the local
                level, subnational dynamics, and the negative local-level externalities that this sector can impose.


                Old and new natural disasters continue to pose important risks
                Droughts are another threat to the sustainability of Africa’s growth momentum. The pernicious effects of
                droughts for Africa’s growth and poverty have long been documented and continue to pose enormous
                challenges, as witnessed by the 2008–11 drought in the Horn of Africa, which affected 13 million people
                and severely disrupted agricultural production and livelihoods in drought-affected areas. But Africa’s
                natural disaster profile is also changing, with floods (and cyclones) increasingly also causing havoc. With
                climate change adding uncertainty, disaster risk management will need to be an integral part of Africa’s
                growth and poverty-reducing policy agenda.

                More than 1,000 major natural disaster events have been recorded in Sub-Saharan Africa since 1970. Of
                these, 670 were floods (440 of which were recorded during the last decade). This increasing prevalence
                of floods has remained relatively neglected. Yet in some countries, especially those home to river basins
                such as Nigeria (Niger River basin) and Zambia (Zambesi River basin), many more people have been
                affected by floods than by drought. Flash floods can also cause substantial havoc, especially in urban
                areas. The 2009 flood in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, for example, affected 150,000 people and killed
                46 (World Bank 2015b). It was caused by exceptionally high rainfall of 263 millimeters in 12 hours,
                exacerbated by poor drainage and hydraulic infrastructure. In Malawi, heavy rains caused widespread
                flooding this January. Nonetheless, droughts continue to affect the largest number of people, especially
                in semi-arid and subhumid areas of the Sahel countries, the Horn of Africa, and Southern Africa. Cyclones



12   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
and tropical storms affect countries
on the southeastern coast along               FIGURE 11: Top three adverse shocks commonly reported                                                               Over a fifth of
                                              by households                                                                                                       households
the Indian Ocean (Madagascar,
                                                                                                                                                                  in Ethiopia,
Mozambique, and the Indian Ocean                        100                                                                                                       Malawi, Niger,
islands).                                               90                                                                                 Drought/ﬂood           and Uganda
                                                                                                                                           Input price shock      reported having
                                                        80
                                                                                                                                           Food price shock       experienced a
The importance of natural disasters                     70                                                                                 Death                  climate shock
for households is apparent in the                       60                                                                                 Illness                over the last
                                                              51.4
microdata (figure 11). About a                          50                                            45                                                          year




                                              Percent
                                                        40                                                                                      35
fifth of households in four African                                                30.3
                                                        30                                                                24.1
countries (Ethiopia, Malawi, Niger,                     20
and Uganda) reported having                             10
experienced a climate shock over                         0
                                                              Tanzania (5 years)   Niger (past year) Malawi (past year) Ethiopia (past year) Uganda (past year)
the last year (a drought or flood).
                                              Source: Nikoloski, Christiaensen, and Hill 2015.
Climate shocks were also the most
reported shocks in Nigeria, and
close to the most in Tanzania (50
percent), where five-year recall periods were used. In the vast majority of cases (84 percent), the
reported climate shocks concerned droughts (not floods), consistent with the pattern depicted for
these six countries.

To be sure, economic price shocks (food, input, and output price shocks) were also reported with high
frequency (for instance, food price shocks impacted the same number of households as climatic shocks,
and even more in Ethiopia and Niger). And health shocks (death or illness) were only slightly less frequent
than climate shocks (20 percent of households on average), and occurred with higher regularity in
Nigeria and Tanzania. Digging deeper, Nikoloski, Christiaensen, and Hill (2015) find that climate shocks
prove particularly harmful for rural residents. In the above-mentioned six African countries, they are 2.3
times more frequent among rural than urban households. Similar patterns are reported for price shocks.
Unemployment and loss of business occurred more frequently among urban citizens.

With respect to households, the poor usually suffer the most in terms of their level of both consumption
and human development, given higher exposure to natural disasters and more limited capacity to cope
(World Bank 2015). And the effects of shocks may be long-lasting, with young adults (aged 19 to 22) who
were aged 12 to 36 months at the peak of the 1984 Ethiopia Famine found to be at least 5 centimeters
shorter than the older cohort and their unaffected peers (Dercon and Porter 2014). Indicative
calculations by the authors suggest that such height loss may lead to income losses of around 5 percent
per year over their lifetime.

Climate change is increasing natural disaster risks, and also interacts with other trends, such as
urbanization, to change the risk profiles. Droughts are expected to become more likely in central
and southern Africa, and drought frequency will likely increase in currently dry regions. Climate-
smart agriculture is called for. In contrast, higher, but also more extreme, rainfall is expected in the
Horn of Africa and parts of East Africa. This increases the risk of floods, but may also alleviate the


                                                                                                                                         A F R I C A’ S P U L S E       >   13
                occurrence of rain shortages (and increase the potential for hydropower). Flexibility will be key to
                benefiting from higher rainfalls, while also being able to deal with the extremes. Finally, sea-level
                rise is increasingly a concern for countries with populated urban centers and informal settlements
                in low-lying coastal areas, such as those along the coasts of West and East Africa (including the
                densely populated Niger Delta), as well as for island economies such as Madagascar, Mauritius, and
                the Seychelles.

                Climate change adaptation and disaster risk management will need to be embraced now to address this
                slow but deep-running threat to Africa’s growth and poverty-reducing performance. On the upside, the
                changing climatic environment also shifts the cost-benefit ratios of long-needed investments such as in
                irrigation infrastructure. They stand to become much more necessary and profitable.


                The Ebola epidemic and what it highlights about systemic effects
                The Ebola outbreak has slowed significantly in 2015, but progress toward zero cases remains challenging,
                with reversals in Guinea and Sierra Leone. The primary and secondary impacts of the Ebola epidemic
                continue to reverberate. As of late March 2015, the cumulative number of cases neared 25,000 and
                deaths surpassed 10,000. Over the course of 2014, Ebola killed roughly twice as many people as malaria
                in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, and it killed about the same number as tuberculosis, even without
                taking the likely undercounting of Ebola deaths into account. The direct impact of the disease in deaths
                and illness has been substantial.

                Furthermore, the economic impact in those countries has been massive. In the second half of 2014, all
                three countries saw flat or negative income growth. Forecasts for 2015, with ongoing investor aversion,
                are sobering, with contractions in Guinea and Sierra Leone, and projected growth in Liberia less than half
                what was predicted before the crisis (World Bank 2015c) (table 1). These projections are consistent with
                mobile phone surveys in Liberia and Sierra Leone, which document significant unemployment in Liberia
                and small enterprise closures in Sierra Leone (World Bank 2015d; 2015e).

                           Beyond the immediate impacts on economic activity, there are several indicators that suggest potential
                           long-term impacts on human capital. Schools in all three countries were closed for the second half
                                                                                         of 2014 and early 2015. Vaccinations for
                                                                                         measles dropped between 25 and 50
TABLE 1: GDP growth forecasts for 2015, for Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone            percent, with likely similar drops for other
                                                                                         diseases, including whooping cough and
                                                     2015 growth forecast
                                                                                         polio (Dennis 2015). Survey evidence
                            Est. 2014 GDP June 2014                January  GDP loss
                                ($ billion)                         2015   ($ million)
                                                                                       a suggests that postnatal visits in Sierra Leone
 Guinea                              6.2               4.3           -0.2      540       dropped (World Bank 2015e). Many children
                                                                                         have been orphaned, and many others have
 Liberia                             2.3               6.8            3.0      180
                                                                                         been adversely affected by the economic
 Sierra Leone                        5.0               8.9           -2.0      920
                                                                                         impacts of the epidemic (Evans and Popova
 TOTAL                             13.5                                       1,640      2015). All of these could lead to disease
Source: World Bank staff calculations.
Note: a. Includes base effect from lost 2014 growth.
                                                                                         outbreaks down the line or—at the very
                                                                                         least—reductions in health and well-being.


14   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Early concerns of a major spread to other African countries have not, to this point, been borne out.
After a successful national and international response to a single case in Senegal and a handful of cases
in Nigeria and Mali, all three countries have been declared Ebola free. Other countries in West Africa,
particularly the Gambia and Senegal, experienced negative impacts on income through reduced travel
and tourism, lost trade through closed borders, and disrupted supply chains, but those impacts have
been modest. Most recent estimates for the economic impact in 2015 outside of Guinea, Liberia, and
Sierra Leone are roughly $550 million (World Bank 2015e).


What the Ebola epidemic highlights about health systems
While the direct and indirect impacts of the Ebola epidemic have been significant, they also highlight
preexisting weaknesses in the health systems of the three most affected countries, and of much of the
continent. For example, consider maternal mortality as one indicator of the overall quality of health
systems. Over the last 25 years, maternal mortality has fallen in Sub-Saharan Africa, but it remains more
than double that of developing countries in general. Likewise, the number of health care workers is
the lowest of any region in the world, and barely one-quarter the global average. Disease surveillance
systems reflect these same weaknesses. These affect the risk not only for infectious diseases, but for all
health conditions.

The Ebola epidemic can serve as a catalyst to increase investments in health systems, both in those
countries directly affected by the epidemic and in Sub-Saharan Africa more broadly. Improved surveillance
systems, embedded within stronger health systems overall, will be crucial to short-term recovery and
long-term improvements. Investments in health care workers at each skill level are one key component of
that health system strengthening, from doctors and nurses to community outreach workers. These actions
will not only help to avoid the next infectious disease outbreak, but also to improve the quality of life and
consequently the economic prosperity of individuals across Africa.


External risks
Slower-than-expected output growth in China would weigh on demand for the region’s commodities,
driving prices down further. A further decline in the already depressed price of metals, especially iron
ore, gold, and copper, would severely affect a large number of countries in the region and lead to
a substantial drop in export revenues. A scaling down of operations and new investments in these
countries in response to the low prices would reduce output in the short run, and reduce growth
momentum over an extended period of years.

Any further decline in oil prices, while unlikely, would further lower revenues in oil-exporting countries,
requiring them to undertake deeper fiscal adjustments with sharper expenditure cuts. It may prompt
some oil companies to delay or even cancel planned investments in 2015.

A sudden adjustment of market expectations to the upcoming tightening of monetary policy in the
United States could adversely affect the region’s emerging and frontier markets, especially in countries
that receive substantial capital inflows, such as South Africa. However, quantitative easing in the Euro
Area should contribute to continued attractive borrowing conditions on Eurobond markets, allowing


                                                                                               A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   15
                frontier-market governments to maintain market access. Recent episodes of capital market volatility
                suggest that countries with large macroeconomic imbalances would face strong downward pressure on
                the exchange rate, and hence an increased risk of inflation, further constraining policy.


                POLICY CHALLENGES
                The consequences of the terms-of-trade shock on economic activity will depend on the policy
                response. Commodity exporters with limited policy buffers will have less flexibility to implement gradual
                adjustment of public spending to the lower commodity prices and protect current account balances.
                Allowing currencies to depreciate will provide a buffer against the impact of the weaker export prices.
                At the same time, it will be important for these countries to prevent inflation induced by currency
                depreciation from becoming a constant threat. In addition, the commodity price shock highlights the
                need for commodity exporters to diversify their economies—both output and fiscal revenues—away
                from primary commodities, which will require them to implement deep structural reforms that will
                remove impediments to private sector activity and improve the business environment.

                For many countries in the region, large fiscal deficits and inefficient government spending remain
                sources of vulnerability. In these countries, focus will need to be on strengthening fiscal positions and
                restoring fiscal buffers to increase resilience against exogenous shocks. Fiscal consolidation should
                involve a shift in spending priorities that supports both the efficiency of public expenditures and
                long-term growth. In the countries where inflation remains high or has been rising and the currency
                has weakened, monetary policy tightening might be needed to ward off any second-round effects of
                price increases.

                The poor face risks from changing conditions in the broader economy and from fiscal adjustments.
                Attention must, thus, also be on protecting the poor from income losses arising from these shifts.

                Despite these challenges, there are opportunities for policy makers in both oil-importing and oil-
                exporting countries in the region. Falling oil prices reduce the need for fuel subsidies or make room for
                higher energy taxes. Fiscal resources released by lower fuel subsidies could either be saved to rebuild
                fiscal space or reallocated toward better-targeted programs to assist poor households, or could be used
                to make critical infrastructure and human capital investments (World Bank 2015a). Along with reducing
                the burden on state coffers, market-based fuel prices will also help to redress allocative inefficiencies in
                the use of energy.

                Beyond macroeconomic policies, there is an urgent need across the region for deep structural reforms
                to ignite and sustain rapid productivity growth across all sectors, but especially prioritizing agriculture
                and diversification of rural economies. Boosting fundamentals such as lower transport cost, cheaper and
                more reliable power, and a more educated and skilled labor force will benefit all sectors. Past issues of
                Africa’s Pulse have addressed these issues in detail.




16   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Section 2: Falling Commodity Prices: Headwinds for
Sub-Saharan Africa?

    The 57 percent decline in the price of oil from June 2014 to January 2015 is not unprecedented. But
   u	
       commodity prices have become more synchronized in the current commodity super cycle, which
       began in 2000 and is associated with the rapid industrialization and urbanization of dynamic large
       emerging market economies, most notably, China.

    Sub-Saharan Africa is a net exporter of primary commodities. Oil is the most important commodity
   u	
       traded in the region. Ninety six percent of the total exports of oil-exporting countries come from
       the three biggest exports of each country, which represent nearly 30 percent of their GDP. This
       dependence exposes them to swings in oil prices.

    Overall, the initial terms-of-trade shock effect reflects a loss in the price of exports relative to imports
   u	
       of 18.3 percent for the region. Much of this deterioration in the ratio of export to import price is
       explained by the decline in oil and other energy commodities. For instance, the decline in terms of
       trade is about 40 percent for oil-exporting countries. By contrast, countries that exported agricultural
       commodities experienced a much smaller deterioration in their terms of trade of 0.6 percent, and
       exporters of metals and minerals show a modest gain of 1.2 percent.

    Fourteen countries are highly vulnerable to the fall in commodity prices; that is, they experienced
   u	
       terms-of-trade deterioration greater than 10 percent. Among these, nine countries—eight major oil
       exporters and Mauritania, which experienced a dramatic loss in terms of trade due to the high share
       of iron ore in its export basket—experienced terms-of-trade deterioration of 20 percent or more. Five
       countries experienced a terms-of-trade deterioration of 10 to 15 percent. Most of these countries
       are energy exporters, but changes in nonfuel export prices have also played an important role. For
       example, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the negative shock from oil is magnified by additional
       losses attributed to weaker copper prices.

    More vulnerable countries have weaker quality of policies and institutions as measured by selected
   u	
       Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) indicators (World Bank 2014).2 The quality of
       macroeconomic management for this group shows a deterioration in the period following the global
       financial crisis. There is also a wide gap in terms of the quality of the business regulatory environment
       between the countries with low and high vulnerability. This gap is more pronounced when looking at
       the efficiency to mobilize revenues.


2	 The CPIA Africa report can be downloaded at http://datatopics.worldbank.org/cpia/.




                                                                                                      A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   17
                INTERNATIONAL COMMODITY PRICES:
                IS THE COMMODITY SUPER CYCLE NEAR THE END?
                The sustained growth record of Sub-Saharan Africa during the last 20 years was partly attributed to good
                policies—that is, sound macroeconomic frameworks that delivered aggregate stability, as reflected in
                lower inflation and healthy fiscal positions—and higher investment rates. However, faster growth in
                the region was also attributed to the strong performance of resource-rich countries supported by an
                external environment of rising international prices for their commodity exports.

                Commodity prices—and especially crude oil prices—experienced an impressive surge in the run-up to
                the global financial crisis. For instance, the price of oil rose from an average of $25 per barrel in January
                2000 to a monthly average peak of $133 per barrel in July 2008. Prices of metals and minerals nearly
                tripled from January 2000 to July 2008, whereas food prices grew nearly 170 percent over the same
                period. There was, of course, a great deal of heterogeneity in the evolution of international prices across
                the different commodities. In the case of commodities exported by the region, iron ore prices more
                than quintupled, while copper prices almost quadrupled from the beginning of 2000 to July 2008. The
                international price of cocoa and rice tripled, while that of coffee almost doubled. Cotton, on the other
                hand, grew only 63 percent.

                Super cycles of commodity prices: Demand-driven by nature
                The upward trend in commodity prices experienced at the start of the 21st century was coined a
                “commodity price super cycle.” Super cycles are typically characterized by (a) the length and amplitude of
                the commodity price upswings; and (b) price increases over a wide range of commodities, most notably,
                among inputs for industrial production and urban development. Commodity super cycles are typically
                driven by the emergence of a sustained appetite for raw materials during the industrialization of a major
                economy or of a major group of economies (Heap 2005). Erten and Ocampo (2013) identify three super
                cycles (from trough to trough) that occurred previous to the post-2000 commodity super cycle. They
                occurred during 1894–1932 (with a peak in 1917), 1932–1971 (with a peak in 1951), and 1971–1999 (with
                a peak in 1973). These commodity super cycles have been associated with the protracted U.S. growth
                in the late 19th and early 20th century and the post-World War II reconstruction of Europe and the
                emergence of Japan as a major economic player.

                The current commodity super cycle is associated with the rapid and sustained industrialization-cum-
                urbanization of dynamic large emerging market economies, most notably, China. Over the last 15 to
                20 years, China has become a major engine for global growth, and its greater presence in the global
                economy has generated major shifts in production, trade, and investment patterns across the world
                (Prasad and Rumbaugh 2003). China has also made its presence felt in the commodity markets: the
                Chinese demand for commodities has increased at an unusually fast pace for its level of income per
                capita. During 2010, China’s consumption of nonrenewable energy resources accounted for 20 percent
                of global production, but its consumption of agricultural crops and base metals accounted for 23 and 40
                percent of global production, respectively.

                The fast-paced economic growth in China reflects the rapid expansion of commodity-intensive activities
                in the traded export sector and large-scale fixed asset investment (Yu 2011). For instance, infrastructure


18   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
investment and construction in China explains over half of the country’s copper usage, while consumer
and industrial goods account for nearly one-third (Ye 2008). Econometric evidence suggests that shocks
to China’s aggregate activity have a persistent short-run impact on oil and base metal prices, while
shocks to consumption have a negligible effect on commodity prices (Roache 2012).

Empirical evidence shows that international prices of oil and metals have moved historically with the
business cycles of advanced countries; however, this relationship changed in mid-1997. Industrial
production in emerging Asia appears to have become a more dominant driver of oil price fluctuations.
This could be attributed to increased outsourcing of production to Asia from advanced countries that
generates higher levels of energy demand as greater shares of world manufacturing are produced in
relatively energy-inefficient Asian firms. For metals, surges in prices since 2002 are explained not only by
increasing Asian industrial activity but also by the rising intensity of metal production (Cheung et al. 2007).

Commodity super cycles are tightly related to the rapid industrialization and urbanization of a group
of dynamic economies. However, as the level of income per capita of these countries increases, their
commodity consumption follows an S-curve pattern: it stabilizes at very high levels after the rapid and
accelerating growth (Roache 2012). Once commodity consumption stabilizes, periods of much lower
commodity prices tend to follow (Canuto 2014; Jacks 2013).

Commodity prices have experienced sharp swings since the global financial crisis.3 More recently, the
world economy has experienced sharp declines in oil prices. The price of a barrel of oil has dropped
significantly from $108 in June 2014 to $47 in January 2015 (figure 2). Moreover, a number of commodity
prices other than oil have also weakened over the last year; however, the extent of their decline has
been far from uniform. For instance, energy commodities experienced a year-on-year (YoY) drop of 50
percent in January 2015—a sharper decline than that experienced by metals and minerals (16 percent)
and agricultural commodities (nearly 10 percent). Again, there are significant differences across goods in
the pace of the decline; the international price of iron ore and copper dropped 47 and 20 percent YoY,
respectively, in January 2015. Cotton and soybean prices dropped nearly 25 percent, while the price of
cocoa and coffee increased.


Benchmarking the current oil price decline
The international price of crude oil has declined sharply since June 2014. After fluctuating around $105
per barrel during the first six months of 2014, the monthly average price of crude oil hit a five-year low
in January 2015 (nearly $47 per barrel)—an approximately 57 percent decline since June 2014.4 Between
January and March of this year, oil prices rebounded slightly. However, the cumulative drop between
June 2014 and March 2015 still exceeds 50 percent. There are different forces at play driving the current
decline of crude oil prices at different frequencies.

Lower oil prices are explained not only by supply shocks but also by demand shocks. From the demand
side, sluggish demand growth for oil is partly attributed to the weak recovery in Europe and to China’s

3	 After the sharp drop in the last quarter of 2008 and first half of 2009, ample policy stimulus in the advanced world and among large and dynamic emerging markets produced a postcrisis
   recovery in commodity prices.
4	 This international price for crude oil refers to the average of the Brent, WTI, and Dubai prices.




                                                                                                                                                                   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   19
                    slowdown in economic activity. On the supply side, technological innovations in hydraulic fracturing and
                    horizontal drilling techniques have enabled U.S. producers to access oil supplies trapped in shale oil fields.
                    U.S. shale oil production grew from nearly 0.4 million barrels per day in 2007 to more than 4 million barrels
                    a day in 2014 (Kilian 2014).5 Moreover, the conflict in the Middle East has not created major disruption in
                    the production of crude.6 Others have suggested that the November 27, 2014, announcement by Saudi
                    Arabia (the largest exporter of crude oil in the world) that it would maintain its share in world markets
                    rather than cut production to defend a price contributed to the slide in oil prices.7 Finally, the plunge in oil
                    prices has been accompanied by a sharp appreciation of the U.S. dollar which, since end-June 2014, has
                    appreciated more than 20 percent (see figure 12) (Baffes et al. 2015).

                                                                                                                                      The negative association between oil price
There is a      FIGURE 12: Oil prices and the U.S. dollar                                                                             and exchange rates may be explained by
strong negative
                  105                                                                                          115                    increases in real interest rates in the United
correlation
between the       100                                                                                          105                    States. Frankel (2006) argues that higher U.S.
U.S. dollar and                                                                                                95                     interest rates strengthen the U.S. dollar and
                   US$ = 100 in 1973




oil prices         95


                                                                                                                     US$ per barrel
                                                                                                               85                     reduce the price of internationally traded
                                       90
                                                                                                               75                     commodities in the U.S. dollar—even if the
                                       85                                                                                             price has not fallen or declined at a slower
                                                                                                               65
                                       80                                                                      55                     pace in foreign-currency terms. Anticipation
                                       75                                                                      45                     of interest rate hikes by the Federal Reserve
                                            Dec-13
                                            Jan-14
                                            Feb-14
                                            Mar-14
                                            Mar-14
                                            Apr-14
                                            May-14
                                            May-14
                                            Jun-14
                                             Jul-14
                                             Jul-14
                                            Aug-14
                                            Sep-14
                                            Sep-14
                                             Oct-14
                                            Nov-14
                                            Dec-14
                                            Dec-14
                                            Jan-15
                                            Feb-15
                                            Feb-15
                                            Mar-15




                                                                                                                                      in 2015 may, however, trigger other channels
                                                           US$ (LHS)       Brent (RHS)
                                                                                                                                      of transmission (Frankel 2014). Portfolio
                     Source: Bloomberg.                                                                                               managers may shift into Treasury bills (or
                     Note: The U.S. dollar index is the weighted geometric mean of the U.S. dollar value relative to
                     the major world currencies (Euro, Japanese Yen, British Pound, Canadian Dollar).                                 other U.S. dollar-denominated assets) and out
                                                                                                                                      of commodity contracts. Firms may want to
Since 1970,          FIGURE 13: Oil prices                                                                                            decrease inventories in anticipation of high
there have
                                            T   T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5 T+6 T+7 T+8 T+9 T+10 T+11 T+12                                    rates. Finally, high interest rates may increase
been three                       0%
episodes of                                                                                                                           the incentive to extract nonrenewable
sharp decline           -10%
                                                                                                                                      resources today rather than tomorrow, thus
in oil prices;          -20%                                                                                                          boosting production and reducing their price.
the price of oil
declined 57             -30%
percent since                                                                                                                         The pronounced drop in crude oil prices
                        -40%
June 2014.                                                                                                                            since June 2014 is not unprecedented.
                        -50%
                                                                                                                                      Data on peak-to-trough cycles in crude oil
                        -60%                                                                                                          prices from January 1960 to January 2015
                        -70%                                                                                                          show two other episodes of a cumulative
                                                          Nov-85          Jul-08           Jun-14
                     Source: DECPG Commodity Markets Outlook, World Bank.
                                                                                                                                      drop from peak to trough that exceeds 50
                     Note: Period T corresponds to the month and year where the oil prices peak according to the Bry-
                     Boschan monthly algorithm. We selected those episodes.
                                                                                                                                      percent: (a) from a peak in November 1985


                    5	 To gauge the importance of the industry, shale oil accounted for almost half of U.S. oil production and a quarter of the total quantity of oil used by the U.S. economy in March 2014 (Kilian
                       2014).
                    6	 Oil production in Libya has tripled to nearly 900,000 barrels a day since June (although it is 40 percent lower than in 2012). War has not stopped Iraq’s oil production (approximately 3.1
                       million barrels a day). Finally, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) boosted September production to an 11-month high of 30.9 million barrels a day.
                    7	 There are also other forces operating in the medium term that might explain a secular decline in oil prices, such as the substitution to other types of energy (solar and wind) and the
                       increasing use of fuel-efficient vehicles.




20    >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
to a trough in July 1986, with a price decline of 66 percent; and (b) from July 2008 to February 2009 with
a cumulative oil price drop of 68 percent.8 The drop in the average price of crude oil from June 2014 to
January 2015 is approximately 57 percent (see figure 13). For the peak-to-trough episodes of 1985–86, it
took the international price of oil more than 15 years to recover to previous peak levels. The current price
of oil (an average of US$52.8 per barrel for March 2015) is 60 and 51 percent of that in the corresponding
monthly peaks of July 2008 and June 2014.9

It has been argued that the recent decline in oil prices has an underlying set of shocks that is more in
line with the developments in 1985–86: supply shocks appear to have played a larger role than demand
shocks. There was a significant increase in the supply of oil from non-OPEC countries (Russia during
the 1980s and U.S. shale oil producers in 2010s), and technological innovations in the production of
oil (off-shore drilling in the 1980s and fracking in the 2010s). Furthermore, in both episodes, Saudi
Arabia changed its policy directive in oil markets from price targeting to maintaining world market
share. However, the synchronized weakening of energy, metals, and minerals, and agricultural prices
was mainly driven by the contraction of global economic activity. We should note that the drop in
international oil prices since June 2014 has not been as deep as that of 1985–86 and 2008–09.

Figure 14 shows the cumulative variation
of the prices of agricultural commodities                                                      FIGURE 14: Commodity prices                                                                       There is
                                                                                                                                                                                                 significant
and of metals and mineral ores over the                                                         20%
                                                                                                          T    T+1 T+2 T+3 T+4 T+5 T+6 T+7 T+8 T+9 T+10 T+11 T+12
                                                                                                                                                                                                 variability in
next eight months following the peak in                                                         10%                                                                                              the evolution
oil prices of the three episodes mentioned                                                       0%                                                                                              of nonoil
                                                                                                                                                                                                 commodity
above. During 1985–86, agricultural                                                            -10%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 prices after a
products initially increased but then                                                          -20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                 plunge in oil
                                                                                               -30%                                                                                              prices
declined by 6 percent in the eight months
                                                                                               -40%
following the price drop, while metals and
                                                                                               -50%
minerals experienced a 7 percent increase.                                                     -60%
As we argued above, the unprecedented                                                          -70%
                                                                                                                 Agriculture 1985             Metals 1985                  Agriculture 2008
negative shock on global economic activity                                                                       Metals 2008                  Agriculture 2014             Metals 2014
during 2008–09 led to a sharp and broad-                                                       Source: DECPG Commodity Markets Outlook, World Bank.
                                                                                               Note: Period T corresponds to the month and year when the oil prices peak, according to the

based weakening of commodity prices. On                                                        Bry-Boschan monthly algorithm. We selected episodes where the peak-to-trough cumulative
                                                                                               variation of oil prices exceeds 50 percent. Those peaks correspond to the months of November
                                                                                               1985, July 2008, and June 2014. The figure depicts the cumulative variation over the subsequent
average, agricultural prices declined nearly                                                   months of the international price indexes of agricultural goods, metals and mineral ores, and
                                                                                               energy commodities.
30 percent from July 2008 to March 2009,
while the drop in metals and minerals was
comparable to that of oil (a cumulative reduction short of 60 percent).

There is also a great deal of heterogeneity in the dynamics across groups and within groups of
commodity prices during periods of sharp decline in oil prices. Metals and minerals is the group with
the largest price decline in 2008. Within this group, the international price of iron ore experiences the

8	 The identification of episodes of sharp declines in oil prices implemented by the World Bank (2015) and Baffes et al. (2015) consists of selecting seven-month periods where the cumulative
   drop in oil prices exceeds 30 percent. They identify six periods that are related to major changes in global economic activity and world oil markets.
9	 Baumeister and Kilian (2015) show that more than half of the plunge in oil prices was predictable in real time as of June 2014 and, hence, it reflects earlier cumulative effects of demand
   and supply shocks (instead of more recent shocks). Furthermore, the faster decline in oil prices during the second half of 2014 relative to other commodity prices might reflect oil-
   market-specific developments that occurred prior to June 2014—say, positive oil supply shocks or unexpectedly low demand for storage in response to expectations of higher future oil
   production.




                                                                                                                                                                      A F R I C A’ S P U L S E        >   21
                sharpest drop after the oil peak prices of July 2008 and June 2014 (68 and 37 percent, respectively)
                followed by nickel, tin, and copper. The price of agricultural commodities also weakened, although at
                a lower rate than that of metals and minerals. On average, the drop in the price index for beverages,
                raw materials, and food slightly exceeded 10 percent since June 2014. However, the price of some
                agricultural commodities weakened at a faster pace. For instance, the price of cotton, wheat, soybean,
                and soybean meal exceeded 20 percent, whereas that of rice, bananas, and groundnuts strengthened.

                In general, there is a sharp and broad-based decline in commodity prices during the global financial
                crisis as a result of the drop in world demand for commodities—especially, those associated with
                industrialization and urbanization, such as energy and metals. During the 1985–86 episode, there is a
                major drop in energy prices, but not for metals and minerals or for food and agricultural raw materials.
                Since June 2014, the prices of all groups of commodity prices have weakened, although at a slower pace
                than that of the decline in 2008. These findings imply that, first, the commodity price episode of 1985–86
                was driven mainly by shocks specific to the oil market rather than global demand weakening, and
                second, the sharp drop in global economic activity explains the commodity price decline of 2008–09. The
                reduction of the global demand for commodities is more pronounced among energy commodities (crude
                oil and natural gas) and metals and minerals (iron ore, copper, aluminum, among others). Finally, both
                oil-market-supply and global-demand shocks were at play during the recent decline in commodity prices.
                Oil sharply weakened over the last eight months, and there has been a synchronized decline in the price
                of commodities that are inputs for industrialization and urbanization. This might signal not only that the
                peak of the super cycle has already occurred, but also that the end of the cycle is (almost) near.

                CHARACTERISTICS OF THE CURRENT CYCLE OF COMMODITY PRICES:
                HOW DIFFERENT IS IT FROM EARLIER CYCLES?
                This section characterizes the main features of the evolution of commodity prices during the last 15
                years (that is, 2000–15) relative to 1970–99. We look at the basic properties of fluctuations in international
                commodity prices from two complementary perspectives. First, a statistical analysis of price fluctuations
                over the two aforementioned periods that includes the computation of the moments of the distribution
                and correlations is conducted. Second, peaks and troughs of international commodity prices using
                the Harding and Pagan (2002) algorithm are identified. Once those turning points are identified, the
                properties of upswings and downswings in international prices—as measured by the duration and
                amplitude of the different phases of their cycles—are examined.

                The analysis of commodity price movements will attempt to respond to the following questions: (a)
                have the distribution of commodity price fluctuations changed over time, or, more specifically, have
                commodity prices become more volatile over time?; and (b) have commodity prices become more
                correlated over time, or are they decoupling over time? To accomplish this task, we analyzed monthly
                information on commodity prices from January 1970 to February 2015.

                Has commodity price volatility risen over time?
                Figure 15 plots the volatility of (annual) changes in the international prices of commodities during
                1970–99 compared to their corresponding volatility in 2000–15. The standard deviation of annual


22   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
changes in the price of 36 commodities is
obtained for the two subperiods.10 We find                                                          FIGURE 15: Commodity price volatility                                                                                                 Metals and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          energy
that 16 of the 36 commodities displayed                                                                                                                   0.5




                                                                                            Standard deviation YoY changes in commodity prices, 2000-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          commodity
more volatile fluctuations over the last 15                                                                                                                                     Iron Ore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          prices have
                                                                                                                                                          0.4
years relative to 1970–99. The standard                                                                                                                                                         Rubber                                    become
                                                                                                                                                                                               Cotton                                     more volatile
deviation increased almost 50 percent                                                                                                                     0.3                                      Copper                                 over the last
for those commodities that experienced                                                                                                                                                                                                    15 years
                                                                                                                                                          0.2                                      Cocoa
greater volatility during 2000–15, while
it declined by 25 percent for those                                                                                                                       0.1
commodities with lower volatility in
                                                                                                                                                          0.0
the last 15 years. The most notable                                                                                                                             0.0         0.1             0.2            0.3         0.4          0.5
increases in volatility occurred among                                                                                                                                Standard deviation YoY changes in commodity prices, 1970-99
                                                                                                                                                                                Agriculture     Metals & minerals  Energy
energy commodities and base metals.
For instance, the standard deviation of                                                             Source: DECPG Commodity Markets Outlook, World Bank.
                                                                                                    Note: The scatterplot depicts the standard deviation of year-on-year changes in 36 commodity
                                                                                                    prices during 1970–99 compared to those during 2000–15. Figures above the 45-degree diagonal
coal and natural gas almost doubled                                                                 represent commodities that display higher volatility during 2000–15.

from 1970–99 to 2000-15 (that of oil was
slightly lower). The standard deviation of
iron ore prices during 2000–15 was four times as high as during 1970–99, while the standard deviation
of the rest of base metals (copper, lead, nickel, tin, and zinc) grew between 15 and 40 percent over
time. Finally, only 8 of 24 agricultural commodities displayed higher volatility during 2000–15, and, as a
whole, the volatility of these 8 commodities increased nearly 15 percent, on average.

Further testing of rising commodity price volatility over time involves examination of the duration and
amplitude of upswings and downswings in commodity prices; more specifically, it involves evaluating
whether these properties have changed over time. Have upswings in international commodity
prices become longer and more pronounced? Have downswings in international commodity prices
become shorter and shallower? To answer these questions we look at the different peak-to-trough
(downswing) and trough-to-peak (upswing) phases of the cycle of international commodity prices.

Results at the group level show that the duration of upswings in commodity prices has increased,
although at different rates. The median amplitude in upswings more than doubled for energy
commodities, while that of agriculture slightly increases, and the amplitude of the cycle of metal
prices remains almost invariant. The average duration of downswings in the prices of energy and
metals declined, but increased for agricultural commodities. The median amplitude in downswings
is largely unchanged for different commodity groups. The evidence on changes in duration and
amplitude across groups masks a great deal of heterogeneity within groups.

Have commodity prices become more synchronized over time?
The salient feature of commodity price super cycles is that they are mainly demand-driven, and this
implies that individual commodity prices will tend to move together with a strong positive correlation


10	 This basket of 36 commodities comprises 24 agricultural commodities, 9 metals and minerals, and 3 energy commodities.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A F R I C A’ S P U L S E     >   23
                             (Pindyck and Rotemberg 1990). One would expect, then, a greater co-movement between fuel and
                             nonfuel commodity prices and among nonfuel commodity prices over the last 15 years (that is, the
                             current commodity super cycle) compared with 1970–99.

                             Table 2 shows the correlation matrix of a selected group of commodity prices.11 The numbers above
                             the diagonal (shaded in red) represent correlation coefficients for 1970–99, whereas those below the
                             diagonal correspond to 2000–15 (shaded in green). Results show that 79 pairwise correlation coefficients
                             are larger during 2000–15 relative to 1970–99. Focusing only on those with a positive correlation in the
                             latter period, we find that 75 pairwise correlations (more than 70 percent of the pairwise correlations
                             computed per period) were positive and stronger than during 1970–99. Note that the median
                             correlation for those commodity pairs with a positive co-movement increased from 0.28 during 1970–99
                             to 0.39 during 2000–15. The median correlation among nonoil commodities increased slightly from 0.34
                             to 0.38, whereas the commodity pairs that involved energy commodities increased from 0.12 to 0.42. The
                             correlation between fuel prices and base metals (for example, aluminum, copper, and iron ore) exceeded
                             0.67 during 2000–15, while it was below 0.3 during 1970–99. Pairwise correlation among base metals
                             was also high during 2000–15 (it exceeded 0.6).



TABLE 2: Commodity price correlation, 1970–99 and 2000–15
Correlation among commodity prices has increased over time

                                     Natural                                                                                                                             Iron
                    Crude Oil         Gas          Cocoa       Coffee       Tea         Rice      Wheat         Sugar      Tobacco       Cotton       Aluminum           Ore        Copper        Gold        Silver
 Crude Oil               1            0.3986       0.0004      0.0287      0.1489     0.1614       0.2265      0.1491       0.1342           0.2737      0.1725         0.2411      0.2883       0.3687       0.4140

 Natural Gas          0.5785             1        -0.0592 -0.0829 0.1800              0.1013       0.2013      0.1130       0.0581       -0.0498       -0.1493          0.2627      -0.1058      0.1913       0.1136

 Cocoa                0.1714          0.0214          1        0.4875      0.4069     0.0506      -0.1423      -0.0898      0.1447           0.2214      0.1600        -0.0242      0.1039       -0.0760      0.0508

 Coffee               0.2581          0.0392       0.3193         1        0.2613 -0.1470 -0.1711              -0.1767      0.0576           0.1072      0.3026         0.0454      0.2581       -0.0540      0.0824

 Tea                  0.4354         -0.0015       0.3066      0.1638         1       -0.0266 -0.1195          0.1586       0.3297           0.2497      0.1459         0.0507      -0.0275      0.1014       0.1617

 Rice                 0.4613          0.4258       0.1242      0.0456      0.2859         1        0.5608      0.3015      -0.0581           0.3415      0.1267        -0.1076      0.4237       0.3150       0.1729

 Wheat                0.6450          0.3567       0.1286      0.2670      0.3700     0.3301          1        0.1685       0.0286           0.2355      0.0873        -0.0407      0.4453       0.2141       0.1841

 Sugar                0.1868         -0.0353       0.4144      0.6298      0.1959 -0.0742 -0.0660                  1        0.0051           0.0014      0.1535         0.0577      0.0240       0.5049       0.2781

 Tobacco             -0.2095         -0.3100       0.2576      0.2199      0.1422 -0.1523 -0.2837              0.2754           1            0.1409    -0.2602          0.5334      -0.0568 -0.1564 -0.0684

 Cotton               0.3375          0.1981       0.2500      0.6193      0.2940 -0.0299          0.4845      0.3884       0.0755             1         0.1994         0.0985      0.4889       0.3019       0.2371

 Aluminum             0.6702          0.3877       0.1212      0.4018      0.3054     0.1704       0.4538      0.3218      -0.2495           0.4153         1          -0.2307      0.5222       0.3833       0.3991

 Iron Ore             0.8056          0.4224       0.2479      0.3067      0.3913     0.2955       0.6676      0.2500      -0.1684           0.4608      0.6155            1        -0.0515      0.1017       0.1017

 Copper               0.6813          0.1916       0.1604      0.3806      0.4824     0.0964       0.5401      0.3770      -0.1724           0.4830      0.8919         0.6853          1        0.2609       0.3161

 Gold                 0.4223         -0.0147      -0.0463      0.3636      0.4257     0.3501       0.3710      0.3852      -0.1354           0.2110      0.3222         0.3715      0.4677          1         0.7945

 Silver               0.4924          0.0591       0.0492      0.5929      0.3789     0.2189       0.5258      0.4067      -0.0651           0.5694      0.5189         0.4483      0.6232       0.8230          1
Source: World Bank staff calculations.
Note: The table reports the correlation among year-on-year changes in international commodity prices. The numbers above the diagonal represent correlation coefficients for 1970-99, while those below the diagonal
correspond to 2000-15.




                             11	 The selected group of 15 commodities that produced 105 pairwise correlation coefficients for each period.




 24      >     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Figure 16 complements the information
                                                                                                 FIGURE 16: Co-movement of oil and commodity prices                                                                                     Co-movement
presented in table 2 by depicting the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        of commodities
changes in the co-movement between oil                                                                                                                            0.8                                      Iron Ore                     with oil prices




                                                                                                Correlation of commodity j and oil price, 2000-15
                                                                                                                                                                  0.7
prices and the prices of a wider basket of                                                                                                                                                     Rubber Copper                            has increased
                                                                                                                                                                  0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        over the last
fuel and nonfuel commodities.12 From a                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15 years
total of 35 pairwise correlations between                                                                                                                         0.4                                   Cotton
                                                                                                                                                                  0.3
oil and other commodities, we find that
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
24 pairwise correlations (nearly 70 percent                                                                                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Cocoa
of the sample) increased over time. Again,                                                                                                                               0.0
                                                                                                                                                    -0.2   -0.1                0.1       0.2      0.3      0.4        0.5   0.6   0.7
the largest correlation with oil prices is                                                                                                                        -0.1
                                                                                                                                                                  -0.2
exhibited by three base metals (aluminum,                                                                                                                         -0.3
                                                                                                                                                                           Correlation of commodity j and oil price, 1970-99
copper, and iron ore). Finally, note that 18
                                                                                                                                                                                 Agriculture  Metals & minerals      Energy
of the 25 agricultural commodities—whose                                                         Source: World Bank.

correlation with oil price is depicted in                                                        Note: The scatterplot depicts the price correlation of commodity j and oil (both expressed in
                                                                                                 annual variations) for 36 commodity prices (other than oil) during 1970–99 compared to those

figure 2—exhibit a greater correlation                                                           during 2000–15. Figures above the 45-degree diagonal represent greater co-movement between
                                                                                                 commodity j and oil prices during 2000–15.

during 2000–15, most notably, rubber and
wood pulp.

Thus, key characteristics of the current commodity price super cycle are higher volatility for some
commodities and more synchronized movement among commodity prices. Compared with 1970-99,
energy commodities and base metals have become more volatile, but the volatility of agricultural
commodities has declined. In tandem, the co-movement between fuel and nonfuel prices, has
strengthened. Base metals such as aluminum, copper, and iron ore exhibit the largest correlation with
oil prices, but agricultural commodity prices have also become more correlated with oil.


BOOM-BUST IN COMMODITY PRICES AND
THEIR IMMEDIATE IMPACT ON TERMS OF TRADE
Sub-Saharan African countries are typically more likely to experience sharp collapses in economic activity than
any other region in the world. In fact, real GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa is almost twice as likely to fall into a deep
recession as in other developing countries. The excess volatility in output and consumption of Sub-Saharan
African countries relative to other developing countries and advanced economies is typically attributed in
the literature to the size and occurrence of exogenous external shocks. In general, external shocks play an
important role in driving volatile output fluctuations (Akıncı 2013; Kose and Riezman 2001). For instance, output
fluctuations tend to be more volatile in environments with sharp swings in the relative price of their exports. In
turn, high terms-of-trade volatility reflects structures of trade and production that are not diversified and that
rely mainly on primary commodities.

In the event of an external shock, some countries tend to have an internal environment (that is, structural
features) that exacerbates the response to the shock. For instance, the lack of diversification of the export
sector or financial mechanisms may magnify the response of the economy to a shock in terms of trade. In

12	 In contrast to the calculations underlying table 2, this scatterplot depicts the correlation between the international price of oil and the price of 35 commodities (among fuel and nonfuel
    commodities).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A F R I C A’ S P U L S E     >   25
                fact, having a nondiversified basket of exports—concentrated in a few primary commodities— increases the
                vulnerability of the real sector to adverse terms-of-trade shocks (Loayza and Raddatz 2006).


                Natural resources in Sub-Saharan Africa: What does the region export?
                Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) is a net exporter of primary commodities. During 2010-12, the region as a
                whole had a trade surplus in oil of 12.3 percent of GDP. It also registered trade surpluses in nonoil
                commodities such as cocoa, iron ore, gold, and coffee. Despite efforts to expand and diversify the
                export base over the last decade, the region’s export basket is still dominated by a limited array of
                primary commodities. The share of the top five commodity exports exceed one-third of GDP in five SSA
                countries: Angola, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Mauritania, and Republic of Congo. In 28 of 48 SSA countries, the
                top five export goods represented more than 50 percent of total exports in 2012.

                In terms of export earnings, SSA’s main export goods are crude oil, gold, natural gas, silver, cocoa, and
                iron ore. Crude oil is the top export of Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Republic of Congo, Gabon, Nigeria,
                and Sudan. The export earnings in oil typically exceeded 80 percent of merchandise exports for
                all oil-abundant countries, with the exception of Cameroon. Extractive industries play a key role in
                various economies. For instance, iron ore is the top commodity export in Mauritania, copper is a main
                commodity export in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Zambia, aluminum in Guinea, and tin in
                Rwanda. In other countries, agriculture is very important for the economy. For example, coffee is the
                main commodity export of Burundi and Ethiopia, cocoa is the top commodity export of Côte d’Ivoire
                and Togo, and cashews are the principal export of Guinea-Bissau.

                In general, import trade is more diversified, but the dependence on fuel and a few industrial imports
                is still substantial. The five main import commodities represent between 3.5 and 7.1 percent for the
                Republic of Congo and Namibia, respectively, and 39 and 36.5 percent of total merchandise imports for
                Cameroon and Côte d’Ivoire, respectively. Import trade is highly concentrated in terms of products; 43 of
                48 countries in the region import steel.

                Oil is the most important commodity traded in the region; it is among the top five export items in 18 of
                the 48 countries in the region. Fifteen countries report imports of oil and oil products among their top 5
                import items. Oil trade is more important on the import side in countries such as Kenya, Senegal, South
                Africa, and Togo. On the export front, oil is more important in Angola, Republic of Congo, Equatorial
                Guinea, Nigeria, South Sudan, and Sudan, among others.

                Table 3 illustrates the previously mentioned fact that, regardless of the concentration measure,
                exports are more concentrated than imports by a large margin (around five times). Regarding exports,
                unsurprisingly, energy-exporting countries have concentration measures that are much higher than
                other countries. Indeed, 96 percent of their total exports come from their three biggest exports,
                representing almost 30 percent of their GDP. This dependence exposes them to swings in energy prices.
                Agriculture-exporting countries seem to also be highly concentrated, with their top three exports
                representing 72 percent of their merchandise export, above the continent’s median. Countries exporting
                metals and minerals have slightly lower concentration ratios, with their top three exports accounting for
                just over 60 percent of exports. Other countries, or noncommodity countries, seem to be well diversified,


26   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
   TABLE 3: Concentration of exports and imports for the region, 2012


                                                                                                        Concentration ratiosa
                                                                           % Merchandise trade                                  % GDP
                                                                           CR3                          CR5              CR3            CR5
    I. Exports
    Sub-Saharan Africa of which:                                          68.7                          73.9              9.2           11.0
       • Agricultural exporters                                           71.5                          78.9              5.7            5.8
       • Metals and minerals exporters                                    60.7                          65.3             12.9           15.4
       • Energy exporters                                                 96.0                          96.7             29.6           29.8
       • Others                                                           18.4                          18.8              2.6            2.8
    II. Imports
    Sub-Saharan Africa of which:                                          13.3                          15.3              4.5            5.3
       • Agricultural exporters                                           13.7                          14.7              5.3            6.1
       • Metals and minerals exporters                                    13.6                          15.8              3.7            4.5
       • Energy exporters                                                 10.3                          11.4              2.3            2.6
       • Others                                                           12.1                          15.4              6.5            8.1
   Source: World Integrated Trade Solutions (WITS) database.
   Note: a. CR3 and CR5 are the share of the top 3 and 5 commodity exports and imports, respectively.




with a median of the top five exports below 20 percent. On the import side, the story is a little different
in that all country groups have fairly low concentration ratios.

Figure 17 also shows that energy-exporting countries have more concentrated exports and that the level
of concentration is relatively higher than imports. Six of the 10 countries with the most concentrated
exports are energy exporters, and all have a significant part of their export in energy, metals and minerals,
or agriculture. As mentioned, imports are less concentrated, with concentration ratios topping off at less
than 40 percent, compared to four countries being above 98 percent on the export side. Countries with the
highest commodity import concentration structure show more diversification as only two of those countries
are energy exporters, two export metals and minerals, and four export agricultural products.


A first-order estimate of the terms-of-trade
effect of the current change in commodity prices
Recent sharp swings in commodity prices (figure 2) have had a significant impact on many countries
in the Africa region. Most notably, the plunge in oil prices has created severe budgetary and balance-
of-payments problems for oil exporters like Angola, Chad, the Republic of Congo, Gabon, and Nigeria.
However, it has benefited oil importers by drastically reducing their import bill.

The Africa region as a whole is not only a net exporter of crude oil (with a trade surplus of 12.3 percent
of GDP during 2010–12), but it is also an exporter of other commodities, including agricultural raw
materials, beverages, base metals, and precious metals. Recent fluctuations in nonfuel commodities
have also been important. Several commodity prices different from oil have also weakened over the
last year, although the trend has been far from uniform. Iron ore prices have declined by 37 percent


                                                                                                                                        A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   27
                                                                                                                                                                  while international prices of rubber
The structure   FIGURE 17: Share of top five products in commodity trade,                                                                                         and cotton dropped approximately 24
of exports is   2012
                                                                                                                                                                  percent and 17 percent, respectively.
more biased     A. Commodity Exports
toward                                                                                                                                                            However, some African countries have
commodities     100
                                                                                                                                                                  actually had a boost from terms-of-
than that of     98                                                                                                                                               trade fluctuations thanks not only to
imports in
Sub-Saharan      96                                                                                                                                               weak prices of oil imports but also to
Africa           94                                                                                                                                               the prices of plywood (10 percent),
                 92                                                                                                                                               ground nuts (7 percent), and aluminum
                 90
                                                                                                                                                                  (3 percent).
                         South Sudan

                                        Sudan

                                                   Mauritania

                                                                   Nigeria

                                                                                 Angola

                                                                                           Burkina Faso

                                                                                                             Congo, Rep.

                                                                                                                            Guinea-Bissau

                                                                                                                                             Gabon

                                                                                                                                                        Mali
                                                                                                                                                                  This section computes the first-order
                                                                                                                                                                  aggregate terms of trade for 48 countries
                                           Energy exporter                                                Agriculture exporter
                                           Metals and minerals exporter                                                                                           in the region (both resource rich and
                                                                                                                                                                  resource poor) using a basket of 36
                B. Commodity Imports
                                                                                                                                                                  commodities. This basket includes
                 40
                                                                                                                                                                  3 energy commodities, 9 metals
                 30                                                                                                                                               and minerals, and 24 agricultural
                                                                                                                                                                  commodities.13 This particular group of
                 20                                                                                                                                               commodities was selected due to its
                 10
                                                                                                                                                                  significant presence in the commodity
                                                                                                                                                                  basket of the region, and the existence
                  0                                                                                                                                               of liquid markets that allow for the
                                                                Guinea-Bissau
                       Cameroon

                                       Zambia

                                                Côte d'Ivoire



                                                                                Eritrea

                                                                                          Senegal

                                                                                                            Swaziland

                                                                                                                           Sudan

                                                                                                                                            Zimbabwe

                                                                                                                                                       Botswana




                                                                                                                                                                  identification of a clear international price.
                                                                                                                                                                  Having a diversified basket in the analysis
                                          Energy exporter                                                 Agriculture exporter                                    highlights the need to understand the
                                          Metals and minerals exporter                                    Others                                                  granularity of the impact on aggregate
                Source: World Integrated Trade Solutions (WITS) database.
                                                                                                                                                                  terms of trade of movements in
                Note: Countries with the largest share of top five commodity exports and commodity imports
                relative to their total merchandise exports and imports, respectively.
                                                                                                                                                                  international prices of commodities.
                                                                                                                                                                  The commodity basket for a few African
                                                                                                                                                                  countries might be underrepresented,
                however, due to price data limitations. Among the commodities with missing (or the lack of international)
                prices are diamonds (with a large share in the export basket of Botswana, the Central African Republic,
                the Democratic Republic of Congo, Namibia, and Sierra Leone), uranium (Namibia and Niger), cloves
                (Comoros and Tanzania), fish (Cabo Verde and the Seychelles), and bauxite (Guinea).

                To assess the initial impact of recent commodity price movements for Sub-Saharan African countries, the
                estimated changes in their corresponding terms of trade resulting from movements in commodity prices
                is examined. For each commodity i, the percentage variation between the average price of 2015 (as
                forecasted in January 2015) and the average price of 2014 is computed—which is denoted here as

                13	 The group of energy commodities comprises crude oil, natural gas, and coal. The group of metals and minerals (including precious metals) comprises aluminum, copper, gold, iron ore,
                    lead, nickel, silver, tin, and zinc. Agricultural commodities (food, beverages, and raw materials) comprises bananas, beef, cocoa, coffee, cotton, groundnuts, groundnut oil, logs, maize,
                    oranges, palm oil, plywood, rice, rubber, sawn wood, sorghum, soybeans, soybean meal, soybean oil, sugar, tea, tobacco, wheat, and wood pulp.




28   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
                	  
     	  
     	  
             ∆!
          ∆
        
          ∆ !
             
                !
             ,!"#$
                !
     
     
        ! , !"#$
                ! ,!"#$

                The change in the terms of trade (TOT) for country j with respect to commodity i in 2015 relative to 2014
The    changein
   ischange
  The defined inthe
              by the terms
                      terms of trade
                               trade((TOT
                                      TOT)  for country
                                          ) for                  respect
                                                           with respect
                                                country jj with          to
                                                                        to  commodity
                                                                           commodity    i in
                                                                                     i in    2015
                                                                                          2015    relative
                                                                                               relative    to 2014
                                                                                                        to 2014
     The change in the terms of trade (TOT) for country j with respect to commodity i in 2015 relative to 2014
is is
   is defined
   defined  by
      defined by
              by                           !
                   ∆ !!                                                 ∆!
                                    !       =!        !!" − !!"                         	  
            ∆
            
            ∆         
                              !
                         !
                                 !  !          !                                  ∆
                                                                               !
                                 ! = ! !! !"
                               ,!"#$                   !"    −  !"
                                                                    !"            ∆ 
                                                                                       !
                                                                                    ,!"#$
                                                                                       !   	  
                  !                =          ! − !
                                                  !           !
                                                                                       	  
   	  	   !!,!"#$
                     ! ,!"#$             ! !!                         !   ,!"#$
                                                                                ! ,!"#$
                                             ! !!
      	  
 	  	  
 	  
where      where	  	                                                       	  
 where	  	  
 where	                         	                                     	  
                                                                        	  
           !!" , !!" 	  
             !" !"
 !
       	  !"
               	   ,   !!" 	  
                     ,            	  
         !    !
  	  	   the shares of commodity i in country j’s exports and imports, respectively, and Pi is the world
are
     	  	  
   are	  
price of   the	   shares	  of	  c
                                   i.ommodity	  
            commodity                            i	  in	  country	  
                                      The terms-of-trade         change j’s	  exports	   and	  imports,	  
                                                                                 for country        j is the r  espectively,	  
                                                                                                               sum of these a     nd	  ! 	  is	  tover
                                                                                                                                 changes                 he	  wall
                                                                                                                                                                orld	  
                                                                                                                                                                    the
  are	   the	  
          t
   price	  
  are	  
commodities   os
            he	   s hares	  
                   f	  
                     hares	   of	  
                               o f	  c
                         commodity	  
                           considered.           Note i
                                          i,	  and	  i	  =
                                      commodity	  
                                        ommodity	            	  i
                                                              	  
                                                              that  n	  c
                                                                   in	  
                                                             i1,…,n.	    country	  
                                                                           ountry	   j ’s	  e
                                                                                      j’s	   exports	  
                                                                           this first-order     xports	  
                                                                                                   approacha
                                                                                                           and	  
                                                                                                             nd	  i
                                                                                                                   imports,	  
                                                                                                                      tends r
                                                                                                                     mports,	   r
                                                                                                                                 toespectively,	  
                                                                                                                                   espectively,	  
                                                                                                                                     underestimate  a nd	  
                                                                                                                                                    and	      ! 	  
                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                               ! 	  is	  net
                                                                                                                                                             the            the	  
                                                                                                                                                                      is	  t       w
                                                                                                                                                                                    world	  
                                                                                                                                                                              he	  trade
                                                                                                                                                                                      orld	  
     price	  of	  commodity	  i,	  and	  i	  =1,…,n.	  
 price	  oresulting
           f	  commodity	         and	  i	  changes,
                              i,	  price       =1,…,n.	   since export supply and import demand are currently adjusting
benefits
  	                 from
to	  
  	   new relative prices and exchange rates in a manner that should be welfare improving. Thus, this is an
       	  
assessment only of the magnitude of the initial shock to trade in the region before any adjustments in
  	  
  	  
supply,     demand, or economic policy.

The initial approximation of the terms-of-trade effects of commodity prices may also be under- or over-
estimated in countries for other reasons. First, the trade structure considered in the assessment of the terms-
of-trade effects was computed over the period 2010-12. However, extraction from recent discoveries of
nonrenewable resources may change these structures over time. For instance, tungsten became the major
commodity export of Rwanda in 2013. Second, the calculation of the terms-of-trade effect involves average
prices in international markets. Since they are considered for a broad group of countries, these prices may
not necessarily match those received by the country. For instance, there are some discrepancies in the
variation of Kolkata and Mombasa tea prices. Third, price change used is the expected percentage variation
of the international price of each commodity for 2015, that is, the price predicted for 2015 compared with
the actual price for 2014. This forecast might differ from actual year-on-year or year-to-date changes in
commodity prices up to March 2015. Fourth, one may not distinguish sharp declines in commodity prices
from more secular downward trends if the time horizon over which the price changes is longer. Calculating
average annual variation in commodity prices over 3- or 4-year periods will conceal the sharp decline of oil
prices over the last 9 months. Finally, the basket of commodities excludes those goods where some form of
processing has been undertaken and, hence, are classified as manufacturing goods. For instance, we exclude
exports of aluminum bars in Mozambique, refined copper in Zambia and the Democratic Republic of Congo,
and exports or imports of refined petroleum in some African countries.

The effects on the terms of trade of a price shock for each commodity are simulated. The percentage
variation between the 2015 price projected by the World Bank and the actual price for 2014 is
computed.14 Terms-of-trade effects can be interpreted as the outcome of expected change in

14	 The vector of commodity prices projected for 2015 is taken from DECPG’s forecasts conducted in January 2015. See http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/GEP/GEP2015a/
    Price_Forecast.pdf.




                                                                                                                                                                               A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   29
                                                                                                                         commodity prices in 2015. Table 4 shows
TABLE 4: Aggregate terms-of-trade effects of changes in commodity prices for
                                                                                                                         aggregate estimates of the terms-of-trade
SSA and subregions (Percentage change)
                                                                                                                         change for Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole,
                                                                 TOT Effect due to:                                      and the contribution of price swings in
                                                                                                          Overall TOT
                                                                       Metals &
                                                  Agriculture                              Energy           Effect       agricultural, metals and minerals, and
                                                                       minerals
 Sub-Saharan Africa                                         -0.31           -0.86            -17.10          -18.26
                                                                                                                         energy commodities.
   of which:
                                                                                                                         Overall, the initial terms-of-trade shock
     Agricultural exporters                                 -2.44           -0.25              2.06            -0.63
     Metals and minerals exporters                          -0.14           -2.17              3.50             1.19     effect reflects a loss of 18.3 percent for
     Energy exporters                                       0.02            -0.02            -39.55          -39.55      Sub-Saharan Africa as a region, and
     Others                                                 -0.11            0.00              1.41             1.30     this deterioration is mainly explained
     Fragile                                                -0.56           -0.74            -20.12          -21.42      by the decline in oil and other energy
     HIPC                                                   -1.15           -0.75             -9.50          -11.40      commodities. However, the terms-of-
                                                                                                                         trade effect changed at a different pace
     Memo: Terms of trade (TOT) gainers and losers (GDP-weighted)
     TOT losers                                             -0.35           -0.23           -19.83           -20.41
                                                                                                                         depending on the extent of abundance
     TOT gainers                                            0.00            -0.56              1.87             1.3      of natural resources in the country. For
Source: World Integrated Trade Solutions (WITS) database.                                                                instance, the decline in terms of trade
Note: The aggregate TOT effects for the region as a whole. Agricultural exporters are those with share of agricultural
commodity exports in total merchandise exports that exceeds 25 percent of GDP. The same threshold applies to exporters
of metals and minerals, and energy commodities.
                                                                                                                         is about 40 percent for oil-exporting
                                                                                                                         countries. By contrast, countries that
                                                                                                                         exported agricultural commodities
                            experienced a much smaller deterioration in their terms of trade of 0.6 percent, and exporters of metals
                            and minerals show a modest gain of 1.2 percent.

                            Finally, the impact of commodity prices on countries that may have other covariate risks is computed.
                            For instance, the terms of trade of fragile countries in the region were reduced by 21 percent, whereas
                            that of heavily indebted poor countries declined by 11 percent. Note that the main driver of the terms-of-
                            trade deterioration for this group was energy prices, the contribution of which exceeded 80 percent of
                            the overall change in terms of trade.

                            Figure 18 illustrates the estimated terms-of-trade changes for 48 countries in the region for which
                            relevant commodity export, import, and international price data are available. According to their
                            degree of vulnerability, the map shows SSA countries classified as being more vulnerable, less
                            vulnerable, and resilient to the current decline in commodity prices. More vulnerable countries are
                            those that register terms-of-trade deterioration that exceeded 10 percent, while those with smaller
                            terms-of-trade decline (smaller than 10 percent) are considered less vulnerable. Countries that
                            registered terms-of-trade gains are labeled as resilient.

                            Calculations show that 36 countries in the region (out of a total of 48) experienced a deterioration
                            in terms of trade (which includes both the more and less vulnerable countries). These countries
                            represent nearly 80 percent of the population and about 70 percent of the level of economic activity
                            of the region.

                            Fourteen countries are highly vulnerable to the fall in commodity prices; that is, they experienced terms-of-
                            trade deterioration greater than 10 percent. In contrast, no country in the region was able to register terms-


 30      >     A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
of-trade gains greater
than 10 percent. In fact,         FIGURE 18: Terms-of-trade effects                                                                                                                                                            The impact of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               commodity
the distribution of gains                                                                                                                                                                                                      price
and losses in terms of                                                                                                                                                                                                         movements on
trade across SSA countries                                                                                                                                                                                                     terms of trade
                                   Cabo                            Mauritania
                                   Verde                                                                                                                                                                                       varies across
is asymmetric; the                                Senegal
                                                                                                      Mali            Niger
                                                                                                                                                              Sudan             Eritrea                                        countries in
                                                                                                                                       Chad
negative terms-of-trade               The Gambia
                                       Guinea-Bissau                                          Burkina Faso                                                                                                                     the region
                                                          Guinea                                        Benin
shocks are significantly                          Sierra Leone
                                                                                         Côte
                                                                                                                   Nigeria
                                                                                                                                                                                Ethiopia
                                                                                        d’Ivoire Ghana                                 Central African      South Sudan
larger than the positive                                             Liberia
                                                                                                       Togo             Cameroon
                                                                                                                                         Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Somalia
                                                                                               Equatorial Guinea
ones. The average                                                                         São Tomé and Princípe
                                                                                                                                                                  Uganda
                                                                                                                                                                           Kenya
                                                                                                                             Gabon Congo
terms-of-trade change                                                                                                                                    Rwanda
                                                                                                                                              Dem. Rep. of      Burundi
                                                                                                                                                Congo
among the countries that                                                                                                                                             Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Seychelles
registered a deterioration                                                                                                                                                                  Comoros
                                                                                                                                     Angola
is -20.4 percent, while                                                                                                                                  Zambia
                                                                                                                                                                      Malawi


that of the gainers is                                                                                                                                     Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                                                       Mozambique
                                                                                                                                                                                           Madagascar              Mauritius
1.3 percent. Figure 19                                         ToT decline that exceeds 10%
                                                                                                                                   Namibia
                                                                                                                                                Botswana
                                                               ToT decline up to 10%
shows that countries that                                      ToT improvement                                                                                         Swaziland

had the largest losses in                                                                                                                       South
                                                                                                                                                Africa
                                                                                                                                                                    Lesotho

terms of trade represent
nearly 40 percent of the
                                             IBRD 41568 | APRIL 2015
                                           World
                                  Sources:This
                                          The            Integrated
                                               map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
                                               boundaries, colors, denominationsTrade      Solutions
                                                                                and any other information (WITS) and World Bank.
                                             shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
                                  GSDPM
                                  Map Design Unit The
                                  Note:                aggregateor acceptanceterms-of-trade                   effects are computed as the sum of the price shock of commodity j times the difference of their
                                                   Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any


region’s population and
                                                   endorsement               of such boundaries.

                                  export and import shares relative to total export and import merchandise. Price shocks were computed as the percentage variation
                                  of the predicted 2015 price of commodity j relative to the actual 2014 price.
more than 50 percent
of its economic activity.
In contrast, the countries that exhibited terms-of-trade gains represented only 22 percent of the region’s
population and less than one-third of its GDP.

Figure 20 zooms in on the magnitude of the changes in the terms of trade and their sources of
variation (resulting from movements in international prices of agricultural, metals and minerals,
and energy commodities). It suggests a natural classification of African countries according to
the magnitude and nature of the terms-of-trade effect recently experienced. Among the highly
vulnerable countries, 9 experienced terms-of-trade deterioration of 20 percent or more. Eight of these
countries—Angola, Chad, Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Nigeria, Sudan, and South
Sudan—are major oil exporters. The ninth country, Mauritania, experienced a dramatic loss in terms of
trade due to the high share of iron ore in its export basket. A second group of 5 countries experienced
a terms-of-trade deterioration in the range of 10 to 15 percent. Most of these countries are energy
exporters, but changes in nonenergy export prices have also played an important role. The fall in the
terms of trade in Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Guinea comes primarily from oil.
In the Democratic Republic of Congo, the negative shock from oil is magnified by additional losses
attributed to weaker copper prices. In Guinea, it is partially offset by aluminum price hikes. Declining
prices of cocoa also contributed to the deterioration of terms of trade in Cameroon. Finally, iron ore
explains the large terms-of-trade decline in Liberia and Sierra Leone. In the case of Liberia, oil and
rubber also contributes to the deterioration.


                                                                                                                                                                                           A F R I C A’ S P U L S E                  >   31
Thirty six       FIGURE 19: Distribution of terms-of-trade gains and losses
countries in SSA
experienced a                                                                                                                            Angola
deterioration                                                                                                                            South Sudan
in their terms                                                                                                                           Congo, Rep.
                                                                                                                                         Nigeria
of trade; these                                                                                                                          Chad
countries                                                                                                                                Sudan
represent nearly                                                                                                                         Gabon                          52% of African GDP
80 percent of                                                                                                                            Equatorial Guinea              39.5% of African population
                                                                                                                                         Mauritania
the population                                                                                                                           Congo, Dem. Rep.
and about 70                                                                                                                             Cameroon
percent of GDP                                                                                                                           Guinea
of the region.                                                                                                                           Liberia
                                                                                                                                         Sierra Leone
                                                                                                                                         Ghana
                                                                                                                                         Benin
                                                                                                                                         Togo
                                                                                                                                         Rwanda
                                                                                                                                         Burundi
                                                                                                                                         Malawi
                                                                                                                                         Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                                         Swaziland
                                                                                                                                         Central African Republic
                                                                                                                                         Ethiopia
                                                                                                                                         Côte d'Ivoire                  16.6% of African GDP
                                                                                                                                         Cabo Verde                     38.7% of African population
                                                                                                                                         Mali
                                                                                                                                         Guinea-Bissau
                                                                                                                                         Uganda
                                                                                                                                         Tanzania
                                                                                                                                         Mauritius
                                                                                                                                         Gambia, The
                                                                                                                                         Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                         Madagascar
                                                                                                                                         Seychelles
                                                                                                                                         Comoros
                                                                                                                                         Namibia
                                                                                                                                         Mozambique
                                                                                                                                         Lesotho
                                                                                                                                         Somalia
                                                                                                                                         Botswana
                                                                                                                                         Senegal                        31.4% of African GDP
                                                                                                                                         Zambia                         21.8% of African population
                                                                                                                                         Kenya
                                                                                                                                         South Africa
                                                                                                                                         Niger
                                                                                                                                         São Tomé and Príncipe
                                                                                                                                         Eritrea

                  10                 0                 -10                -20                -30                -40                -50
                 Source: World Bank staff estimates.
                 Note: The aggregate terms-of-trade effects are computed as the sum of the price shock of commodity j times the difference of their export and import shares relative to total export and
                 import merchandise. Price shocks were computed as the percentage variation of the predicted 2015 price of commodity j relative to the actual 2014 price. The countries more vulnerable
                 to the decline in international commodity prices are those with terms-of-trade (TOT) deterioration that exceeds 10 percent. Countries with a deterioration lower than 10 percent are
                 denoted as less vulnerable countries. Countries with TOT gains are labeled as more resilient countries.




                 Twenty two countries in Sub-Saharan Africa faced declining terms of trade that were smaller than 10
                 percent. In this group of countries, the terms-of-trade deterioration in Ghana (of nearly 9 percent) is
                 attributed to weakening prices of oil and, to a lesser extent, cocoa and gold. Most of the terms-of-trade
                 deterioration in Togo comes from a decline in the price of cocoa, while Benin experienced a weakening
                 in the price of cotton. For Benin, terms-of-trade losses from oil exports were accompanied by a
                 deterioration attributed to declining prices of cotton and gold.


 32   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
For the 19 countries that experienced
                                                                                                 FIGURE 20: Terms-of-trade effects                                                                                                                                                                          Terms-of-trade
a reduction in their terms of trade
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            losers are mostly
smaller than 5 percent, these losses                                                                        5                                                                                                                                                                                               oil exporters,
                                                                                                            0
were attributed to weaker nonenergy                                                                        -5                                                                                                                                                                                               while winners
                                                                                                          -10                                                                                                                                                                                               are mostly oil
commodities (except for Swaziland).                                                                       -15                                                                                                                                                                                               importers




                                                                                                Percent
Weaker prices of tin and coffee explain                                                                   -20
                                                                                                          -25
the decline in aggregate terms of trade                                                                   -30
                                                                                                          -35
of Rwanda, while tobacco and, to a lesser                                                                 -40
                                                                                                          -45
extent, cotton, drive the losses in Malawi.




                                                                                                                Angola
                                                                                                                          South Sudan
                                                                                                                                         Congo, Rep.
                                                                                                                                                       Nigeria
                                                                                                                                                                    Chad
                                                                                                                                                                             Sudan
                                                                                                                                                                                      Gabon
                                                                                                                                                                                              Equatorial Guinea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mauritania
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cameroon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Guinea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Liberia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sierra Leone
Furthermore, terms-of-trade deterioration
in Burundi is mainly driven by declining
coffee prices, while sugar and oil jointly                                                                                              Agriculture                     Metals & minerals                                       Energy                                    Total
explain the fall in Swaziland. In this group
                                                                                                          10
of countries with medium vulnerability, the
benefits from cheaper fuel and natural gas                                                                 5

for (net) energy importers were fully offset                                                               0
by the deterioration in the export prices
                                                                                                Percent




                                                                                                          -5
of metals and minerals and agricultural
commodities. For instance, declining                                                                  -10

prices for cashew nuts erase the benefits                                                             -15
                                                                                                                              Ghana
                                                                                                                               Benin
                                                                                                                                Togo
                                                                                                                            Rwanda
                                                                                                                             Burundi
                                                                                                                             Malawi
                                                                                                                       Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                         Swaziland
                                                                                                                Central African Rep.
                                                                                                                            Ethiopia
                                                                                                                       Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                                                                        Cabo Verde
                                                                                                                                 Mali
                                                                                                                     Guinea-Bissau
                                                                                                                             Uganda
                                                                                                                           Tanzania
                                                                                                                          Mauritius
                                                                                                                       Gambia, The
                                                                                                                         Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                        Madagascar
                                                                                                                         Seychelles
                                                                                                                           Comoros
of cheaper fuel in Guinea-Bissau, while
the losses attributed to weaker prices of
cocoa and rubber erase the gains from
cheaper oil in Côte d’Ivoire. Finally, some                                                                                             Agriculture                        Metals & minerals                                        Energy                                       Total

countries in this group were affected by                                                                  10
sharp declines in coffee prices (Ethiopia                                                                  8
                                                                                                           6
and Uganda), gold (Mali and Tanzania), and                                                                 4
                                                                                                Percent




nickel (Zimbabwe).15                                                                                       2
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                          -2
Twelve countries in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                                                                                          -4
                                                                                                                Namibia
                                                                                                                           Mozambique
                                                                                                                                            Lesotho
                                                                                                                                                          Somalia
                                                                                                                                                                      Botswana
                                                                                                                                                                                 Senegal
                                                                                                                                                                                           Zambia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kenya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Niger


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Eritrea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sao Tome and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Principe




experienced positive terms-of-trade shocks.
Again, the magnitude of terms-of-trade
gains in this group of resilient countries is                                                                                     Agriculture                         Metals & minerals                                 Energy                                    Total
markedly smaller than that of the losses of
                                                                                                 Source: World Bank.
the more vulnerable countries. Most of the                                                       Note: Countries are more vulnerable to declining commodity prices are those whose aggregate
                                                                                                 terms-of-trade deterioration exceeds 10 percent. Those with terms-of-trade losses of less than

countries in this group benefit from weaker                                                      10 percent are defined as countries less vulnerable. The countries more resilient to declining
                                                                                                 commodity prices are denoted as more resilient. The price shock is the change in the predicted
                                                                                                 price for 2015 compared with the actual price for 2014.
fuel prices; however, these benefits were
partly reduced by offsetting effects from
sharp swings in different commodity prices. Botswana, South Africa, and Zambia benefit from lower fuel
prices, but these gains are partially offset by losses coming from declining international prices of nickel,
iron ore, and copper, respectively. Terms-of-trade gains are registered by Kenya and Senegal thanks

15	 This calculation does not account for additional benefits that these countries might receive by increasing imports of cheaper fuel.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A F R I C A’ S P U L S E                                       >   33
                                         to lower oil prices, but these gains were estimated at less than 5 percent. The positive terms-of-trade
                                         effects of São Tomé and Principe (5.3 percent) are attributed to weaker oil prices and are partly offset by
                                         lower cocoa prices. Finally, Kenya and Niger16 benefit strongly from lower oil prices and, to a much lesser
                                         extent, from stronger prices of tea and maize, respectively.

                                         The discussion conducted above is partly summarized in table 5, which explores whether having
                                         commodities other than oil may have helped oil exporters cushion the decline in fuel prices, and
                                         either contributed to or offset the gains from cheaper oil for nonfuel commodity exporters. The
                                         table shows that countries like Rwanda and Tanzania had moderate terms-of-trade effects coming
                                                                                                                                                    from either oil or the entire basket of
                                                                                                                                                    commodities. Some countries such as
 TABLE 5: Typology of Sub-Saharan African countries by their terms-of-trade                                                                         Ghana and Togo are more vulnerable to
 effects of declining prices
                                                                                                                                                    negative terms-of-trade effect when only
                                                                 Commodity TOT Impact                                                               oil prices decline, but the deterioration in
                                        More resilient                 Less vulnerable                    More vulnerable                           the terms of trade is partly offset when all
                                                                                                                                                    commodities are taken into account.
                                     Botswana                      Cabo Verde                       Sierra Leone
                                     Eritrea                       Central African Republic
                                     Kenya                         Côte d’Ivoire
                                                                                                                                                    QUALITY OF POLICIES:
                   More resilient




                                     Mozambique                    Ethiopia
                                     Niger                         Guinea-Bissau                                                                    RECENT TRENDS
                                     São Tomé and Príncipe         Malawi
                                     Senegal                       Mali                                                                             Many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa
                                     South Africa                  Mauritius
                                     Zambia                        Uganda                                                                           benefited from the commodity price
                                                                   Zimbabwe
                                                                                                                                                    super cycle. However, it is warranted to
                                                                                                                                                    ask whether these countries improved the
                                     Lesotho                       Burkina Faso                                                                     quality of their policies and institutions
                   Less vulnerable




                                     Namibia                       Burundi
  Oil TOT Impact




                                     Somalia                       Comoros                                                                          during the good times. It has often been
                                                                   Madagascar                                                                       argued that countries experiencing
                                                                   Rwanda
                                                                   Seychelles                                                                       terms-of-trade windfalls would delay the
                                                                   Tanzania
                                                                                                                                                    institutional reforms or macroeconomic
                                                                   Benin                            Angola                                          policy adjustments necessary to continue
                                                                   Gambia, The                      Cameroon
                                                                   Ghana                            Chad                                            growing on a balanced path. Agency and
                                                                   Swaziland                        Congo Republic
                   More vulnerable




                                                                                                                                                    common pool problems are typically argued
                                                                   Togo                             Congo, Democratic Republic
                                                                                                    Equatorial Guinea                               as the culprits of delaying reforms (Alesina,
                                                                                                    Gabon
                                                                                                    Guinea
                                                                                                                                                    Ardagna, and Trebbi 2006; Eslava 2011).
                                                                                                    Liberia
                                                                                                    Mauritania                                      Figure 21 depicts the evolution of
                                                                                                    Nigeria
                                                                                                    South Sudan                                     macroeconomic outcomes over the last 10
                                                                                                    Sudan                                           years for the three groups of SSA countries
Source: World Bank.
Note: The aggregate terms-of-trade effects of changes in commodity prices are used to define the low-, medium-, and
                                                                                                                                                    according to their terms-of-trade effects.
high-vulnerability countries. We consider two scenarios—one where only oil prices change (oil TOT impact), and one where
all commodity prices change. Countries are less vulnerable if their negative impact on terms of trade is smaller than 10                            Fiscal and current account deficits widened
percent, while countries with more vulnerability are those with terms-of-trade deterioration that exceeded 10 percent.
                                                                                                                                                    after 2011 for all groups of countries. For


                                         16	 Terms-of-trade effects of Niger may be misrepresented due to the fact that uranium and thorium ore are not accounted for in the commodity export basket of the country.




34             >           A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
countries that were more vulnerable to
the weaker commodity prices, the current          FIGURE 21: Macroeconomic management                                                               Countries
                                                                                                                                                    with greater
account deficit was nearly 8 percent of                                            Fiscal balance (% of GDP) - Median
                                                                                                                                                    terms-of-trade
                                                    8
GDP, while the fiscal deficit exceeded 2            6                                                                                               deterioration
percent of GDP. There was also a slight             4                                                                                               experienced
                                                    2                                                                                               more volatile
increase in public debt since 2009; the             0                                                                                               macroeconomic
gross public debt of more vulnerable               -2                                                                                               performance
countries increased by more than 5                 -4
                                                   -6
percentage points of GDP, while that of            -8
                                                         2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
the more resilient countries increased
                                                                         More vulnerable       Less vulnerable      More resilient
nearly 10 percentage points of GDP. In                                          Gross public debt (% of GDP) - Median
contrast, reserves were trending upward           140
                                                  120
in the run-up to the crisis, and central          100
banks started deploying reserves in 2009.          80
The international reserves of the more             60
                                                   40
vulnerable countries were reduced by 7             20
percentage points of GDP, while that of the         0
                                                          2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
less resilient dropped only 4.5 percentage
                                                                         More vulnerable         Less vulnerable         More resilient
points of GDP. The more resilient countries                                          Reserves (% of GDP) - Median
have deployed only 1 percent of GDP since          20
                                                   18
2009, and their level of reserves exceeds          16
                                                   14
15 percent of GDP. Finally, on average, the        12
                                                   10
more resilient countries have more flexible         8
                                                    6
exchange rate arrangements than the more            4
                                                    2
vulnerable ones.                                    0
                                                         2004     2005      2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011      2012     2013

Figure 22 plots the current account and                                  More vulnerable         Less vulnerable         More resilient
                                                                                 Current account (% of GDP) - Median
the overall fiscal balance for SSA countries        6
for 2007 and 2013. These years preceded             4
                                                    2
large adverse shocks; 2007 preceded the             0
global financial crisis and a sharp drop           -2
                                                   -4
in commodity prices as a result of lower           -6
                                                   -8
global demand, and 2013 preceded the
                                                  -10
current plunge in oil prices and other            -12    2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
commodities that was initiated in the                                    More vulnerable         Less vulnerable         More resilient
second half of 2014. The two scatterplots         Sources: World Economic Outlook, IMF; Bleaney and Tian 2014.
                                                  Note: The countries more vulnerable to the decline in international commodity prices are those
show that current account and fiscal              with terms-of-trade (TOT) deterioration that exceeds 10 percent. Countries with a deterioration
                                                  lower than 10 percent are denoted as less vulnerable countries. Countries with TOT gains are

positions have moved in a southwest               labeled as more resilient countries.


direction; that is, they have deteriorated.
In 2007, six countries that are now labeled
more vulnerable had both fiscal and current account surpluses. These countries were, of course,
benefiting from higher growth supported by commodity prices. By 2013, the number of countries with


                                                                                                                            A F R I C A’ S P U L S E     >   35
                                                                                                                                     both fiscal and current account surpluses
Fiscal and        FIGURE 22: Twin deficits                                                                                           was reduced to only two. Furthermore,
external
positions have                                             Fiscal and external positions of SSA countries in 2013                    23 SSA countries had current account
                                                                                        25
worsened
                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                     and fiscal deficits in 2007, and that
among African
                                                                                                                                     number increased to 33 in 2013.
                 Fiscal balance (% GDP), 2013


                                                                                        15
countries,
                                                                                        10
especially
                                                                                          5                                          Figure 23 shows the evolution of the
among the                                                                                 0
terms-of-trade                                   -40   -30         -20         -10       -5            10         20     30          quality of policies and institutions in
losers                                                                                 -10                                           SSA countries since 2005, as measured
                                                                                       -15
                                                                                                                                     by selected CPIA indicators (World Bank
                                                                                       -20
                                                                                                                                     2014).17 CPIA scores show that the quality
                                                                  Current account balance (% GDP), 2013
                                                                                                                                     of macroeconomic management had
                                                           More vulnerable         Less vulnerable      More resilient
                                                           Fiscal and external positions of SSA countries in 2007
                                                                                                                                     deteriorated in the group of countries
                                                                                         25                                          that have been affected the most by
                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                     weaker fuel and nonfuel commodity
                  Fiscal balance (% GDP), 2007




                                                                                         15
                                                                                         10                                          prices during the postcrisis period.18
                                                                                          5                                          There was also deterioration of the
                                                                                          0
                                                 -40   -30         -20         -10       -5            10           20   30          business environment in these countries,
                                                                                        -10                                          and the slight recovery experienced
                                                                                        -15
                                                                                                                                     after 2010 was not sufficient to reach
                                                                                        -20
                                                                                                                                     precrisis peak levels. Moreover, there is a
                                                                 Current account balance (% GDP), 2007
                                                           More vulnerable      Less vulnerable     More resilient
                                                                                                                                     considerable gap in terms of the quality
                  Source: World Economic Outlook, IMF.                                                                               of the business regulatory environment
                                                                                                                                     between the countries with low and
                                                                                                                                     high vulnerability. This gap is more
                 pronounced when looking at the efficiency to mobilize revenues.

                 In an environment of lower commodity prices, governments that rely heavily on commodity revenues
                 will have to find other ways to collect revenues in order to fund public investment programs and
                 other spending. Reforms to elevate the efficiency of revenue mobilization are needed to keep the
                 government providing public goods to the population. Finally, low scores are achieved in transparency,
                 accountability, and corruption in the public sector for all groups of countries in SSA. However, there
                 are still considerable differences between more vulnerable and resilient countries. This implies that,
                 on average, the governments of net commodity exporters (especially fuel) have been less transparent
                 and accountable than those of net aggregate commodity importers and some nonfuel net exporters.
                 Prudent and transparent management of resource windfalls in booms and busts is of much relevance
                 for resource-rich countries (see box 1).




                 17	 The CPIA Africa report can be downloaded at http://datatopics.worldbank.org/cpia/.CPIA scores are available only for IDA-eligible countries.
                 18	 Scores are group averages. There is considerable variation in country-level scores within groups.




 36   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
FIGURE 23: Quality of policies and institutions                                                                                                                                                 Countries
A. Macroeconomic management                                                                        B. Business regulatory environment                                                           with greater
                                                                                                                                                                                                terms-of-trade
3.8                                                                                                3.3                                                                                          deterioration
3.7                                                                                                3.2                                                                                          have weak
                                                                                                                                                                                                scores in
3.6                                                                                                3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                economic
3.5                                                                                                3.0                                                                                          policies and
3.4                                                                                                2.9                                                                                          institutions

3.3                                                                                                2.8
3.2                                                                                                2.7
3.1                                                                                                2.6
        2005     2006      2007      2008       2009    2010     2011      2012        2013                2005    2006      2007      2008     2009     2010      2011      2012        2013

                   More vulnerable           Less vulnerable          More resilient                                 More vulnerable           Less vulnerable          More resilient
C. Efficiency of revenue mobilization                                                              D. Transparency, accountability, and corruption in
                                                                                                   the public sector
3.3                                                                                                3.2
                                                3.8                                                3.1
3.2
                                                3.7                                                3.0
3.1                                                                                                2.9
                                                3.6                                                2.8
3.0
                                                3.5                                                2.7
2.9                                                                                                2.6
                                                3.4
2.8                                                                                                2.5
                                                3.3                                                2.4
2.7
                                                3.2                                                2.3
2.6                                                                                                2.2
        2005     2006      2007      2008       2009    2010     2011      2012     2013                   2005 2006 2007 2008                  2009     2010      2011     2012         2013
                                                3.1
                                                       2005     2006      2007     2008       2009       2010 2011 2012 2013
                   More vulnerable           Less vulnerable         More resilient
                                                                  More vulnerable             Less vulnerable        More resilient
Sources: CPIA Africa Report 2014; World Bank.

Note: CPIA scores are for IDA-eligible countries only. The countries more vulnerable to the decline in international commodity prices are those with terms-of-trade (TOT)
deterioration that exceeds 10 percent. Countries with a deterioration lower than 10 percent are denoted as less vulnerable countries. Countries with TOT gains are labeled as more
resilient countries.




How to manage resource windfalls is an important issue for resource-rich countries of Africa. A key                                                                                             BOX 1: Save,
                                                                                                                                                                                                invest, or
question is whether windfalls should be saved—that is, the bird-in-hand rule, as in Chile and Norway,
                                                                                                                                                                                                consume:
or spent on pressing social needs that are largely unmet because of capital scarcity. A recent paper                                                                                            Budget
(Devarajan et al. 2014) sheds some light on this issue by simulating the impact of resource windfalls                                                                                           rules under
                                                                                                                                                                                                resource price
on long-term growth and welfare, under resource price uncertainty.a The aim is to formulate simple                                                                                              uncertainty
budget rules to apply under conditions of volatile resource revenues.
Four strategies or budget rules for use of revenue windfalls are considered: (a) an all-consuming rule
with the windfall transferred to households—think of this as a universal dividend; (b) an all-investing
rule, with the windfall used for public investment (the assumption is that there is some inefficiency
in investment, so that investment is only 50 percent effective in raising output); (c) an all-savings
rule, or all-wise rule, with the windfall saved in a sovereign wealth fund and invested abroad; and (d)
a balanced rule, with a fixed amount saved and the remainder invested (a 50–50 allocation between
savings and investment is used in the analysis, but the appropriate allocation will depend on factors




                                                                                                                                                                    A F R I C A’ S P U L S E          >   37
BOX 1             such as the elasticity of output to public                                             FIGURE B1.1: Welfare impact of a temporary positive
Continued
                  capital, and interest rate premium on rising                                           one-standard-deviation change in the resource price
                  level of foreign debt). Two types of resource                                          0.238
                  price shocks are examined: a temporary                                                 0.236
                                                                                                         0.234
                  shock, both an increase and decrease in
                                                                                                         0.232
                  price; and persistent but uncertain shocks.                                             0.23
                                                                                                         0.228
                  Three policy lessons are derived from the
                                                                                                         0.226
                  simulation results of the economic effects of                                          0.224
                  price shocks under different budget rules.                                             0.222
                                                                                                          0.22
                  First, when the temporary price shock                 All-consuming           All-investing             All-savings             Balanced

                  is positive, the best strategy is to save    Source: Devarajan et al. 2014.
                                                               Note: The welfare measure is the percentage increase in the deterministic steady state
                  the entire windfall abroad and transfer      consumption that gives the same level of utility brought about by the shock to resource price.

                  the interest earnings to citizens over
                  time (figure B1.1). These transfers raise    FIGURE B1.2: Welfare impact of a temporary negative
                                                               one-standard-deviation change in the resource price
                  consumption, and the welfare gains from this
                  strategy are higher than the all-consumption -0.198 All-consuming              All-investing            All-savings             Balanced

                  and all-investment strategies.                 -0.2

                  Second, with a negative price change,                                                  -0.202
                                                                                                         -0.204
                  however, the all-saving strategy is no
                                                                                                         -0.206
                  longer superior. Now, the best strategy
                                                                                                         -0.208
                  is the all-investing one (figure B1.2). This
                                                                                                           -0.21
                  cuts public investment instead of reducing
                                                                                                         -0.212
                  transfers to households, which directly                                                -0.214
                  reduces consumption, or drawing down the                                               Source: Devarajan et al. 2014.

                  sovereign wealth fund, which is equivalent                                             Note: The welfare measure is the percentage increase in the deterministic steady state
                                                                                                         consumption that gives the same level of utility brought about by the shock to resource price.

                  to increasing debt.
                  Third, when shocks occur persistently, the best strategy to consumption smoothing is the balanced
                  rule. This rule provides insurance against both negative and positive shocks.
                  Note: a. The authors extend the dynamic 1-2-3 model by introducing uncertainty. The ensuing 1-2-3-4 model is of a small open economy with four economic agents (household, firm,
                  government, and rest of the world), two types of capital (public and private), and four goods (a domestic good, a traditional export good, a resource export good, and an import good). A
                  windfall is defined as the difference between the current and steady state level of royalties from the resource export.




38   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
CONCLUSION
Despite 20 years of sustained growth, most African countries have seen little diversification of their
economic structure and composition of trade. In short, the region continues to be a net exporter of
primary commodities. Oil is, by far, the most important commodity traded in the region. Among oil
exporters, 96 percent of total exports have come from the three biggest exports of each country, which
represent nearly 30 percent of their GDP. This dependence exposes these countries to swings in oil
prices. Unsurprisingly, the pronounced drop in oil prices since June 2014 has translated into a sharp
initial terms-of-trade deterioration for this group of countries, and for the region as a whole. Although
net oil importers are set to gain from sharply lower global prices of energy commodities, the gains
have been muted, in some instances, by price declines in these countries’ commodity exports. This is
especially so for some exporters of metals and minerals. In the current commodity price cycle (2000-15),
nonfuel commodity prices are moving more closely with those of fuel prices. The greater synchronization
of price movements heightens exposure to negative commodity price shocks.

Management of resource windfalls takes on added importance during downswings in commodity
prices. As countries grapple with issues of whether windfalls should be saved or spent, attention to
the quality and efficiency of public spending is needed. A case in point is phasing out inefficient and
regressive gasoline and other oil-related subsidies and replacing these with better-targeted social
protection interventions. Priority should also be given to implementing appropriate social protection
policies to cushion the effects on the poor in countries that need to tighten fiscal balances (and other
macroeconomic adjustments).

As tailwinds have transformed into headwinds, there is heightened focus on structural transformation
and sustainability of growth. Sustained development requires inclusive growth. This must start with
agriculture, where more than 80 percent of the poor are still employed (Africa’s Pulse vol. 10). Despite
substantial policy commitments in the 2003 Maputo Declaration (and the 2014 Malabo declaration),
productivity growth in African agriculture has remained disappointing. Attention is urgently needed to
the question of the relative effectiveness of different kinds of policy interventions in agriculture. Poverty
reduction and income growth also arise through economic diversification, and job creation in the vastly
heterogeneous services and manufacturing sectors. Sustainably breaking into manufacturing requires
continued progress in a number of “structural” issues, such as access to reliable and affordable power,
lower transport costs and better logistics, a more skilled labor force, and lower unit labor costs
in manufacturing.

Reducing conflict risks and promoting stability must be high on the policy agenda. It requires acting
on the drivers of fragility, such as investment in lagging regions, reform and improvement of the
security sector, greater openness regarding public matters, and broadening the scope of governance
in the extractive sector to incorporate issues such as political bargaining at the local level, subnational
dynamics, and the negative local-level externalities that this sector can impose.

Priority must also be on strengthening health systems. This will not only help avoid the next infectious
disease outbreak, but also improve the quality of life, and consequently the economic prosperity of
all Africans.


                                                                                                A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   39
                Appendix I
                Classification of Sub-Saharan African (SSA) countries

                 I. Classification of SSA countries by the nature of their commodity exports a

                                                                   Metals and
                 Agricultural exporters                                                                              Energy exporters                                Others
                                                                   minerals exporters
                 Burundi                                           Botswana                                          Angola                                          Cabo Verde
                 Central African Republic                          Benin                                             Cameroon                                        Comoros
                 Côte d'Ivoire                                     Burkina Faso                                      Chad                                            Eritrea
                 Ethiopia                                          Congo, Democratic Republic                        Congo, Republic                                 Lesotho
                 Gambia, The                                       Ghana                                             Equatorial Guinea                               Madagascar
                 Guinea-Bissau                                     Guinea                                            Gabon                                           Mauritius
                 Kenya                                             Liberia                                           Nigeria                                         Mozambique
                 Malawi                                            Mali                                              South Sudan                                     Senegal
                 Rwanda                                            Mauritania                                        Sudan                                           Seychelles
                 São Tomé and Príncipe                             Namibia
                 Swaziland                                         Niger
                 Togo                                              Sierra Leone
                 Uganda                                            Somalia
                                                                   South Africa
                                                                   Tanzania
                                                                   Zambia
                                                                   Zimbabwe


                 II. Classification of SSA countries by the impact of declining
                 commodity prices on the aggregate terms of trade b
                 More vulnerable                                                                  Less vulnerable                                                     More resilient
                 Angola                                             Benin                                              Madagascar                                     Botswana
                 Cameroon                                           Burkina Faso                                       Malawi                                         Eritrea
                 Chad                                               Burundi                                            Mali                                           Kenya
                 Congo, Democratic Republic                         Cabo Verde                                         Mauritius                                      Lesotho
                 Congo, Republic                                    Central African Republic                           Rwanda                                         Mozambique
                 Equatorial Guinea                                  Comoros                                            Seychelles                                     Namibia
                 Gabon                                              Côte d'Ivoire                                      Swaziland                                      Niger
                 Guinea                                             Ethiopia                                           Tanzania                                       São Tomé and Príncipe
                 Liberia                                            Gambia, The                                        Togo                                           Senegal
                 Mauritania                                         Ghana                                              Uganda                                         Somalia
                 Nigeria                                            Guinea-Bissau                                      Zimbabwe                                       South Africa
                 Sierra Leone                                                                                                                                         Zambia
                 South Sudan
                 Sudan
                Source: World Bank.
                a. Countries are classified as exporters of a specific commodity group if the share of exports of said category is above 25 percent.
                b. The aggregate terms-of-trade effects are computed as the sum of the price shock of commodity j times the difference of their export and import shares relative to total export and import
                   merchandise. Price shocks were computed as the percentage variation of the predicted 2015 price of commodity j relative to the actual 2014 price. The more vulnerable countries to the decline
                   in international commodity prices are those with terms of trade (TOT) deterioration that exceeds 10 percent. Countries with a deterioration lower than 10 percent are denoted as less vulnerable
                   countries. Finally, countries with TOT gains are labeled as more resilient.




40   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
Bibliography
Akıncı, Özge. 2013. “Global financial conditions,          Dennis, Brady. 2015. “Why measles could be worse for
  country spreads and macroeconomic fluctuations            West Africa than Ebola,” Washington Post, March 12.
  in emerging countries.” Journal of International         Dercon, S., and C. Porter. 2014. “Live Aid Revisited:
  Economics 91(2): 358–371.                                 Long-Term Impacts of the 1984 Ethiopian Famine
Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, and Francesco Trebbi.     on Children.” Journal of the European Economic
  2006. “Who Adjusts and When? On the Political             Association 12 (4): 927–948.
  Economy of Stabilizations.” IMF Staff Papers, Mundell-   Devarajan, S., D. Go, M. Maliszewska, I. Osorio-Rodarte,
  Fleming Lecture, 53: 1–49, International Monetary         and H. Timmer. 2013. “Stress-testing Africa’s recent
  Fund, Washington, DC.                                     growth and poverty performance,” World Bank
Baffes, John, M. Ayhan Kose, Franziska Ohnsorge, and        Policy Research Working Paper Series 6517,
  Marc Stocker. 2015. “The Great Plunge in Oil Prices:      World Bank, Washington, DC.
  Causes, Consequences, and Policy Responses.” Policy      Devarajan, Shantayanan, Yazid Dissou, Delfin S. Go,
  Research Note PRN/15/01, World Bank, Washington,          and Sherman Robinson. 2014. “Budget Rules and
  DC, March.                                                Resource Booms and Busts: A Dynamic Stochastic
Baumeister, Christiane, and Lutz Kilian. 2015.              General Equilibrium Analysis.” World Bank,
  “Understanding the decline in the price of oil since      Washington, DC.
  June 2014.” CEPR Discussion Paper 10404, Centre for      Erten, Bilge, and José Antonio Ocampo. 2013.
  Economic Policy Research, London, February.                “Super cycles of commodity prices since the mid-
Belke, Ansgar, Ingo G. Bordon, and Ulrich Volz. 2013.        nineteenth century.” World Development 44 (April):
  “Effects of global liquidity on commodity and food         14–30.
  prices.” World Development 44: 31–43.                    Eslava, Marcela. 2011. “The political economy of fiscal
Berkmen, S. Pelin, Gaston Gelos, Robert Gaston, and          deficits: A survey.” Journal of Economic Surveys 25 (4):
  James P. Walsh. 2009. “The global financial crisis:        645–673.
  Explaining cross-country differences in the output       Evans, David K., and Anna Popova. 2015. “West African
  impact.” IMF Working Paper WP/09/280, International        Ebola crisis and orphans.” Lancet 385 (9972) (March
  Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, December.                   14): 945–946.
———. 2012. “The global financial crisis: Explaining        Frankel, Jeffrey A. 2006. “The Effect of Monetary Policy
 cross-country differences in the output impact.”            on Real Commodity Prices.” In Asset Prices and
 Journal of International Money and Finance 31(1):           Monetary Policy, edited by J. Campbell. Chicago:
 42–59.                                                      University of Chicago Press, Chapter 7, pp. 291– 327.
Bleaney, Michael, and Mo Tian. 2014. “Classifying          ———. 2014. “Effects of Speculation and Interest Rates
  Exchange Rate Regimes by Regression                       in a ‘Carry Trade’ Model of Commodity Prices.” Journal
  Methods.” Discussion Papers 14/02, School                 of International Money and Finance 42 (April):
  of Economics, University of Nottingham,                   88–112.
  Nottingham,England.
                                                           Harding, Don, and Adrian R. Pagan. 2002. “Dissecting
Canuto, Otaviano. 2014. “The Commodity Super                 the cycle: A methodological investigation.” Journal of
  Cycle: It this time different?” PREM Economic              Monetary Economics 49: 365–381.
  Premise No. 150, World Bank, Washington, DC,
                                                           Heap, A. 2005. “China: The engine of a commodities
  June.
                                                             super cycle.” Citigroup Smith Barney, New York,
Cheung, Calista, and Sylvie Morin. 2007. “The Impact         pp. 1–25.
  of Emerging Asia on Commodity Prices.” Money
  Affairs 0 (2): 181-224. Centro de Estudios Monetarios
  Latinoamericanos.


                                                                                                      A F R I C A’ S P U L S E   >   41
                Jacks, David S. 2013. “From Boom to Bust: A Typology           Verwimp, P., and T. Bundervoet. 2009. “Civil War and
                  of Real Commodity Prices in the Long Run.” NBER                the Welfare of Extended Households: Evidence from
                  Working Paper No. 18874, National Bureau of                    Longitudinal Data from Burundi,” Households in
                  Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, March.                       Conflict Working Paper 70, Institute of Development
                Kilian, Lutz. 2014. “The impact of the shale oil                 Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton, England.
                   revolution on U.S. oil and gasoline prices.” CEPR           World Bank. 2014. “Country Policy and Institutional
                   Discussion Paper 10304, Centre for Economic Policy           Assessment (CPIA) Africa: Assessing Africa’s policies
                   Research, London, December.                                  and institutions (includes Djibouti and Yemen).”
                Kose, M. Ayhan, and Raymond Riezman. 2001. “Trade               World Bank, Washington, DC, June.
                  shocks and macroeconomic fluctuations in Africa.”            ———. 2015a. “Global Economic Prospects: Having
                  Journal of Development Economics 65(1): 55–80.                fiscal space and using it.” World Bank, Washington,
                Loayza, Norman V., and Claudio Raddatz. 2006.                   DC, January.
                  “The composition of growth matters for poverty               ———. 2015b. “Striving Toward Disaster Resilient
                  alleviation.” Journal of Development Economics                Development in Sub-Saharan Africa, A Strategy
                  93(1): 137–151.                                               for Current World Bank Engagement and Future
                Loayza, N., E. Olaberria, J. Rigolini, and L. Christiaensen.    Priorities.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
                  2012. “Natural Disasters and Growth: Going beyond            ———. 2015c. “The Economic Impact of Ebola on
                  the Averages.” World Development 40 (7): 1317–1336.           Sub-Saharan Africa: Updated Estimates for 2015.”
                Lombardi, Marco J., Chiara Osbat, and Bernd Schnatz.            World Bank, Washington, DC, January 20.
                  2012. “Global commodity cycles and linkages: a               ———. 2015d. “The Socio-Economic Impacts of Ebola
                  FAVAR approach.” Empirical Economics 43 (2):                  in Liberia: Results from a High Frequency Cell Phone
                  651–670.                                                      Survey. Round 4.” World Bank, Washington, DC,
                Martin, Leopoldo. (N.d.) “Cumulative totals of cases            February 24.
                 and deaths over time,” in Ebola virus epidemic in West        ———. 2015e. “The Socio-Economic Impacts of Ebola
                 Africa. Wikipedia.                                             in Sierra Leone: Results from a High Frequency Cell
                Nikoloski, Z., L. Christiaensen, and R. Hill. 2015.             Phone Survey. Round 1.” World Bank, Washington,
                  “Household shocks and coping mechanism: evidence              DC, January 12.
                  from the Sub-Saharan Africa LSMS,” Policy Research           World Health Organization, UNICEF, UNFPA, World
                  Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.                    Bank, and UNPOP. 2014. “Trends in Maternal
                Pindyck, Robert S., and Julio J. Rotemberg. 1990. “The          Mortality: 1990 to 2013.” Washington, DC, and
                  Excess Co-Movement of Commodity Prices.” The                  New York.
                  Economic Journal 100 (403): 1173–1189.                       Ye, Wang. 2008. “China’s Refined Copper Usage.”
                Prasad, Eswar S., and Thomas Rumbaugh. 2003.                     Presentation to the International Copper Study
                  “Beyond the Great Wall: Why China’s integration into           Group. http://www.icsg.org.
                  the global trading system is seen as a competitive           Yu, Yongzheng. 2011. “Identifying the Linkages
                  threat by some but as a boon by others.” Finance and           between Major Mining Commodity Prices and
                  Development (December): 46–49.                                 China’s Economic Growth—Implications for Latin
                Raoche, Shawn K. 2012. “China’s Impact on World                  America.” In Identifying the Linkages Between Major
                  Commodity Prices,” IMF Working Paper WP/12/115,                Mining Commodity Prices and China’s Economic
                  International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, May.              Growth-Implications for Latin America. Washington,
                                                                                 DC: International Monetary Fund.
                Verwimp, P., and J. C. Muñoz-Mora. 2013. “Returning
                  Home after Civil War: Food security, nutrition and
                  poverty among Burundese households,” Households in
                  Conflict Working Paper 123, Institute of Development
                  Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton, England.


42   >   A F R I C A’ S P U L S E
W W W. W O R L D B A N K . O R G / A F R I C A S P U L S E
