                                                                                                           95921



                                             Concept Note

          The Impacts of Community Driven Development Interventions
                          on Women’s Empowerment


                                    Revised draft, March 30th, 2015

1.     This proposed Learning Product will review existing evidence of the impacts of
community driven development (CDD) on women’s empowerment. It will analyze
findings of World Bank Group-supported interventions in countries that have shown
commitment to the community driven development approach (that is, have
implemented more than one isolated project). It will also draw from the findings of
several IEG Project Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs) and one IEG impact
evaluation.

2.     This analysis has several interesting dimensions. It focuses on an issue — the
gender-specific impacts of CDDs, especially on empowerment — that has not received
due attention in evaluation. The approach is innovative, in that it derives evidence from
what are traditional accountability products and methods —such as PPARs and
portfolio reviews —to generate knowledge and learning. From the methodological
point of view, it faces the challenge of documenting impacts that are partially
‘unintended’, that is, may not be included among the main goals of the project, even
when they are mentioned as motivations for this type of interventions.

3.     This learning product is relevant for and will feed into a number of other IEG
products, including the Development of the Rural Non-Farm Economy evaluation, the
learning product on maximizing development product in IDA (in preparation to the
IDA18 replenishment), the RAP 2015 (with gender equality as a special theme) and the
work on shared prosperity among others.

Background and Context
4.     The World Bank defines community-driven development as “an approach to
local development that gives control over planning decisions and investment resources
to community groups (including local governments).”1 The approach has been widely


1
 CDD core course material: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTCDD/Resources/430160-
1361480685593/9058621-1366731546330/Session1_IntroductionCDD.pdf. This definition corresponds to the one

                                                                                                           1
used at the World Bank and elsewhere and tested in different contexts, including
fragility and conflict. CDD interventions are based on the principle that community
involvement in identifying needs and priorities, making decisions about projects, and
managing investment funds produces better development outcomes than more
centralized, top-down approaches. The ‘bottom-up approach’ to poverty reduction that
CDD projects embed has been promoted on the ground that it makes development
more inclusive and responsive to the real needs of the poor, because it has the potential
to empower poor people, improve governance, build social capital, and strengthen
communities’ collective action.

5.     According to a literature review of CDD undertaken for the last OED evaluation
of the effectiveness of World Bank support for this type of interventions (OED, 2005) the
Bank categorizes CDD approaches in a three-fold typology (see table 1), which
encompasses both community participation efforts and participatory governance/social
accountability initiatives.2

Table 1. Type of CDD Interventions
                                                                                                3. Enabling
 Type                    1. Community control                 2. Local governments
                                                                                                 environment
 Definition   Community groups           Community groups     Democratically elected       Policy and institutional
              make decisions on          make decisions on    local governments make       reforms oriented toward
              planning                   planning             decisions on planning,       increased control of
              implementation and         implementation and   implementation, O&M, in      decisions and resources
              O&M and directly           O&M but do not       partnership with different   by community groups.
              manage investment          directly manage      community groups
              funds                      investment funds
Source: IEG 2005.
Note: O&M = Operation and maintenance.

6.     The first typology of projects (“community control”) is the one that more closely
corresponds to the notion of community participation. Communities are enabled to
make planning, implementation, operation, and maintenance decisions about specific
sub-projects, and may also be assigned direct management of the investment funds. The
second typology of projects (“local governments” or participatory governance) includes
those projects that promote collaboration between communities and local government
in making development decisions. Finally, “enabling environment”-type of projects aim
to promote policy and institutional reforms that facilitate both community participation
and participatory governance.



provided in the PRSP Sourcebook: “Community-driven development (CDD) gives control of decisions and
resources to community groups.” (World Bank, 2003, p. 3).
2
  This typology has been recognized by and taught in the World Bank CDD core course for several years.

                                                                                                                      2
7.     In general, CDD projects aim to decrease poverty and improve the well-being of
the targeted population (see the CDD result framework summarized in Figure 1).
Although different interventions may emphasize different objectives and dimensions of
well-being, typically CDDs aim to support income and consumption (through
enhancing livelihoods), access to services and local public goods (with the goal of
improving education, health, etc.), local governance, and “empowerment” of local
communities, in particular of excluded groups (such as the poor, minorities, and
women) (“development outcomes” in “general result chain”).3 To achieve these goals,
CDDs support training and facilitation activities aimed to strengthen the community
organization and its decision-making and managerial abilities (“institution building”),
as well as to support assets creation through block grants provided to the communities
(“asset creation”). Program conditions are meant to ensure greater inclusion and
citizens’ engagement.

8.     The project activities aim to strengthen community participation, decision-
making, and control of resources, in order to enable communities to build assets and
infrastructure and support income generating activities (“outputs” in “general result
chain”). This in turns should lead to increased social capital, social cohesion, and
greater citizens’ engagement, alongside increased access to and use of services and
improved livelihoods (“intermediate outcomes”) — preconditions for improved
development outcomes. The priorities, design, and achievement of each specific CDD
intervention are influenced by the formal and informal institutions and the
characteristics and response of the community in a given context (“context”).

9.      Empowerment is embedded in the whole approach and at all stages of the CDD
result chain (“Targeted community-driven approaches devolve control and
decisionmaking to poor women and men, which empowers them immediately and
directly” (World Bank, 2003, p. 308).) It is not only a final objective but it is also
functional to achieving the other project’s objectives — to increase income and access to
services (Jorgenson, 2005). The definition of empowerment adopted by the World Bank
Group CDD framework is aligned with the definition provided in World Bank (2002):
“Empowerment is the expansion of assets and capabilities of poor people to participate
in, negotiate with, influence, control, and hold accountable institutions that affect their
lives” (p. 14).




3
    Specific CDD projects may have different objectives. Figure 1 represents a very broad framework.

                                                                                                       3
Figure 1. CDD Result Framework
                                                                General result chain                                           Gender-specific aspects

                                                              Development outcomes                                             Development outcomes
                                                                                                                   Increased education, health, income, assets, time saving for
                                                      Increased Household Welfare (consumption,                      women as a whole or specific groups (e.g. female-headed
                                                           income, assets, education, health)                       households, female ethnic minorities, young women, etc.)
                                                      Increased local capacity for collective action                     Women increased capacity for collective action
                                                               Community empowerment                                             Decrease in domestic violence



                                                              Intermediate outcomes
                                                                                                                               Intermediate outcomes
                                                             Social capital, social cohesion
                                                                                                                   Women increased access to and use of services
                                                        Increased access to and use of services
                                                                                                                   Employment opportunities for men and women
                                                                 Improved livelihoods
                                                                                                                       Improved attitudes regarding women’s
                                                          Improved targeting / increased equity
                                                                                                                    involvement / engagement at community level
                                                     Increased citizen’s involvement / engagement


                                                                        Outputs                                                           Outputs
                                                         Community participation in activities                          Gender-balanced participation in activities
                                                      Community infrastructure built / maintained                     Choices regarding infrastructure and income-
                                                    Income generating activities supported / created               generating activities reflect needs of men and women




                                                                      Context
                                                                                                               •   Community contribution
               •    Legal, institutional,
                                                                                                                 (financial, labor, social)
                    political framework
                                                                                                               • Community participation
                   • Decentralization          FORMAL AND INFORMAL               COMMUNITY ATTITUDES      •   Transparency and accountability
                                                   INSTITUTIONS                    TOWARDS WOMEN’S
                       GOVERNMENT               RELATED TO GENDER                    PARTICIPATION                        COMMUNITY


                                                              Program conditions
                   Rules for selecting micro-projects; Implicit or explicit quotas; Rules and activities for citizen’s engagement, etc.

           Institution building                                                                                     Asset creation
             Training and facilitation                   Community Driven Development                    Block grants to support investments in
      Awareness raising / social mobilization                  INTERVENTION                              human, financial, social, physical, and
      Support to local/community governance                                                                          natural capital



Source: IEG.


                                                                                                                                                                                  4
10.    Because they are designed to directly involve communities and better respond to
the needs of the poor and groups more easily excluded by traditional interventions,
CDD projects have the potential to enhance women’s participation in local decision-
making. They can build social capital, and support social and even economic
empowerment. As the World Bank Group invests a large part of its portfolio in these
projects, CDD projects offer a great potential to advance the gender equality agenda.
Furthermore, as most CDD are rural, they can drive change where women tend to be
more marginalized and gaps more acute. Investing in rural women was indeed
identified as one of the priority areas for “global action” in the World Development
Report 2012 on Gender Equality (World Bank 2011a, Table 9.1).

11.     Yet limited evidence exists on the female empowerment impacts of CDDs. A
recent World Bank Policy Research report, while not looking at gender specifically and
systematically, found that local (”induced”) participation was mostly driven by
wealthier, more educated, male participants, with higher social status and more
political connections (Mansuri and Rao 2013). Similarly, a review of CDD impact
evaluation evidence (Wong 2012) indicates that active engagement of women in CDD
projects is not systematic. Annex I summarizes the gender relevant results found by the
impact evaluations reviewed by Wong (2012), as they have been reported in that
summary report. In general, this review found that there is very limited evidence on the
impact of CDD projects on social capital (in the community as a whole) and that, when
it exists, this evidence is mixed at best.

12.    Livelihood needs and strategies of men and women differ because of different
gender roles and responsibilities, and gender disparities in access to resources at both
the household and community level. CDD interventions that ignore these differences
may not be effective in empowering women, which would limit or undermine their
overall effectiveness. By contrast, CDD interventions that pay particular attention to
gender impacts have the potential to achieve better results on the ground and become a
vehicle of “women’s empowerment,” as the experiences of East and South Asia seem to
suggest.

13.     It has been suggested that CDD projects can effectively enhance empowerment
and inclusion only if they explicitly take into account gender-specific needs, constraints,
and opportunities and are designed in such a way to ensure equal participation of men
and women in deciding about community priorities, implementing projects, managing
funds, and monitoring and evaluating community projects (Kuehnast 2003). Some
earlier evaluations of social funds indicate that “a demand-driven approach is not
automatically a gender-sensitive approach” (Bigio 1997, p. 119) and that “experience
also shows that community based development does not automatically include
marginalized groups, the poor, women or ethnic minorities unless their participation is

                                                                                          5
specifically highlighted as a goal, both at the agency and community levels” (Narayan
1995). These evaluations call for greater effort to move the gender agenda forward in
community based development projects: “Social funds have not come to grips with
gender issues. Some serious work is needed in understanding the gender dimensions of
demand-oriented institutions such as social funds. Women are often marginalized in
communities” (Bigio ed. 1997, p. 140).

14.     A similar message comes from the Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook (The
World Bank, IFAD, and FAO 2009) — untargeted CDD projects often bypass women
and the poor. Moreover, more female participation in CDD project does not necessarily
translate into active participation and equal benefits for women. The report also
highlights the limited availability of evidence on CDD’s impacts for rural women and
calls for an increased attention to gender in the M&E of these types of projects to ensure
the intended impact on inclusive poverty reduction (The World Bank, IFAD, and FAO
2009, p. 55). A recent cursory review of the evidence on gender and community driven
development (Browne 2014) reaches very similar conclusions—only the explicit
integration of a gender strategy in CDD, aimed at generating women’s participation in
community meetings and activities, can produce positive results for women.

15.    The increased awareness that gender integration in CDDs is crucial to ensure
that projects achieve the intended poverty reduction and empowerment goals has
progressively generated a more explicit definition of gender-specific activities, outputs,
and outcomes and more guidance for systematically tracking gender results. The right-
hand side of Figure 1 makes explicit the main gender elements of CDDs. It also
incorporates the recommendation of a recent World Bank toolkit for gender integration
in CDDs (World Bank 2011b).

16.     The result chain highlights the gender-specific aspects of CDD interventions and
shows that these projects have the potential to empower women in the economic, social
and political domain, as intermediate or final outcomes. By increasing access to
livelihood opportunities, jobs, and income, CDDs can increase women’s economic
empowerment, if the choices regarding infrastructure, assets, and income generating
activities reflect the needs of both men and women. Women’s increased ability to access
social services and participation in community decisions can enhance their confidence
and autonomy and positively impact social relationships and gender norms (social
empowerment). Finally, as women are included in decision-making processes CDDs can
enhance women’s political empowerment — that is, impact voice, accountability, and
political participation within the community and at various levels of government.

17.    Economic, social, and political empowerment are dimensions that CDDs aim to
positively impact for the community as a whole — for its male and female members.

                                                                                             6
The manifestations of what empowerment is about (the empowerment indicators) may
differ along gender lines, however. Moreover, project design may need to include
specific elements and activities to ensure equal participation and inclusion of women
and men (the studies cites above indicate that project design should explicitly target
women to empower them effectively). Yet, if the goal of empowering women is not
achieved, one may question whether the community (as a whole) was effectively
empowered.

18.     CDDs do not all include each individual element highlighted in Figure 1. Some
focus more on building assets and infrastructure, other emphasize community
empowerment more. At the same time, CDDs can have unintended impacts, that is,
they can impact dimensions that were not explicitly addressed in the design and result
chain. For example, with respect to empowerment, CDDs interventions aim to empower
communities and increase local capacity for collective action. However, higher
empowerment as a group and within the community could lead to higher gender
equality within the household. An interesting question is whether women whose voice
and agency increase at the community level — in relation to the activities implemented
by the project — get also more empowered at the individual and household level, even
if the project did not plan to directly impact these dimensions.

Purpose and Objectives

19.     The purpose of this learning product is to analyze the gender impacts of CDD
interventions, with a specific focus on empowerment outcomes—manifestation of
decision-making and participation, at the individual, household, and community level.
Drivers and manifestations of decision-making and participation, as created or
enhanced by the CDD approach (such as access to services, new livelihood
opportunities, capacity building and modalities of engagement and participation) will
also be analyzed.4 The central evaluation questions will be “Do CDD interventions
result in economic, social, and/or political empowerment of women, as well as men’s?
What are the conditions (including contextual elements) and the design elements that
enhance or hamper these impacts?”

20.      More specific questions guiding the analysis are:

         a.     Design. Do CDD interventions deliberately aim to enhance women’s
                empowerment and achieve greater gender equality as one of their main



4
  To select indicators of empowerment (in particular for the purpose of collecting new data) the team will refer to the
recent literature that proposed and piloted a number of indicators comparable across countries, with special attention
to the rural context (Alkire and Ibrahim 2007; Alkire and others 2013).

                                                                                                                     7
           objectives? If so, which dimensions of gender equality do they focus on and
           what elements do they incorporate in their design to achieve this goal?

      b.   M&E. Which indicators do CDD projects use to measure empowerment or
           social capital? And, women’s empowerment in particular?

      c.   Efficacy. What are the impacts of CDD interventions on women’s
           empowerment? Does participation of women in community decision-
           making processes increases as a result of CDD projects? What about
           household decision-making? What about alternative measures of
           empowerment? Does a higher participation of women result in different
           choices regarding community projects? Are CDD interventions that
           deliberately aim to improve women’s empowerment more effective in
           doing so than those that do not target women explicitly? Is there evidence
           of increased efficacy over time with respect to empowering women?

Methodology

21.     Three main exercises will be undertaken to answer the evaluation questions.
First, a critical review of the literature will provide the conceptual framework to
organize the main messages emerging from the empirical analysis. The critical review of
the literature will appraise three main strands of literature—the literature on CDD, with
a specific focus on the mechanisms enhancing participation, inclusion, social capital,
and empowerment; the literature on gender in CDD, including also the findings of
evaluations that document specific gender impacts of CDD projects; and the literature
on empowerment to help define the meaning and dimensions of empowerment that are
supported through these projects and those that could be impacted (including impacts
that are unintended). The review of the literature will also analyze results achieved by
successful CDD projects that were not supported by the World Bank.

22.    The second exercise carried out in for this report will be an in-depth review of
gender dimensions in CDD/rural livelihood projects supported by the World Bank
(IBRD and IDA) and approved between FY03 and FY11. The sample unit will be a
country where at least two consecutive projects have been supported by the Bank. The
aim is to document any evolution over time of the notion of and approach to gender
integration into CDD interventions. Including only projects approved no later than
FY11 ensures that currently open projects have become effective and have been
undergoing implementation for at least two years. The team expects that about 20-25




                                                                                          8
countries will be included in the portfolio review.5 Only one CDD program will be
selected for each country (if more than one exist) but the whole sequence of projects will
be part of the analysis. For larger countries — such as India — more than one project
may be selected, using the same criteria of focusing on established projects.

23.    Projects objectives, components, outcomes indicators, and reported results will
be analyzed using available information from project documents to assess the level of
gender integration, the approaches adopted, and the type of indicators used to measure
and monitor results. Task team leaders will be contacted to provide additional
information (including beneficiary assessments, impact evaluations, and other evidence
on outcomes) as needed to supplement the review of project documents. CASs and CAS
evaluations will be analyzed to situate the CDD in the broader country strategy. ESW
and other relevant analytical work will be used to analyze contextual elements (such as
specific gender issues in the country or region, type of livelihood, level of government
decentralization, and so on). The design of currently active projects will be compared to
the design of closed projects to assess whether the approach to address gender issues
has changed over time.

24.   The third exercise consists in summarizing evidence from IEG Project
Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs) of CDDs, carried out during FY15 and FY16.
Two PPARs that have been recently completed and generated relevant information on
involvement of and impacts on women are the PPAR for the Nigeria Second National
Fadama Development Project and the PPAR of the Gemi Dirya Project in Sri Lanka.
Four ongoing PPARs will also generate new and useful evidence for this learning
product — the PPAR of the Andhra Pradesh District Poverty Initiatives Project
(APDPIP) and the Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Production Project (APRPRP); the
PPAR of the Indonesia Third Urban Poverty Project; the PPAR of the Lao PDR Poverty
Reduction Fund project; and the PPAR of the Nepal Poverty Alleviation Fund.

25.    Most of these projects, more or less explicitly, aimed to reach out to women and
enhance their participation in community activities and in the identification and
management of sub-projects. Often, they aimed to fund investment in micro-
infrastructure that meets women’s needs or enhance women’s livelihoods. The projects’
M&E frameworks include variables that are meant to capture several dimensions of
participation and empowerment (see Box 1 for additional details on the projects
evaluated in PPARs, particularly on their gender dimensions). The ICR of the Lao PDR
PRF notes, “Qualitative assessments suggest that while women participated in

5
 The CDD Community of Practice shared with the team a list of long-run CDD programs in 25 countries identified
by the front office and through consultations with task team leaders, which will be used as a starting point for
selection (see Annex 2).


                                                                                                                   9
meetings, and the needs/views of women are reflected in the sub-project investments,
their role in decision-making may be minimal in practice and empowerment of women
does not appear to have been extended beyond the boundaries of the project” (World
Bank 2012, p. 19). The PPARs assessed (or will assess) achievements of the projects with
respect to women’s increased participation and access to services—as per their explicit
design and motivations. Wherever possible, the ongoing PPARs will also investigate
other empowerment dimensions that may be impacted as opportunities and voice
increase. To the extent possible, the PPARs will aim to collect evidence also on those
empowerment dimensions that “extend beyond the boundaries of the project.”

Box 1. Assessing Empowerment Outcomes in Project Performance Assessment Reports
The Andhra Pradesh District Poverty Initiatives Project (APDPIP) aimed to improve opportunities for the rural
poor to meet priority social and economic needs in the six poorest Districts of Andhra Pradesh, through the creation
of self-managed grass-roots institutions (Common Interest Groups and Self-Help Groups), enhanced capacity of
established local institutions (Gram Sabha/Panchayats and the government of Andhra Pradesh line departments) to
address the needs of the poor, support to investment in sub-projects proposed by grass-roots institutions, and
increased access to education for girls. Investments were a means to support social capital and women’s
involvement in group formation, financial literacy and training, and networking activities, in order to leverage their
collective voice to meet economic needs. The creation of self-help groups had, according to many observers and the
evidence collected by IEG, a transformational impact of women’s participation in their village communities.
The Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project aimed to expand the geographical coverage of the APDPIP
and sharpened the focus on the poorer community members and on the livelihoods of the rural poor. This project
entirely focused on supporting women self-help groups, as a mean to socially engage otherwise disempowered
members of the community. Emerging IEG findings indicate that — in line with what had been documented in other
evaluations —self-help groups gave women the opportunity to participate in meetings and increase their voice in
demanding more and better services for them and their children. Moreover, there were also positive impacts on
household outcomes, such as increased demand for equality between husband and wife and increased ability of
women to negotiate more respectful treatment in the household. The project also determined an increase in political
participation of women in elected local governments. By the end of the second phase, evidence is emerging that
social empowerment is leading to (at least modest) economic gains.
The Nigeria Fadama II Project* aimed to increase the incomes of Fadama users (farmers, pastoralists, fishers,
hunters, gatherers, and service providers) in a sustainable way and to empower communities to take charge of their
own development agenda. While the gender element was not prominently reflected in the explicit objectives of the
project, the aim was to encourage the formation of marginalized groups, including women and widows. The IEG
evaluation indicates that “Fadama increased female participation in local economic development planning but
evidence suggests that women and other members of vulnerable and marginalized groups were often not able to
afford or obtain their needed assets” (IEG 2014, p. xiv).
The objective of the Sri Lanka Community Development and Livelihoods Improvement Project* (commonly
referred to as the Gemi Diriya project) was to target poor communities in the Uva and Southern provinces and
improve their livelihood and quality of life by enabling them to build accountable and self-governing local institutions
and to manage sustainable investments. The project aimed to increase women’s participation in decision making by
increasing their representation in management positions. IEG evaluation found that the project was indeed effective
in targeting and including women. Evidence collected by IEG indicates that women constituted the majority of the
Savings and Credit scheme membership; Focus Group Discussions confirmed that women assumed key leadership
roles in the organizations (IEG 2015, p. xiii).



                                                                                                                      10
The Indonesia Third Urban Poverty Project (PNGN/UPP) aimed to support community organizations able to
increase the voice of the poor in public decision making, making local government more responsive to the needs of
the poor, and provide funds to community based organizations and local government to provide services to the urban
poor. The original design did not particularly focused on ensuring women’s participation and empowerment, but
based on the results reported at completion this project was successful in ensuring women’s representation in
community organizations. Moreover, about 46 percent of the members of community groups receiving revolving
funds were women (World Bank 2012, p. 18).
The Lao PDR Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF) targeted communities in poor districts and, within those communities,
the poor, women, and ethnic minorities. The PRF I became effective in 2003 and aimed to fund community
infrastructure activities, build local capacity to manage public investment planning and implementation, and
strengthen the capacity of local institutions to support participatory decision-making at the village, kum ban, and
district levels. Supporting women’s participation in community meetings, in the planning, decision and implementation
process, and in presenting proposals for sub-projects were among the main goals of the project. The project
implemented 3,179 sub-projects in 28 poor districts in 7 provinces. PRF I was followed by PRF II, which became
effective in October 2011, soon after the closure of PRF I, and will run until 2016. PRF II will retain about 50% of PRF
I kum bans and will scale up the project to reach approximately 275 kum bans.
The Nepal Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) is a World Bank supported CDD project established in 2004. This
project aims to bring excluded communities in the mainstream of development, by including the poor and
disadvantaged groups in the development process. Its objective is to improve access to income-generation sub-
projects and community infrastructure for the groups that have tended to be excluded by reasons of gender, ethnicity
and caste, as well as for the poorest groups in rural communities (the targeted beneficiaries are poor women, Dalits,
Janajatis, and vulnerable communities living below the poverty line). PAF II became effective before PAF I closure,
maintaining the same Board and Secretariat, which ensured institutional continuity. PAF II expanded the geographic
coverage of the project while continuing operating in the initial (PAF I) 25 districts. Since its inception the project has
been implemented in 40 districts, reaching over 663,000 households (of which 75 per cent are women and 65 per
cent are extreme-poor). To assess the program an impact evaluation was carried in out in 2010. The evaluation
results indicated that PAF had a positive and significant impact on household welfare, an increase in consumption
expenditure, a significant decline on incidence of food insecurity as well as an increase in school enrollment among
6-15 year olds. However, the effects of PAF on social capital and female empowerment have not been yet identified.
*The PPAR has been already completed.

26.     This report will also benefit from the results of an ongoing IEG impact evaluation
of a community monitoring project in Burkina Faso.6 This IE uses a cluster-randomized
controlled design to assess whether community monitoring improves service delivery
and quality, and indicators of social cohesion, such as trust, altruism, and risk attitudes.
The impact evaluation will provide insight to the attributable, gendered effects of this
pilot project that did not include specific gender elements at design, except for the fact
that it focuses on services that are considered to be highly valued by women, such as
education and health. The same issues explored in the upcoming PPARs will be covered
in the endline questionnaire of the Burkina Faso impact evaluation to improve
comparability. The Burkina impact evaluation will be complemented by a qualitative


6
  The Burkina Faso Community Monitoring for Better Health and Education Service Delivery Project aims to increase
the quality and quantity of health and education services through empowering, capacitating, and stimulating
individuals and communities to demand good governance and through increasing transparency and accountability of
service providers.

                                                                                                                        11
analysis to explore the channels of the impacts on voice and empowerment and
women’s role in the formation of social capital.

27.    The methodology adopted to gather evidence on female empowerment will be
tailored to the project characteristics and build on existing evaluations. In the two
PPARs that have yet to be fielded either a census, a poverty map or previous impact
evaluation were carried out. This would allow for the identification of a credible
counterfactual—communities not reached by the project but comparable to those that
were—to address attribution. A short questionnaire will be used to explore outcomes
related to empowerment, decision-making, and inclusion, with special attention to
document gender differences at the individual, household, and community level.
Questionnaires will be administered to both project and non-project communities.
Additionally (or as an alternative if a credible counterfactual cannot be constructed),
focus groups will be carried out to generate qualitative evidence, which will integrate
and explain some of the patterns found using quantitative data.7

28.    Indicators of empowerment (to be tracked in the desk review and collected
among the new evaluation evidence) will be identified based on the recent literature
that proposed and piloted a number of indicators comparable across countries,
including approaches that paid special attention to the rural context (Alsop and others
2006; World Bank 2002; Alkire and Ibrahim 2007; Alkire and others 2013). The team will
also refer to indicators proposed in the toolkit for gender integration in CDD (World
Bank 2011b) and to the few existing impact evaluations that have analyzed the impact
of CDD interventions on women’s empowerment (Beath and others 2013).

Output

29.   The final output will be a summary report discussing the findings from the desk
review and the review of PPAR evidence.

30.    The methodological approach that will be developed to measure impacts on
empowerment and decision-making will be summarized in a separate note and will
contribute to the work program on Integrating Gender in Evaluation. The aim is to
contribute to test and establish a methodology that can be used for other IEG
evaluations to improve the assessment and documentation of gender results in Bank
operations. The desk review of projects will contribute to the rural employment
evaluation, the review prepared for IDA18, the RAP 2015, and potentially other IEG
products.



7
    This methodology will also draw from the focus group discussions tools used by Munoz Boudet and others (2012).

                                                                                                               12
Relevance to World Bank Group Strategy

31.    The analysis of the World Bank Group’s contribution to advancing gender
equality is integral part of both goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared
prosperity. Addressing gender inequalities means ensuring that both men and women,
boys and girls, are included in the development process, as called for by the shared
prosperity goal. Ending extreme poverty will be elusive if gender inequalities that are
often the cause and the result of poverty are not addressed.

32.    CDD projects represent a large portion of the World Bank portfolio, and one of
the main categories of “poverty reduction” interventions. Between fiscal years 2002 and
2011, IBRD/IDA approved 734 projects that adopted a CDD approach either as a whole
or in specific components. Total Bank lending towards CDD, directly managed and
controlled by communities and local governments, was $22.5 billion.8

Relevance to IEG Strategy

33.    The proposed learning product is well aligned with the ongoing effort by IEG to
ensure a more systematic integration of gender in its evaluation work. It is going to be
one of the “building blocks” of evaluation evidence on gender results towards a broader
assessment of the World Bank Group support to the gender mainstreaming agenda.

34.    This product is also very well aligned with other work ongoing in IEG. It will
exploit synergies with other activities and products under preparation in IEG, such as
the rural employment evaluation, the learning evaluation (which will also look at rural
livelihood as a case study), the impact evaluation of a social accountability intervention
in Burkina Faso, and PPARs assessing the effectiveness of CDD interventions.

35.   Finally, this activity will advance the IEG methodological toolkit. It will use a
combination of quantitative and qualitative methods to explore issues of inclusion and
empowerment, which links it closely to the IEG’s efforts to improve the evaluation of
the poverty and shared prosperity goals. It will pilot an approach to carry out lighter
and yet rigorous impact evaluation work and will provide an opportunity to test a
method to measure not only gender empowerment, but, more broadly, inclusion and
empowerment of the poorest segment of the population.

Quality Assurance Process

36.  The report will be overseen by Nick York, Acting Director for Public Sector, IEG,
and Mark Sundberg, Public Sector Manager. Peer reviewers are Robert Chase, Lead


8
    http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/communitydrivendevelopment/overview#2

                                                                                        13
Human Development Economist, GSPDR, and Anis Dani, former Lead Evaluation
Officer, IEG. An external reviewer of the final report will also be added.

Audience, Potential Influence, and Dissemination Strategy

37.    The Board has already demonstrated great interest in an assessment of gender
results “on the ground.” For this reason, a good level of attention is anticipated,
especially from the Gender CCSA (which will be the lead champion), and at least three
Global Practices—(i) the Agriculture and Social Development Global Practice, (ii)
Urban, Rural and Social Development Global Practice, and (iii) Poverty Global Practice.

38.    The analysis of gender impacts of CDDs is a topic that, quite surprisingly, has
not received much attention in the empirical literature. It is therefore anticipated that
researchers and operational staff alike will be interested in learning which types of
impacts (decision making, time use, access to services, empowerment) these
interventions can produce. The findings can generate insights for design,
implementation, and M&E frameworks of CDD interventions.

39.    Donors (notably Sweden) and policy makers will be equally interested in
learning from World Bank Group results in this area.

40.   The findings generated by this analysis will be disseminated to an internal and
external audience. Internally, the team will engage with task team leaders according to
modalities piloted for the dissemination of the Social Safety Nets and Gender systematic
review. Externally, the report will be presented in relevant conferences and
dissemination events. IEGPS will work with IEGCS to refine the appropriate
dissemination strategy.

IEG Readiness and Value Added

41.    IEG has experienced staff with gender and poverty expertise. The Gender in IEG
work program also relies on other IEG experts working on gender issues. Skills are
therefore not a problem.




                                                                                            14
References

Alkire, Sabina, and Solava Ibrahim. 2007. “Agency and Empowerment: A Proposal for Internationally
         Comparable Indicators.” Oxford Development Studies 35 (4): 379–403.
Alkire, Sabina, Ruth Meinzen-Dick, Amber Peterman, Agnes Quisumbing, Greg Seymour, and Ana Vaz.
         2013. “The Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index.” World Development, 52, 71–91.
Alsop, Ruth, Mette Bertelsen, and Jeremy Holland. 2006. Empowerment in practice: From Analysis to
        Implementation. Washington DC: World Bank.
Beath, Andrew, Christia Fotini, and Ruben Enikolopov. 2013. “Empowering Women though
      Development Aid: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Afghanistan”, American Political Science
      Review, 107(3), 540-557.

Bigio, A.G. (ed.). 1997. Social Funds and Reaching the Poor: Experiences and Future Directions. Proceedings
       from an international workshop organized by The World Bank and AFRICATIP, La Red Social de
       América Latina y el Caribe, and NGO-WB Committee with the support of African Development
       Bank, Canadian International Development Agency, International Labour Office, and Organization
       of American States. Washington D.C.: World Bank.

Browne, Evie. 2014. “Gender in Community Driven Development.” GSDRC Helpdesk Research Report
     1079. Birmingham, UK: GSDRC, University of Birmingham.

IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2014a. “Project Performance Assessment Report , Lessons from
      Two Decades of Village Development in Sri Lanka: A Project Performance Assessment of the Gemi
      Dirya Project in Sri Lanka (2004-2010)”, Report No. 92788, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2014b. “Project Performance Assessment Report, Nigeria, Second National Fadama Development
   Project IDA-38380”, Report No. 88958, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2005. “A Review of the Literature on Participatory Approaches to Local Development for an
   Evaluation of the Effectiveness of World Bank Support for Community- Based and -Driven
   Development Approaches.” Background paper to OED. 2005. The Effectiveness of World Bank Support
   for Community-Based and -Driven Development. Washington DC: World Bank.

Jorgenson, Steen. 2005. “Framing the logic of CDD operations: Towards a project theory for CDD design
      and evaluation”. Social Development Department, World Bank, unpublished draft.
      http://connect.worldbank.org/explore/SDV/cdd/_layouts/WordViewer.aspx?id=/explore/SDV
      /cdd/Lists/Community%20Driven%20Development%20CDD%20Resources/Attachments/140/C
      DDprojecttheory.docx&Source=http%3A%2F%2Fconnect%2Eworldbank%2Eorg%2Fexplore%2FSD
      V%2Fcdd%2Fdefault%2Easpx&DefaultItemOpen=1.

Kuehnast, Kathleen. 2003. “Gender and Social Funds: Challenges and Opportunities.” Social Protection
     Discussion Paper 0309. Washington DC: World Bank.

Mansuri, Ghazala and Vijayendra Rao (2013), Localizing Development: Does Participation Work?,
    Washington DC: World Bank.




                                                                                                         15
Munoz Boudet, Ana Maria, Patti Petesch, and Carolyn Turk with Angelica Thumala (2012), On Norms and
    Agency: Conversations about Gender Equality with Women and Men in 20 Countries, Washington DC:
    World Bank.

Narayan, Deepa. 1995. “Designing Community Based Development.” Social Development Paper 7.
     Washington DC: World Bank.

Wong, Susan (2012), What Have Been the Impacts of World Bank Community-Driven Development
    Programs? CDD Impact Evaluation Review and Operational & Research Implications, Washington
    DC: World Bank.

World Bank, Food and Agriculture Organization, and International Fund for Agricultural Development.
     2009. Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook. Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2002. Empowerment and Poverty Reduction: A Sourcebook. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2003. “Community-Driven Development” Chapter 9 in PRSP Sourcebook. World Bank,
   Washington D.C. http://go.worldbank.org/FAURGRFIP0

———. 2011a. The World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development . Washington DC:
   World Bank.

———. 2011b. Gender Dimensions of Community-Driven Development Operations: A Toolkit for Practitioners.
   Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2012a. “Implementation Completion and Results Report (IBRD-47790 IBRD-77590 IDA-40630) on
   a Credit in the Amount of SDR 47.4 Million (US$71.4 Million Equivalent) and Loan in the Amount
   of US$67.3 Million to the Republic of Indonesia for the Third Urban Poverty Project.” Report No.
   ICR00001834, World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. 2012b. “Implementation Completion and Results Report (IDA-H4180 and IDA-36750) on a Credit
   in the Amount of SDR 15.3 Million (US$ 19.34 Million Equivalent) and a Grant in the Amount of
   SDR 9.3 Million (US$15.00 Million Equivalent) to Lao People’s Democratic Republic for a Pover ty
   Reduction Fund Project.” Report No. ICR2181, World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                                                                         16
Annex 1 – Gender Results in Projects Reviewed and Documented by Wong (2012)

 Project                                                        Gender-relevant Results
 Afghanistan National      The 2009 midline survey report found that the program increased the engagement of women
 Solidarity Program.       across a number of dimensions of community life, while also increasing respect for senior
                           women in the village and making men more open to female participation in local governance.
                           NSP also increased the availability of support groups for women and reduced extreme
                           unhappiness among women. With respect to access to medical care and schooling, the
                           program’s impacts appear limited to female villagers. Women’s access to professional medical
                           services appears modestly improved by NSP, but there is no evidence of an improvement for
                           villagers generally. Some evidence exists that NSP increases girls’ school attendance rates.
                           NSP results in increased involvement by women in income‐generating activities, but there is no
                           evidence of impacts on asset ownership by women, or on the involvement of women in
                           household decisions.
 Afghanistan National      The interim evaluation found that the project increased the participation of women in local
 Solidarity Program II     governance and their awareness of village leadership and local governance services. Women
 (NSP2).                   in NSP areas were also found to have increased the occurrence of meetings between female
                           villagers and women from other villages, as well as district governments. But there was no
                           impact on the general extent of socialization between female villagers or the frequency of
                           female villagers leaving their compounds.
 Bolivia Social Investment The evaluation found that the share of women receiving prenatal care and the share of
 Fund II (SIF).            attended births increased significantly.
 Honduras Social           [Based on qualitative work] the project increased the utilization [of local health centers],
 Investment Fund III       especially for pregnant women and children due to the closer proximity of the health center and
 (FHIS)                    involvement of community members as health volunteers.
 Indonesia Urban Poverty The evaluation shows that the more educated, affluent, and official‐connected are more likely
 Program II.               to get elected into the key project community organizations responsible for allocating UPP2
                           resources. The project credit groups show a similar pattern, although the members are more
                           likely to be female. They are generally more educated, richer, and more likely to be employed
                           than women in the general population.
 Senegal National Rural    The number of female villagers on the Conseil rural significantly increased the likelihood of a
 Infrastructure Program    village receiving a completed project. This result suggests that while the elite capture
 (PNIR).                   phenomenon may be present, it was tempered either by the “voice” given to women in the CDD
                           decision‐making process, or there could have been co‐optation. There is no quantitative or
                           qualitative information to further explore the dynamics behind this finding.
 Sierra Leone GoBiFo.      There was no indication of spillover of local norms or institutional practices outside the
                           immediate project sphere; for example, women were no more likely to speak up in community
                           meetings held after the project ended.
Source: Based on Wong (2012)




                                                                                                                        17
Annex 2 –Relevant CDD Signaled by the CDD Community of Practice

Region        Country                                             Project
SAR            India         Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty Reduction Project;
                             Tamil Nadu Empowerment Project
SAR           Sri Lanka      Community Development and Livelihood Improvement “Gemi Diriya” project

SAR            Nepal         Nepal Poverty Alleviation Fund

SAR          Bangladesh      Social Investment Program

SAR           Pakistan       Poverty Alleviation Fund

SAR          Afghanistan     National Solidarity Project
ECA        Kyrgyz Republic   Village Investment Project

ECA          Azerbaijan      Rural Investment Project
EAP           Lao PDR        Poverty Reduction Fund Project
EAP          Philippines     KALAHI-CIDSS
EAP          Indonesia       PNPM Rural
EAP           Myanmar        National Community-Driven Development Project
EAP           Vietnam        Northern Mountain Poverty Reduction

AFR           Tanzania       Tanzania Social Action Fund

AFR            Malawi        Malawi Social Action Fund

AFR           Nigeria        Community and Social Development Project
AFR           Nigeria        FADAMA III
AFR           Rwanda         Rural Sector Support Project
                             Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside irrigation Project
AFR           Kenya          West Kenya CDD and Flood Mitigation Project
AFR           Uganda         Northern Uganda Social Action Fund

MNA            Yemen         Social Fund for Development

MNA           Morocco        National Initiative for Human Development (INDH)

LCR            Brazil        Bahia Rural Poverty Reduction Project
                             Bahia State Integrated Project Rural Poverty

LCR             Haiti        Rural Community-Driven Development Project




                                                                                                      18
Timeline

                           Jan-   Feb-   Mar-   Apr-   May-   Jun-            Aug-   Sep-   Oct-   Nov-   Dec-   Jan-   Feb-
                            15     15     15     15     15     15    Jul-15    15     15     15     15     15     16     16
   Concept note review
  Revised concept note
   Methodological note
               Analysis
      Preliminary Draft
 Review of Draft Report
         Final Revisions
  Final report delivered
         Dissemination




                                                                                                                               19
20
