                     95294
Getting
Financed
9 tips for community
joint ventures in tourism
©2014 The World Bank Group

1818 H Street N.W., Washington D.C., 20433

All rights reserved.

November 2014

Available online at www.wbginvestmentclimate.org

This work is a product of the staff of the World Bank Group with external contributions. The information included in this
work, while based on sources that the World Bank Group considers to be reliable, is not guaranteed as to accuracy and
does not purport to be complete. The World Bank Group accepts no responsibility for any consequences of the use of such
data. The information in this work is not intended to serve as legal advice.

The findings and views published are those of the authors and should not be attributed to International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the World Bank, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), or any other affiliated
organizations. Nor do any of the conclusions represent official policy of the World Bank or of its Executive Directors or the
countries they represent.

The denominations and geographic names in this publication are used solely for the convenience of the reader and
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of IFC, the World Bank, MIGA or other affiliates
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, area, or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its
boundaries or national affiliation.



Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because the World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution of this
work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, the World
Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; telephone: 202-522-2422; email: pubrights@worldbank.org.



Cover photo: The Sanctuary at Ol Lentille, Kenya
Inside photos: WWF-Namibia, The World Bank
Getting Financed
9 Tips For Community Joint Ventures In Tourism




                                                 photo credit: WWF-Namibia
    |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM




                                              Preface..........................................................................................................................3

                                              Setting the Scene.....................................................................................................4

                                              What Makes a Community—JV Partnership Work?...................................8

                                              What do Banks Want?.......................................................................................... 12

                                              9 Tips............................................................................................... 15

                                                       #1 Choose a marketable place or idea .................................. 17

                                                       #2 Invest in a competitive enabling environment ................ 19

                                                       #3 Strengthen governance structures...................................23

                                                       #4 Draw up equitable contracts.............................................25

    Contents                                           #5 Get creative about collateral........................................... 30

                                                       #6 Professionalize business operations ................................34

                                                       #7 Develop compelling proposals ........................................38

                                                       #8 Improve sector data......................................................... 40

                                                       #9 Maintain a community support system........................... 42

                                              Library card of useful resources......................................................................46




                                                                                                                                                                      photo credit: WWF-Namibia




2   |
                                                                                                  PREFACE
                                                                                                    THEME       |




Preface
      Like many organizations working in the tourism sector, we believe that private sector investment
      is one of the key drivers of development. Over the past few years, the private sector has been a
      central innovator in forging business partnerships with local communities for tourism purposes
      around the world.

      Having demonstrated some extraordinary development results, joint ventures increasingly need
      to demonstrate their commercial viability over the long term. Moving out of the donor- and
      grant-funded sphere and into the competitive capital markets in search of finance has posed a
      significant challenge.

      We have observed that many community joint venture partnerships contain high levels of risk and
      that this risk usually is too high for banks to assume. We have learned that this risk could be reduced
      to more acceptable levels in a number of ways—notably through better market-orientation and
      a more competitive enabling environment. This guide provides nine tips for all actors involved in
      this arena—including governments, the private sector, communities, banks, and nongovernmental
      organizations—to reduce risk and greatly improve joint ventures’ access to commercial finance.

      Thanks to the valuable contribution of the Government of Namibia and numerous community joint
      venture businesses, the following pages discuss the key issues facing the sector globally, provide
      guiding principles for creating more financially viable partnerships, and share some illustrations from
      one case study country, Namibia.

      We hope you find this learning process to be as helpful as we have, and we look forward to hearing
      your thoughts on how we can push this agenda forward.

      Sincerely,

      The World Bank Group (WBG) and World Wildlife Fund (WWF)

      #financingCJVs



                                                                                                                | 3
          THEME      |
                                                                                    JVs introduce a shared
                                                                                    responsibility for managing
                                                                                    and protecting key assets—
                                                                                    such as land, cultural
                                                                                    heritage, or wildlife—to the
                                                                                    local people and the private
                                                                                    sector players




photo credit: WWF-Namibia




          Setting the Scene
                            Joint ventures between communities and private investors in tourism have
                            proven to be a great thing when designed and managed well. They bring income,
                            jobs, and know-how directly to local residents who are often in remote areas.
                            They bring new products and new areas of the country into the tourism economy.
                            They also introduce a shared responsibility for managing and protecting key
                            assets—such as land, cultural heritage, or wildlife—to the local people and the
                            private sector players.




      4   |
                                                                                                           SETTING THE SCENE   |


    Case Study • Namibia: Delivering Impact
    Namibia is in the midst of a conservation revolution, exchanging generations of wildlife
    conflict, poaching, and unsustainable land-use practices for unparalleled levels of habitat
    protection, wildlife conservation, and sustainable development. This is taking place in the
    communal conservancies supported by tourism activities in remote areas of the country.


    Impressive Impacts:
    •	   Wildlife stocks are recovering. The rare endemic mountain zebra, near extinction in the
         early 1980s, is now roaming freely again in northwestern Namibia. Today Namibia is the
         only country with growing, free-roaming populations of black rhino, giraffe, and cheetah.

    •	   Local people have benefited as a result of job creation and cash generation. In 2012, the
         Community Based National Resource Management Programme—of which conservancies
         are an integral part—generated almost N$50 million (US$6 million) in direct benefits
         (cash returns to conservancies, employment remuneration, and in-kind contributions) to
         communities and created 1,512 full-time jobs and 11,223 part-time jobs.

    •	   Women are becoming involved in most aspects of conservancy management. In
         2007, for the first time, women were elected to chair two conservancies in northwestern
         Namibia, and recent trends indicate that mismanagement of finances is less likely if
         finances are handled by women. In 2012, 33 percent of conservancy committee members
         were women, and in 2013, they made up 49 percent of conservancy treasurers.

    •	   Global knowledge is increasing. Mongolia, Nepal, the United States, and 16 other
         countries have sent government delegations to learn directly from Namibia and apply key
         lessons back home.



A wealth of informative and useful literature is available on community JVs and their development
impact. See Library Card, page 46 for links to some examples, plus other resources.



The number of community JVs is growing globally
Africa has seen a significant rise in community JVs, from Kenya to Botswana, Mozambique, Zimbabwe,
and South Africa, and countries in Asia, the Pacific, and South America are following suit. Partnerships
are growing because both supply and demand are growing.


Supply is up
Many countries have begun awarding the rights to land and resources to local communities in a
way that allows “new” assets such as ‘natural capital’ to be brought to the market. Developing
assets on their own without capital and expertise is not easy for communities, so they may partner
with a private business. Development organizations increasingly recognize the role that tourism
can play in supporting community livelihoods, cultural heritage protection, and conservation. Such
organizations are initiating increasing numbers of projects to support community based tourism,
including promotion of JVs.




                                                                                                                               | 5
    |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM




                                      Demand is up
                                      Tourism is growing globally, and private investors need access to new opportunities and new
                                      assets. Changing trends in the consumer market increasingly demand greater sophistication,
                                      variety, and authenticity. Community JV lodges strike a chord with a growing number of
                                      responsibly minded travelers and, increasingly, with more traditional segments of luxury, family,
                                      and adventure travelers.



                                      JV lodges often struggle to access finance
                                      Despite their growing profile, JVs run up against many of the same barriers faced by other small and
                                      medium enterprises (SMEs) in developing countries. One of the most critical obstacles is access to
                                      commercial finance. The World Bank Enterprise Survey 2013 results indicate that globally, 31 percent
                                      of SMEs cite access to finance as a major constraint, rising substantially in lower-income countries. 1

                                      SMEs express a lot of frustration over the seemingly impossible task of getting a commercial loan,
                                      and most ventures are financed through private resources, friends and family, or development grants.
                                      Given the relative insecurity of these sources and the growing demands of the sector, the need to
                                      bring the banks into the equation is growing.



                                      Banks identify prohibitively high risks
                                      When banks consider the opportunity to finance community JVs, they identify a number of risks.
                                      In emerging destinations, the banks usually perceive these risks to be prohibitively high. For such
                                      businesses to increase their chances of getting commercial capital, they need to reduce these risks.
                                      The following tips contained in this guide cover the various ways that actors in this equation can
                                      reduce risk within the businesses. Banks want to be sure that mitigation mechanisms are in place and
                                      can be relied upon to manage risk.




                                                   Percentage of firms identifying access to finance as a major constraint:

                                                     50

                                                     40

                                                     30

                                                     20

    1. World Bank Enterprise Sur-                     10
    vey 2013: Eighteen indicators
    measure the availability of
    financing in 135 countries. The                    0
    results are based on surveys                             ALL      EAP      ECA       LAC       MNA       SA      AFR
    of more than 130,000 firms.

                                                   Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys Global Database, 2013



6   |
                                                                                                           SETTING THE SCENE       |

                               “We need capital at all stages of the business”
                                                                    Simonetta MUSSO, Journeys Namibia
                               “Our needs tend to change as the business grows. Right at the beginning we need startup
                               capital to plan and construct buildings, get licenses and permits, and develop the business
                               overall. From there, we might need project specific infrastructure to support the business—
                               like secondary roads, an airstrip, or bore holes for water. After that, we usually need working
                               capital or lines of credit. This might be to purchase initial inventory stock and make sure we
                               have enough liquidity for operations. Sometimes we could also apply for auto loans if we need
                               specific vehicles like game-viewing trucks, and then expansion capital is usually needed once
                               the business is booming (hopefully!) to upgrade facilities, build more rooms—or things like that.

     We need a variety of products from banks; some longer-term development financing—maybe of five years or more—as
     either equity or long-term debt; and some shorter-term credit loans.”




This note answers the following questions:
•	   Why is it so difficult for these ventures to get finance?

•	   What are the banks saying?

•	   How can the government, the operators, the communities, and other actors make obtaining
     financing easier for community JVs?

Taking into account the various challenges of this niche sector, those with ‘skin in the game’
are overwhelmingly positive. In a private sector survey by the Federation of Namibian Tourism
Association (FENATA) in 2010, the private sector and community organizations both said they
wanted to continue the JV business relationship. Ten of the 12 private sector interviewees said that
if they had the chance to do their project over again, they would certainly do so, and they would
advise others to do it too. All of them say, however, that the experience they have today, would
change the way they would go about it if they started again.

The experience of Namibia forms the basis of this note, drawing lessons and examples to illustrate
broader points made to wider audiences in Africa and beyond. Around the world, investors,
communities, governments, and other parties are recognizing historical mistakes and building on
lessons of the past, but a long road is ahead. People need to deepen their understanding of what
they must do to succeed in this arena and how to secure a well-financed, sustainable future for the
businesses, the communities they support, and the tourism destinations.




                                                                                                                                   | 7
|   GETTING FINANCE: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM                                                   PREFACE     |




        What Makes a Community—
        JV Partnership Work?
                              There are various motivations for establishing and promoting JVs. A partnership
                              model will not be appropriate in all cases, and other alternatives do exist for
                              achieving touristic, conservation, or social objectives. That said, JVs have the
                              potential to deliver extraordinary results for the private sector, the communities,
                              and the government if effectively planned and managed.




                              Different parties have different motivations
                              Broadly speaking, communities are primarily interested in increasing household incomes, the jobs, and
                              the skills training that the model can deliver for individual or collective advancement. Communities
                              may also recognize the value of better managed natural or cultural resources brought about as a
                              result of the “tourism incentive” from the presence of a lodge. These interests typically are shared by
                              the support sector of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and donors involved with communities
                              as well as the government. Governments also tend to be supportive of the growth and diversification
                              of the tourism sector and the resulting opportunities for promotion and nation branding. Although
                              other motivations come into play, the opportunity to develop a commercially attractive business is
                              the major incentive for the private sector. The concept is attractive because it affords them access
                              to an asset (natural or cultural) that they believe they can sell—and sell more effectively than other
                              opportunities available to them.




8   |
                                                                     WHAT MAKES A COMMUNITY—JV PARTNERSHIP WORK?                    |

JV partners have a spectrum of priorities
The more responsible players will also be motivated to support or generate a development
dividend for communities and the local area. The private sector approaches this responsibility in
a number of ways.

A social enterprise is an organization that applies commercial strategies to maximize improvements
in human and environmental well-being, rather than maximizing profits for external shareholders.
Social enterprises can be structured as for-profit or nonprofit.

A commercial enterprise is an organization that applies commercial strategies to maximize profits
for the owners or investors of the business. Many commercial enterprises consider themselves to
be responsible or to have social objectives, but these objectives are not the sole purpose of their
activity. Increasingly, responsible business operators recognize that commitment to good social and
environmental practices also contributes to the financial value of the business.

Most banks feel more comfortable financing enterprises that seek to responsibly maximize their
financial value and that are clearly operated as commercial enterprises. Other sources of finance
exist for social enterprises or nonprofit organizations.




    Case Study • Namibia: JV Demand
    Generally speaking, the tourism industry private sector understands and supports
    conservation and protection of Namibia’s natural resources, which are what the tourism
    sector sells. The private sector therefore invests in communal conservancies to sell a
    nature-based, wildlife product to consumers where limited alternatives exist in the country
    outside private game reserves.
    Management of Wilderness Safari’s Damaraland Camp, the first JV lodge in Namibia,
    highlighted additional motivations when they first made their investment, many of which
    directly impact the bottom line:
    “Firstly, it’s a seller. Tourists responded positively to the unusual degree of staff warmth
    and attention, which in turn can be partly ascribed to their own stake in the camp. Given
    the importance of word of mouth in marketing, this is significant.”
    “Secondly, it has boosted exposure through various awards,” such as the 2005 Tourism for
    Tomorrow Award for conservation and National Geographic’s Best Ecolodges 2013. “This
    has been beneficial in a highly competitive market where southern African safari lodges
    need to distinguish themselves.
    “Thirdly, it provides some security and comfort to Wilderness Safaris of the community’s
    support in the event that a problem arises from external sources, such as neighboring
    communities, local government, or other operators.”
    “Fourthly, the Namibian tourism product is dependent on maintenance of the wildlife
    and wilderness. Our Company Director and Camp Manager believed that local attitudes
                                                                                                      2. Ashley, C and Jones,
    to elephants, which cause enormous physical damage in the area and occasionally kill              B (2001) ‘Joint Ventures
    people, have become more positive since the lodge began2 .”                                       Between Communities and
                                                                                                      Tourism Investors: Experience
                                                                                                      in Southern Africa’
    For the private sector, sustainability = profitability. Serious entrepreneurs are not in          International Journal of
    business to just cover costs but to earn a living at a standard of their choosing. A business     Tourism Research Vol.3, No.2
    is viable only when operating costs are covered and the return on investment is high              3. FENATA (2010) ‘A Private
    enough to justify the original cash outlay to start the business 3.                               Sector Point of View:
                                                                                                      Conservancy Based Tourism
                                                                                                      Enterprises (CBTEs) in
                                                                                                      Namibia and the Business of
                                                                                                      Tourism’

                                                                                                                                    | 9
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM


                             Some fundamental factors increase the chance of JV success

                             The first, and probably most important factor is the commercial proposition or project concept.
                             Most JVs come about because the partnership provides the enterprise with access to a tourism
                             asset or product that is marketable and attractive to the consumer, or tourists.

                             Second, the right to use this asset for tourism purposes should be held by at least one of the
                             partners. This right is usually afforded to the community partner because it strengthens their
                             stake in the JV and provides them something tangible to bring to the deal. Awarding community
                             organizations such rights is a matter of effective legislation, although many destinations fail to
                             take it that far.

                             Having established the commercial proposition, a solid facilitation and brokering structure in the
                             form of NGOs and advisers who have valuable experience working directly with communities is
                             important. Research also shows that the success of JVs can be affected by the company philosophy,
                             trust, time invested, external market trends, the caliber and commitment of dedicated individuals
                             who want it to work.


                             The type of partnership affects results

                             Communities and the private sector have various choices in the JV models they select for their
                             engagement, depending on the legal context and the levels of risk to which each party is exposed.
                             Of the JV models available, three common examples follow.

                             •	   Private sector builds, operates, and sometimes transfers. In this scenario, a lodge operator
                                  enters a joint-venture agreement with a community partner for a fixed period, during which
                                  the community agrees to support the lodge and, in many cases, obtains the appropriate
                                  tenure rights for the business and manages the surrounding environment. In return,
                                  the lodge operator provides the capital and builds, manages, and markets the lodge. In
                                  addition, the lodge operator, within the framework of their agreement, can ensure that
                                  employment (within reason) comes from the community and a fee (which generally is
                                  based on the lodge’s performance, demonstrated by factors such as turnover) is paid to the
                                  community account. The community fee is important because it covers costs associated with
                                  community management of the land and contributes to community projects and support
                                  to local residents to offset the cost of living with wildlife. A minimum fee payment protects
                                  communities in case the lodge turnover is reduced; the minimum also motivates the lodge
                                  to perform well. An example of this model of JV is the Brandberg White Lady Lodge in the
                                  Tsiseb Conservancy, Namibia.

                             •	   Community and private sector invest (joint equity) and private sector operates. A number
                                  of opportunities exist for communities to access capital (often, at the initial stages, through
                                  donor funds) to invest in lodge operations with the aim of increasing their return or their share
                                  of ownership.

                                  ◆◆   In some cases, the community investment is in the form of a loan for new buildings; in return,
                                       the community partner receives an increased percentage of turnover that is based on the
                                       performance of the lodge. Unless the community partner can access 100 percent capital
                                       requirement, providing a loan for a higher return is generally considered better than a minority
                                       equity shareholding (it also may have tax advantages).

                                  ◆◆   In other instances, the community investment can be significant enough to cover construction
                                       of lodge buildings, which are rented out to an operator; in return, the community receives
                                       a percentage on turnover for the user’s rights to the area, as well as a rental fee on the
                                       structure. Etendenka Trail Camp, Namibia is an example of this JV model.



10   |
                                                                        WHAT MAKES A COMMUNITY—JV PARTNERSHIP WORK?   |
      ◆◆    Some JV structures fall between the preceding examples, whereby community partners
            become shareholders in the business (the operating company). Doro Nawas Lodge
            (Wilderness Safaris), for example, was able to raise capital for the conservancy to become
            an immediate 45 percent shareholder in the lodge. In this case, the conservancy has two
            potential income streams: a fee that is based on turnover that covers the right to use the
            land, and a dividend on return from the business. The minority shareholder usually has no
            right, however, to declare dividends.

•	    Community invests and private sector partner manages. In this case, the community owns
      the lodge and hires a management company to run the business. The management company
      earns a fee that is based on turnover (with performance incentives), and the community is
      fully exposed to the profit and loss of the business. An example of this JV structure is the
      Grootberg Lodge in ≠Khoadi-//Hôas Conservancy, which originally raised funding for the
      lodge through a grant from the European Union. In a relatively mature JV market, this model
      may become increasingly popular.




Is a community—JV partnership right for you?

             Do not consider JVs if:                              Do consider JVs if:
 •	        Communities express resistance
           or ambivalence                                •	   Communities are receptive and open to
                                                              the concept
 •	        There is no experienced support sector
           of NGOs                                       •	   Private sector demand exists for the
                                                              community’s asset
 •	        The private sector is expected to take
           over the state role of rural development      •	   The right to use the asset lies with at
           instead of supporting it                           least one of the partners (usually the
                                                              community)
 •	        The quality of the communities’ assets is
           not high enough                               •	   The tourism product is marketable
 •	        Communities (or another JV partner) do        •	   The JV concept broadly contributes to
           not have access or use rights to the asset         the national tourism sector goals and fits
                                                              with national marketing efforts
 •	        There is no market for the lodge’s
           product                                       •	   Land-use plans and zones account for
                                                              and accommodate JVs
 •	        JVs will expose communities to
           dangerously high risk                         •	   Private sector players can access finance
 •	        The regulatory environment is weak and        •	   Private sector players have responsible
           will not protect both parties                      credentials
 •	        Land-use plans do not include or protect      •	   A reliable, experienced support sector of
           tourism investment                                 NGOs is available
                                                         •	   The enabling environment will protect
                                                              the interests of both parties




                                                                                                                      | 11
                                                             If the bank is to finance a project,
                                                             understanding what they are
                                                             looking for is important. What do
                                                             they need to see in the project?
                                                             How do they make assessments?
                                                             What are their biggest concerns?



     What do Banks Want?
          All investors, banks, and commercial lenders need to be confident that they are
          investing in or lending to a sound, financially viable business. They are concerned
          about mechanisms for injecting capital, mechanisms for the return of their
          capital, and dividends and interest payments. Equity investors are particularly
          concerned about protections for their investment and how they will be able to
          exit at the end of the investment period. Banks are especially focused on the
          adequacy of the project’s cash flow to service debt obligations and the securities
          the borrower can provide.




              All lenders require projects to meet minimum criteria before proceeding with
              financing.

              Lenders assess the following criteria:

              •	   Will the business be viable?

              •	   Is the sponsor credible?

              •	   What collateral is available?

              •	   Is this project profitable enough for us to take the risk?




12   |
                                                                         WHAT DO BANKS WANT?             |


What are banks looking for in a transaction?
In practice, banks expect the project concept and business plan to be sound, well researched, and in
line with market assumptions. The venture will be sufficiently profitable (over time) to service debt
and generate dividends and returns for the owners. The sponsor of the project is experienced in the
business, is trustworthy, and has good credit history or relationships with creditors. Lenders need to
feel confident the sponsor will lead and execute the business plan effectively.

In the event of default or nonrepayment of loans, the banks want to be sure that their rights of
recovery are protected and the collateral is of sufficient value to recoup their losses. Collateral
must also be marketable and transferable in nature (for example, land or property assets). Finally,
the return on equity invested or the interest on debt accrued from the project must justify the
cost of ongoing loan administration and the opportunity cost of financing other, lower-risk
opportunities.




    Why we struggle to finance community–
    private sector lodges in Namibia
                                          Christo VILJOEN, Head,
                First National Bank (FNB) Agri & Tourism, Namibia
         Q: 	 What have been the main barriers?

         A: 	 Often, our biggest challenge is to determine the financial viability of the ventures.
              Business plans are sometimes incomplete and the risks involved are not properly
              addressed. Collateral is important. Repayment ability is even more important. We
              would like to see an up-to-date history of financial performance that indicates good
              financial discipline and financial management. We use this to determine the future
              repayment ability of the business—but many ventures are unable to deliver this.

         Q. 	 What is the most important deciding factor for you?

         A. 	 Its the project sponsor—without a doubt! Since cash flow projections are done
              on assumptions and these can obviously change, we put a huge reliance on the
              person running the business. Do they have the necessary experience to manage
              a business of this nature? Can we trust that person to inform the bank in time of
              any challenges and deviations on the cash flow? Will he/she be able to come up
              with solutions to challenges and make things work out?

         Q:	 What advice would you give to the sector?

         A: 	 I always tell prospective clients to prepare properly before coming to see us.
              Your business plan is key. I can’t overstate how important it is that it addresses
              upfront our main concerns and provides good detail on marketing, management
              structure, expertise and a SWOT analysis as well as detailed financial history and
              projections (i.e. Balance Sheets, Income Statements and Cash Flow Projections)




                                                                                                         | 13
14   |
                  THEME    |




9 Tips
9 ways
community-joint
ventures can be
more attractive
to financiers




                          | 15
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM




     9 Tips

                        Tips                  Governments   Private Sector Communities Support Sector   Banks

                    1
                    Choose a marketable
                    place or idea
                                                                ¡             ¡             ¡

                    2
                    Invest in a competitive
                    enabling environment
                                                 ¡

                    3
                    Strengthen governance
                    structures
                                                 ¡              ¡             ¡             ¡

                    4
                    Draw up equitable
                    contracts
                                                 ¡              ¡             ¡             ¡

                    5
                    Get creative about
                    collateral
                                                 ¡                                                      ¡

                    6
                    Professionalize
                    business operations
                                                 ¡              ¡

                    7
                    Develop compelling
                    proposals
                                                                ¡                           ¡

                    8
                    Improve sector data          ¡              ¡                           ¡           ¡

                    9
                    Maintain a community
                    support system
                                                 ¡                            ¡             ¡

16   |
                                                                     #1 CHOOSE A MARKETABLE PLACE OR IDEA                   |

                                #1 Choose a marketable
                                place or idea
                                Money flows to bankable places and ideas. This means that the
                                inherent marketability of the natural or cultural assets on which the
                                tourism product will be based must be first class or the business
                                will never get off the ground. The history books are full of well-
                                intentioned projects that have failed because of the insufficient
                                quality and commercial appeal of the underlying assets.

                                Most successful JVs come about because the partnership provides the enterprise
 This tip is relevant for the   with access to a tourism asset or product that is marketable. Fundamentally,
private sector, communities,    entering into a partnership with a community brings a set of unique challenges; to
   and the support sector       compensate, the “product” must bring a set of unique or competitive benefits to
                                the business. This means that the underlying asset must be strong, such as a good
                                wildlife base, an area of spectacular beauty, or a rich cultural heritage. This asset
                                often is made more desirable because opportunities to access it are scarce or are
                                unavailable to the private sector without a partnership arrangement.

                                When the private sector begins to search for a suitable lodge site, various market-
                                based elements influence the decision.

                                •	   Quality of the resource base (attraction value). When the project is
                                     conceptualized around a natural asset (a protected area, wildlife population,
                                     or site of special beauty), the site’s value can be measured by biodiversity and
                                     density of wildlife, quality of the natural environment, elevation, wind, tides,
                                     natural water availability, and so forth. Similar principles apply for cultural or
                                     historical assets.

                                •	   Current tourism offer and flow. Lodges (even those that pride themselves
                                     on “wilderness”) usually benefit from being located on existing or emerging
                                     tourist circuits, clusters, or routes, relatively close to service centers with a
                                     critical mass of other facilities. Tourists increasingly have complex and varied
                                     itineraries, visiting several accommodation facilities and destinations in one trip.
                                     JVs will realize the importance of being able to plug into these trade paths to
                                     increase their chances of visitation. Forging strategic alliances with other tourism
                                     providers in a given area also presents potential benefits for joint marketing,
                                     problem solving, and trade.

                                •	   Access and infrastructure provision. Visitors need to be able to access the
                                     lodge and use the asset base once there—for a price that is appropriate. This
                                     means that road networks; proximity and capacity of airstrips; and availability
                                     of water, electricity, and sewage facilities will come under consideration.

                                Other non-market–based factors also come into play, such as availability of
                                destination support (through government programs, marketing, and funding);
                                security of tenure and land availability; and the quality of potential partners in the
                                business—in this case, communities.




                                                                                                                            | 17
     |    GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM


     The following is a typical checklist of market and non-market–       Without a commercially attractive asset base, developing a
     based site characteristics. Evaluators can use such checklists to    commercially attractive tourism product such as a lodge is
     score the competitiveness of each of these components, and           difficult. If the lodge cannot attract visitors, it will have a very
     compare to other sites. Is this really a marketable place or idea?   limited life expectancy, and banks are unlikely to lend to it.


         Infrastructure                                        Score
         Roads
         Air
         Power
         Water
         Site Characteristics
         Quality Natural Features (e.g. natural beauty,
                                                                                    Key takeaways for
         density of wildlife, elevation)                                            managing risk
         Quality Cultural Features (e.g. heritage buildings,
         site-specific traditions and history)
                                                                                    Consider site selection and evaluate
         Project Developmental Viability
                                                                                    assets.
         Size                                                                       The private sector can draw up
                                                                                    comprehensive checklists to determine
         Access
                                                                                    the quality of the site or asset, with a
         Opportunity                                                                focus on the market-based criteria. Several
         Viability                                                                  opportunities can be evaluated at the same
                                                                                    time to ensure the best one is selected.
         Land
         Tenure
                                                                                    Control supply-driven opportunities.
         Ownership
                                                                                    There is a temptation for Government
         Cost                                                                       authorities and the supporting sector of
         Environmental                                                              NGOs to identify and push JV opportunities
         Sensitivity                                                                toward the private sector. The criteria for
                                                                                    selecting these opportunities may not be
         Impact
                                                                                    primarily market driven, and potential private
         Social                                                                     sector players need to know when to walk
         Openness to Tourism                                                        away. The private sector must be allowed the
         Settlements                                                                opportunity to provide input into this process.

         Resettlement Opportunity
                                                                                    Support private sector selection
         Impact
                                                                                    process with data.
         Tourism
                                                                                    The state can support business in making
         Attractions                                                                decisions by highlighting areas of strategic
         Supply                                                                     interest and by providing data, statistics,
         Demand                                                                     and other information in an easily digestible
                                                                                    format to prospective investors.
         Access to Markets
         Institutional
         Capacity
         Development Planning
         Support
         Administrative Barriers
                                                                          4. World Bank Group (2010), ‘Facilitating Large scale tourism resorts in
     Source: World Bank Group (2010) 4 Library Card                       Mozambique: The Integrated Anchor Investment Generation Approach’




18   |
                                                    #2 INVEST IN A COMPETITIVE ENABLING ENVIRONMENT              |

                              #2 Invest in a competitive
                              enabling environment
                              A sound and competitive enabling environment for JVs and
                              respective partners is very important. The policy and regulatory
                              framework should make this niche a competitive and attractive
                              alternative to more traditional forms of tourism enterprise. The
                              framework has to protect the interests of all parties involved,
                              providing clear definitions, and unambiguous guidelines on what is
                              allowed under law, thereby reducing risk and providing a mechanism
                              for protecting a business’s rights and assets.


                              The enabling environment is loosely defined as the set of policies, regulations, and
   This tip is relevant for   practices that stimulate and support the effective functioning of organizations or
       governments            business entities. The more competitive the enabling environment, the easier it is
                              for all businesses to set up, operate, and grow, including the community–private
                              sector partnerships.




The enabling

environment

should create the

opportunity and also

allow the opportunity

to fulfill its potential




                                                                                                                     | 19
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM




                                     Case Study • Namibia: Creating the opportunity
                                     An important emphasis of tourism policy in Namibia has been to actively promote the
                                     increased involvement of rural communities in the tourism industry and to ensure their greater
                                     access to benefits accruing from tourism enterprises. Accordingly, the policy and legislative
                                     environment has undergone significant reform over the two decades.

                                     Community JVs have been formed on communal land. Often remote, scenic, and with wildlife
                                     populations, communities on these lands have been granted the opportunity—through the
                                     1996 amendments to the Nature Conservation Act—to demarcate “communal conservancies.”
                                     A communal conservancy is a legally recognized management unit whereby communities have
                                     the conditional rights to use and benefit from their wildlife resources. This same act requires
                                     that conservancies have uncontested and demarcated boundaries, have a legal personality and
                                     a management structure by virtue of their constitutions, and adopt wildlife and conservancy
                                     plans. Once conditions are met (approved by the Ministry of Environment and Tourism) and
                                     duly registered, conservancies are gazetted (an announcement is published in a public journal
                                     or newspaper of record) and constitute a formal resource use and allocation unit.

                                     A resource management unit and related tourism asset has now effectively been created—
                                     an unfenced and wildlife-rich wilderness product, complete with its own management and
                                     wildlife protection body (the conservancy). Except for heavily restricted national parks
                                     and private lands, these areas represent some of the last and most valuable nature-based
                                     tourism assets in Namibia and hold an attraction for the private sector.

                                     The policy decision to award communities the right to benefit from the wildlife in communal
                                     areas created an enabling environment for tourism development. As legal entities,
                                     conservancies can enter into partnerships with the private sector to establish lodges or
                                     other tourism services on the conservancy land. The normal procedure for acquiring a land
                                     lease is applicable, as are the national rules and regulations for operating a business.


                                In Southern Africa and elsewhere, policy has created similar opportunities. In each case, a
                                legislative or policy change has been necessary to devolve rights over marketable assets to the local
                                level, but the form has varied enormously. Examples include the devolution of appropriate authority
                                to councils under CAMPFIRE5 in Zimbabwe; the land claims process in South Africa; and a policy
                                agreement between two ministries in Botswana that resident communities should have preferential
                                and cheap access to land leases in certain designated areas. In each case, the policy context has
                                generally moved in favor of communities, but several policy and legal constraints remain—notably,
                                secure land tenure.

                                In every situation, without secure land tenure, community JVs remain exposed to high levels of risk,
                                which presents a challenge to securing commercial loans.

                                The framework should also allow the opportunity to fulfill its potential. Responsible private sector
                                operators tend to prefer a tighter business regulatory environment to one that is looser, or open
                                to interpretation. Weak, complicated, and opaque business environments can severely hamper
                                business operations, affect profitability, and deter investment economywide. Specifically in the
                                subsector of joint-venture lodges, the following regulatory issues have a particular impact on
                                financial performance.
     5 CAMPFIRE is the Com-
     munity Areas Management    •	     Length of leases: Some JVs operate on freehold land where the landowner brings the land into
     Programme for Indigenous
     Resources in Zimbabwe.            the deal as an equity contribution; most, however, lease state or communally held land from
                                       the community partner or the state. Although maintaining some control over the land is in the
                                       interest of the landowner, short lease terms—often without an automatic renewal—present


20   |
                                                                       #2 INVEST IN A COMPETITIVE ENABLING ENVIRONMENT   |
     problems for the private sector and their financial backers. A community JV takes an average
     of three years to break even and five years to become profitable. If the lease is for only 10 years,
     establishing long-term investment interest in the market is difficult. Once initial payback of capital
     investment is completed, businesses have just a few years to receive a return on investments,
     making it difficult to justify comprehensive planning, development, and operating a project of
     this nature. One result of this can be the propensity to favor noncapital intensive and temporary
     developments (such as tented camps) instead of more permanent or higher quality physical
     infrastructure. In the U.S. National Parks System—and, indeed, in many regulated concessions
     programs—the provision of legally enforceable preferential lease-renewal rights for lodges that
     have made significant investments brings comfort to investors.

     Lease duration and terms of renewal are usually specified in law and it falls to the lawmakers
     to review the options. Extending the length of head leases to the community allows for longer
     subleases to the JVs (for example, 20 years). This enhances investors’ prospects for generating
     returns and encourages long-term commitment. Joint-venture lodges carry relatively higher risk
     than other similar lodging businesses. Given the business risks involved and the variability of
     returns because of seasonality, investors generally prefer a longer holding period. Commercial
     banks also prefer longer leases when considering lending because longer leases create
     confidence in the business community. More importantly, longer leases are beneficial to the
     conservancy because they increase the private sector operator’s commitment through increased
     reinvestments, enhancing the product and service offering. A stronger product strengthens the
     brand name for the concept and helps attract more investments and financing.

•	   Ability to sublease: Granting community partners rights over commercially attractive land
     or resources is of critical importance to the success of the JV model, allowing those partners
     to bring inherent value to the deal. In most cases, community partners may be awarded land
     or use rights to the land or the natural resources found there. From a lending perspective,
     however, these rights must be legally transferable. When lending to a business, banks need
     to feel secure that the land on which the business depends is controlled by the business,
     and this usually occurs through a sublease from the community to the JV. In many emerging
     economies, the right to sublease is either not permissible or not well articulated in law. Without
     this provision, the lending proposition carries significant risk. Governments can play a role here
     by reviewing the relevant legislation so that leases can be better aligned with the commercial
     realities of the businesses that are likely to be developed on those lands.

•	   Fees, size, and traversing rights: To provide confidence to the private sector, these elements
     must also be effectively regulated, allowing market forces to dictate the appropriate
     parameters. Businesses need appropriate rental pricing as part of their operational costs,
     and they also need adequate space to be able to run their activities without unreasonable
     interference from competitors or from the local community. The community, however, as long-
     term residents of the area, also needs to be confident that their traversing and use rights over
     land are protected and clearly laid out; these rights should be stated in the JV contract.

•	   Taxes and payments: Taxes on land (in addition to lease and other partnership fees) are
     another potential expense or barrier to profitability for JV lodges. In some countries, taxes are
     levied as a percentage of turnover, not of profits, which may put a significant burden on small
     enterprises. The suggestion has been made that because most JV businesses contribute a
     disproportionately high amount to local economic development and community welfare, they
     should be tax exempt. This is a philosophy that has been adopted to an extent in, for example,
     the United States, Canada, and Germany, with policies that provide for tax incentives to
     encourage business development on indigenous land and in areas of low socioeconomic status.
     In Australia, indigenous community shareholding organizations are income tax exempt, but
     nonindigenous shareholders generally are not. A reduction in income tax for nonindigenous
     investors and for the JV could encourage more development, and this suggestion has been put
     forward to the Australian Parliament.


                                                                                                                         | 21
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM


                             •	     Control over asset quality: The private sector partner negotiates the deal with the community
                                    and therefore expects that the community has the ability to maintain its end of the bargain,
                                    particularly in the management and preservation of the asset base on which the tourism
                                    product relies, such as wildlife. This expectation relates to the legal ability to patrol boundaries,
                                    maintain infrastructure, prevent degradation, and manage conflicting land uses. In cases such
                                    as Namibia, where the community has rights to “use” and “benefit” from wildlife resources but
                                    does not own the land, this responsibility can become problematic. Although legislation exists
                                    to prevent other tourism ventures from entering the area, “using” the wildlife, or even leasing
                                    land directly from the government within conservancy boundaries, the law may not be always
                                    strictly enforced. This threat of competition and poor tourism planning at the national level can
                                    leave JVs in a fundamentally insecure and uncompetitive position.




                                  WBG helps improve the tourism sector’s
                                  enabling environment
                                  Through the Trade & Competitiveness (T&C) Global Practice, the WBG works across 40+
                                  destinations with government clients to identify policies that promote growth, while helping
                                  identify and remove impediments to the smooth functioning of markets. This typically involves
                                  support to improve the tourism business environment through strong legal and regulatory
                                  reform, investment policy frameworks, business taxation systems, and policies that unlock
                                  constraints to market competition.




                                  Key takeaways for managing risk
                                  Create a conducive general business climate.
                                  An attractive environment in which to invest and do business enables all businesses to
                                  function more efficiently, operate to their potential, and generate healthy profits—an
                                  important indicator for lenders.

                                  Provide sufficiently long lease terms.
                                  Lease terms that allow for businesses to plan and invest effectively boost confidence in the
                                  market and allow for greater returns – both financially for the business and in terms of more-
                                  predictable, long-term community impact.

                                  Grant the ability to transfer land rights.
                                  Clarifying rights of ownership and transferral in relation to business assets and land reduces
                                  risks for lenders.

                                  Apply appropriate taxes and permits.
                                  The level of taxes and charges must strike a sound balance between what the business earnings
                                  can support and what the business contributes to the community and broader social objectives.

                                  Provide long-term land-use planning and control.
                                  Community JVs benefit from setting up in areas with a clear state-led vision in terms of tourism
                                  and a mechanism for controlling other development that may threaten this subsector. Such
                                  measures reduce risk for the investment and enhance its operational viability.



22   |
                                                                #3 STRENGTHEN GOVERNANCE STRUCTURES                     |

                             #3 Strengthen governance
                             structures
                             Corporate governance is an important consideration for all lenders.
                             Who is ultimately responsible for key business decisions? How
                             effectively is the contract managed? Who is managing the relationship,
                             keeping the books, and auditing the company? What happens in the
                             event of a dispute, and how will the bank’s investment be protected?
                             Solid assurances and answers to these questions mitigate risk from the
                             banks’ perspective and increase the likelihood of securing financing.



                             Corporate governance is the system of structures, rights, duties, and obligations
  This tip is relevant for   by which corporations are directed and controlled. The governance structure is
governments, the private     a mechanism for monitoring the actions, policies, and decisions of corporations,
  sector, communities,       including the distribution of responsibilities among different participants, such as
                             the board of directors, managers, shareholders, creditors, auditors, regulators, and
 and the support sector
                             other stakeholders.

                             In the case of community JVs, in which one of the parties (the community
                             organization) is relatively unknown to banks and is usually inexperienced, this need
                             for a strong structure carries even more weight. Although substantial differences in
                             capacity may exist between the owner and the operator of a JV lodge, banks require
                             very clear explanations within the partnership contract relating to the following:

                             •	   The management of the business

                             •	   The monitoring of the business

                             •	   Systems for dispute resolution

                             JVs must have the support of properly trained company clerical staff and be aware of
                             the specific requirements of the relevant company code and the contractual agreement
                             between the two parties. JVs should also have access to external professional advisers
                             (lawyers and accountants) to ensure compliance. These measures demonstrate an
                             understanding of sound corporate governance and provide increased confidence to
                             external financiers.

                             Troubleshooting dispute resolution. Communities may comprise disparate groups
                             of people and interests, and the potential exists for disagreement that may end up
                             impacting the business partnership. To reduce this risk, JVs must be able to demonstrate
                             a clear separation between community conflict resolution and the day-to-day business
                             operations.

                             In most cases, community management committees share the private sector’s
                             frustration with unclear lines of responsibility and communication between
                             such groups as traditional authorities, regional councils, other stakeholders, and
                             themselves. Some destinations have called for a greater role by the state and some
                             by NGO facilitators. Whichever group provides this valuable support must be well
                             trained, neutral, and business savvy.


                                                                                                                        | 23
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM




                               Case Study • Namibia: Banks cite unclear
                               corporate governance
                               A number of “business models” exist, and the exact nature of the relationship between the
                               parties is not always clear—either to the parties or to outside entities, such as banks. In some
                               JVs, parties (shareholders, managers, or directors) may hold more than one role, and external
                               financiers feel that many JVs could significantly improve their governance structures to
                               provide greater comfort.

                               Much of the contract relates to the structure of ownership of the business and its assets—namely,
                               who holds the lease, who owns the property, and who operates the business. Many variations of
                               business structure are in place in Namibia, and some overlap in terms of governance.

                               The notion of ‘ownership’, particularly of land and assets related to community land, is a sensitive
                               issue across much of the world, especially in Southern Africa, and Namibia is no exception. The
                               term ‘ownership’ is used here because it influences business performance and the willingness of
                               commercial entities to lend to such businesses. In the financial community, the precise structure of
                               a business, the nature and value of the assets, and where they appear on the balance sheet (or who
                               owns them) are of critical importance in making a lending decision.


                             Corporate governance principles and codes have been developed in different countries and
                             issued from stock exchanges, corporations, institutional investors, or associations of directors with
                             the support of governments and international organizations. However, compliance with these
                             governance recommendations is not always mandated by law. Introducing transparency into
                             governance structures is considered good corporate practice, and can be effective in bringing
                             external backers on board.


                               Key takeaways for managing risk
                               Ensure strong corporate governance                   hand, if necessary. This process should
                                                                                    be reinforced by an explicit separation
                               structures.
                                                                                    (within the governance structure) between
                               Partnership agreements can extrapolate from          community conflict and business operations.
                               global good practices codes of conduct to pro-
                               vide a reassuringly strong governance structure      Establish a third party as mediator.
                               that will hold up under the scrutiny of lenders.
                                                                                    A dedicated mediation service provided by
                                                                                    the government or a neutral party is a must
                               Embrace transparency.
                                                                                    to further reduce banks’ perception of risk,
                               Consistently communicating roles and responsi-       and the mediator’s physical presence will
                               bilities among all the various parties and widely    help in brokering trust and understanding
                               publicizing the governance structure can help to     among and between parties.
                               reduce not only suspicion and internal conflict
                               but also perceived risks for banks.                  Construct clearly understood
                                                                                    contracts.
                               Provide avenues for dispute
                                                                                    Contracts must be designed to ensure that the
                               resolution.
                                                                                    business operations are viable and that neither
                               A clearly laid-out process for dealing with          party feels disadvantaged. Contracts must be
                               disputes between or among the parties is             clear and easily understood, and both parties
                               important, with third-party mediators on             must agree to adhere to the terms.



24   |
                                                                                              #4 DRAW UP EQUITABLE CONTRACTS               |

                                                   #4 Draw up equitable
                                                   contracts
                                                   Contracts are the core of the community-private sector partnership.
                                                   They are constructed to specify mutual responsibilities and goals
                                                   and are crucial for avoiding trouble later. Occasionally, contracts
                                                   place such emphasis on the benefits and expectations of the
                                                   community partner that the needs and expectations of the business
                                                   partner become secondary. This practice puts great pressure on
                                                   businesses to perform financially and increases the perception of
                                                   risk from the lenders’ perspective.


  This tip is relevant for the                     Contracts should specify that the partnerships
 private sector, communities,                      involve certain rights and duties
    and the support sector
                                                   The parties have a mutual right to control the enterprise, a right to share in the
                                                   profits, and a duty to share in any losses incurred. Each partner has a fiduciary
                                                   responsibility, owes a standard of care to the other members, and has the duty to
                                                   act in good faith in matters that concern the common interest or the enterprise.


                                                    Standard components of partnership
                                                    agreements
                                                    •	   Main purpose and parties

                                                    •	   Key definitions of terms that will be used

                                                    •	   Key operational clauses, such as leasehold, user rights, operating fee, payment
                                                         schedule, duration of agreement, and development and maintenance of lodges

                                                    •	   What the parties are not allowed to do

                                                    •	   What the parties are supposed to do

                                                    •	   How the agreement between the parties will be managed

                                                    •	   What happens when the parties disagree or do not do what they are
                                                         supposed to do—how this will be resolved

                                                    •	   Legal requirements to ensure both parties comply with the agreement

                                                    •	   What employment and empowerment needs are required

                                                    •	   Signing Page—signed by the authorized representatives of both parties

                                                    •	   Appendices to the agreement, which may include the financial and technical
                                                         offers of the operators, empowerment and environmental management
                                                         plans, proof that the operator can access the necessary funds, company
5 NACSO and WWF (2011) ‘Tips for Joint Venture
                                                         registration forms, and mechanisms for interpreting key terms
Partnerships in tourism: A Handbook for Building
Local Partnerships between Private Operators        Source: NACSO and WWF (2011) 5 Library Card
and Conservancies in Namibia’



                                                                                                                                           | 25
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM


                             From a lending perspective, the contract is of fundamental importance. Banks are primarily
                             concerned with the profitability of the business, the governance structure behind the business,
                             which partner has control of the assets, and what will happen to the business in the event of
                             problems. In drafting the contract, these issues must be clearly articulated and agreed upon.

                             Community–private sector partnerships can be challenging but rewarding ventures for all parties.
                             The partnership and the business must be pursued as one. If the business is not working well, the
                             partnership will suffer; if the partnership is not working well, the goals of the company may not be
                             met—particularly with regard to the management approach, the way staff members behave, the
                             product being offered, and the way the product is marketed. At times, tradeoffs may have to be
                             made between what is good for the partnership and what is good for business. Those tradeoffs
                             must be carefully evaluated and an equitable balance struck as far as possible.

                             The following issues typically covered in the partnership contract have been known to cause
                             stress to the business and investors and should be approached with care:

                             1.	   Selection of the partnership model. The financial obligations of the business to community
                                   partners vary significantly, from true equity JVs to lease agreements to simple operating
                                   contracts. The financial implications of each model for the respective partners vary considerably
                                   and will also impact the business. Lenders typically feel more comfortable with agreements
                                   that clearly demonstrate a fair sharing of risk and reward, in which the needs of the community
                                   and private sector partners are aligned and in balance. This ensures that each party has similar
                                   incentives to make the contract work effectively.

                             2.	 Expectations of the community. Typically, businesses have contractual requirements to
                                 contribute to social development goals and projects and, sometimes, other financial requests
                                 that fall outside of the contract. Unexpected costs can damage the business and make earnings
                                 unpredictable, thus increasing risk and discouraging lenders.

                             3.	 Length of the partnership agreement. In JV partnerships, duration is a key issue, and it often
                                 is where communities and companies start with radically different needs. Communities and
                                 governments who are just entering the tourism sector often do not want to commit themselves
                                 and their members for decades to come, while companies want plenty of time to generate
                                 adequate returns on investment. This issue may require considerable discussion, negotiation, and
                                 compromise.

                             4.	 Community partner roles in operations. Perceived confusion between the roles of the parties
                                 in relation to management and corporate governance can represent risks. Outside of the
                                 community–private sector partnership sphere, lodge operators typically have the right to manage
                                 their operations without interference from lodge owners or other third parties as long as they
                                 operate within the law and the terms of the agreement. These partnerships often are subject
                                 to contractual obligations to source or hire staff members from within the local community. In
                                 general, this practice has had substantial positive impacts on wildlife management and asset
                                 maintenance by engaged community members, and it provides even greater results when a real
                                 investment in training is made. When little training is provided, however, the private sector prefers
                                 to source more productive staff members from elsewhere. In times of economic pressure, this
                                 contractual requirement may make managing costs to stay viable very difficult for businesses.

                             5.	 Manifestation of underlying distrust in overly restrictive contracts. Occasionally, a pervasive
                                 assumption exists (on both sides) that unless every detail is negotiated and tied down, one
                                 partner will exploit the other. For the private sector, this attitude leaves very little room for
                                 flexibility in difficult times, and little room for creativity or space to prove their responsibility
                                 or development impact in other ways. This lack of trust may be further compounded by a
                                 lack of knowledge or understanding by individuals or groups within communities of what the
                                 contract contains.



26   |
                                                                                           #4 DRAW UP EQUITABLE CONTRACTS              |
6.	 Structured communication. Most contracts designate the need for JV management committees
    composed of both private sector and community representatives. Such committees are
    supposed to meet at designated intervals (monthly, quarterly, etc.) so both parties can inform
    one another of operational responsibilities and provide business performance updates. Such
    meetings can foster trust, confidence, and knowledge sharing between both parties. If these
    meetings do not take place, communication can become ad hoc leading to distrust and a lack of
    information flow.


Quality advice from neutral third parties
A further barrier in the design and negotiation of the agreements can be the quality of advice
from neutral third parties, such as government authorities or local NGOs. If inappropriate advice
is provided the resulting contractual emphasis can be on ‘money extraction’ from the business
leading to lower profitability. Although participants have a large interest in getting money out of the
business (to pay conservancy fees and drive local community development), tourism businesses are
capital intensive. Money-oriented structures provide little incentive to reinvest but a big incentive to
withdraw capital quickly, to “drip-feed” capital injections, and to adopt transfer pricing policies that
have the potential to damage local enterprises.




  Case Study • Namibia:
  Exploring nonfinancial returns
  While negotiations often revolve around financial percentages, both companies and
  communities have other non-financial objectives as well. The company may seek
  significant benefits from, for example, measures to boost local security, improved
  environmental management and cleanliness, and cultural events being made accessible
  to tourists. For the community, terms of negotiation may revolve around training,
  development of spin-off enterprises, and traversing rights over land.

  Research conducted by Ashley and Jones in 2001 shows the importance that communities put on
  a range of livelihood concerns. During negotiations with Wilderness Safaris, the Torra Conservancy
  members pressed harder for increased commitment to senior-level training and the transfer of
  ownership, than for a 1 percent increase in revenue share. They also highlighted the importance of
  jobs near their farms, even if they paid less than city jobs, because they could continue working as
  farmers7. An alternative partnership with another company was rejected, despite potential high
  returns, partly because it would have limited access to a spring used in drought.


  Financial dashboard for communities
  The community partner needs to see information regarding the operations of the lodge
  business in a clearly visible and logical way, much like the car’s dashboard for checking speed,
  temperature, and fuel. In Namibia, some lodges regularly present business performance in
  a simple, graphic way on a financial dashboard and talk through aspects such as occupancy
  levels, payments to government and conservancy, increase or decrease in certain expense
  line items compared with the previous months, and so forth. Namibia has found that when                  7 Ashley, C and Jones, B
  partners have open, transparent discussions regarding the operations and performance of the              (2001), ‘Joint Ventures
                                                                                                           Between Communities and
  business, the trust created helps the relationship to flourish. The financial dashboard can be a         Tourism Investors: Experience
  valuable tool.                                                                                           in Southern Africa’ Interna-
                                                                                                           tional Journal of Tourism
                                                                                                           Research Vol.3, No.2



                                                                                                                                       | 27
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM




                               Experience from the mining sector: Published
                               contracts for transparency
                               An increasing number of diverse organizations are calling for contract transparency in mining,
                               including Revenue Watch Institute, the International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank Group.
                               “Countries have no justification for secrecy,” insists Rashad Kaldany of the International Finance
                               Corporation (IFC). “All of these agreements will be made public in future.” The Extractive
                               Industries Transparency Initiative was launched in 2003, with the goal of asking countries and
                               companies to publicly disclose information of all financial payments in the mining, gas, and oil
                               industries to enable citizens to see how much money is generated and how that money is spent.
                               Such publication in the tourism JV arena would help to educate partners on terms agreed, build
                               trust between partners, and set benchmarks for balanced, equitable deals.



                                                                                                                           photo credit: WWF-Namibia




28   |
                                                                                      #4 DRAW UP EQUITABLE CONTRACTS           |

Key takeaways for managing risk
Explore a range of deal structures
Different financial structures bring different rights and duties, with correspondingly different risk levels for communities
and impacts on profitability.

Develop a set of principles and standardize contracts
Contract templates for similar types of partnerships provide JVs with structure and good practice clauses on rights
and duties that have been tried and tested elsewhere. The following “win-win” principles could be considered:

•	   Clear definition of profit motive—either fully commercial or quasi-commercial entities

•	   Transparent risk-sharing structure, reducing pressure on lodge revenues

•	   Reconfigured employment obligation to allow greater flexibility and add training requirements

Strive for greater transparency
Enhanced clarity and transparency of contracts is necessary to create market confidence in the partnerships. NGOs and
other supporters can assist by developing transparency platforms and publishing contracts.

Employ professionals
Ventures may hire reputable lawyers and accountants—in addition to the supporting organizations in the community–
private sector partnership sphere—for advice on negotiating the partnership contract.

Maximize nonfinancial community benefits
Explore, define, and commit to nonfinancial obligations that safeguard or improve communities’ access to economic
opportunities without directly impacting profitability.

Recognize that contractual agreements have implications for the bottom line
Everything agreed to contractually will have a direct or indirect effect on profitability and, as a result, an effect on the
business’s prospects for raising commercial finance. Community staff, for example, may initially be less productive
and require a greater expenditure on training. Calculations need to be considered: does the cost of hiring local
staff members eat into profits, or does it bring its own rewards in the form of a happier staff, more authentic guest
experiences, and reduced community-lodge conflict and a stronger linkage to good management of resident wildlife—
eventually increasing profits? Before committing to the contract, businesses must weigh these options.

Explore alternative delivery mechanisms for development impact
In addition to contractual contributions to social development, JVs can consider employing voluntary mechanisms,
incentivized by the market. Environmental and social performance is increasingly demanded as a prerequisite
for industry excellence, as judged by international award schemes, consumer feedback sites such as TripAdvisor
(Green Leaderboard), and corporate social responsibility indexes. Using the market as an incentive to innovate in the
development sphere can be rewarding for all parties, including consumers.

Educate, empower, and communicate with community partners
Implement regular awareness-raising and training initiatives for communities—not only on basic business principles
but also on the performance of their business partnership and how it meets the goals set in the agreement. Open,
structured, and frequent communication strengthens the relationship.




                                                                                                                               | 29
     |   GETTING FINANCE: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURSISM



                                                     #5 Get creative about
                                                     collateral
                                                     Lenders need collateral or securities to hold against loans in case of
                                                     nonrepayment or default. A common obstacle for SMEs in the tourism
                                                     sector is an inability to use immovable assets, such as the hotel
                                                     property or the land on which it is built, as collateral because of poor
                                                     transferability and perceived insecurity of land tenure. Frequently,
                                                     businesses lease or sublease land from the state or a third party, and
                                                     this agreement is not always considered sufficiently secure.



                                                     Firm-level enterprise surveys conducted by the World Bank in developing countries
          This tip is relevant for                   help explain why obtaining financing is difficult. A common trend for firms is
         governments, and banks                      rejection of credit applications due to unacceptable collateral. The survey showed
                                                     that most firms don’t even bother applying for loans because they are certain that
                                                     they could not meet the collateral requirements often requested by banks.


                                                         Chart showing relationship between number of loans requiring collateral
                                                                     and number of firms managing to secure a loan



                                                                                   All Countries

                                                                 East Asia & Paciﬁc (EAP)

                                                      Eastern Europe & Central Asia (ECA)

                                                         Latin America & Caribbean (LAC)

                                                        Middle East & North Africa (MNA)

                                                                              South Asia (SA)

                                                                Sub-Saharan Africa (AFR)
                                                               Percent of ﬁrms with a bank         0   10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90
                                                               loan/line of credit

                                                               Proportion of loans requiring
                                                               collateral (%)



                                                     Source: World Bank Enterprise Surveys Global Database8


                                                     The bar for accessing capital is different for existing JV partnerships than
                                                     for those conceiving a new partnership. An existing partnership with a well-
                                                     structured lease, contract, and business plan plus a positive financial track record
     8 World Bank (2013) Enterprise Surveys Global   of three years or more is more likely to convince banks that it can service the
     Database
                                                     debt. By contrast, new JV partnerships need to rely more heavily on the private
                                                     sector partner’s creditworthiness and willingness to pledge personal or external
                                                     collateral or securities.




30   |
                                                                                          #5 GET CREATIVE ABOUT COLLATERAL               |
An in-depth analysis indicates that unavailability of collateral is frequently not the problem; rather, it
is the inability to use valuable assets as collateral. In the developing world, around 80 percent of the
capital stock of a business enterprise typically is in movable assets, such as machinery, equipment,
or receivables, and around only 20 percent is in immovable property 9; unfortunately, many financial
institutions are reluctant to accept movable property as collateral.

By contrast, in the United States, movable property makes up about 60 percent of enterprises’
capital stock, and lenders consider such assets to be excellent sources of collateral; movables
account for around 70 percent of collateral for small-business financing.

One way to increase access to credit lies in reforming secured transactions laws and
establishing movable collateral registries. Providing legal structures through which movable
assets in emerging markets can be effectively used as collateral will significantly improve access
to financing by those firms that need it the most. Even in the most advanced jurisdictions where
reliable credit information and a wide range of financial products are available, only the largest and
best-connected businesses can obtain unsecured loans; the rest have to provide fixed collateral. A
sound legal and institutional infrastructure is critical to maximize the economic potential of movable
assets (such as future cash flow) so that they can be used as collateral (for example, accounts
receivables, inventory, equipment, vehicles, farm products [crops, livestock], intellectual property,
household goods, and so forth).




 Case Study • Success in Ghana
 In 2008, Ghana embarked on a reform of its movable collateral legal framework and registry,
 with the support of WBG. Before the reform took place, the use of movable collateral in Ghana
 was a key constraint for SME financing. Upon enactment of the Borrowers and Lenders Act
 2008, the Bank of Ghana established a collateral registry. With IFC support, the Bank of Ghana
 has drafted amendments to the Borrowers and Lenders Act and redesigned the registry system
 to align it more with international best practice. As of June 2014, some results of those changes
 include the following::

 •	   More than 73,000 loans have been registered since March 2010.

 •	   75% percent of the loans go to microenterprises and 17% percent to SMEs.

 •	   The total financing secured with movable property accounts for more than US$14.5 billion.

 •	   Inventory and accounts receivables (25 percent), household assets (20 percent) and motor
      vehicles (19 percent) are the top three types of movable collateral used by businesses.




Another way to increase access to credit is to strengthen the legal framework around the
land lease agreement. Secured transactions and registries often are an effective medium-term
or complementary solution for countries where lease agreements (for immovable assets, such as
land) are not yet readily usable as collateral. In many countries, however, strengthening the legal
framework of the lease may turn this asset into acceptable security.

In some jurisdictions, financial leasing is treated as a secured transaction and, consequently, it is
regulated by secured transactions law. However, other jurisdictions have special laws governing
                                                                                                             9 World Bank Group (2010)
financial leasing. Recharacterizing financial leases as secured transactions may not be necessary            ‘Secured Transactions
or possible in some jurisdictions, but the rights of financial lessors must be subject to the same           Systems and Collateral
                                                                                                             Registries’
publicity and priority rules as rights arising out of other secured transactions.


                                                                                                                                         | 31
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM




                               World Bank Group advises clients on using
                               movable assets as collateral
                               The World Bank Groups’s Finance and Markets Global Practice priorities are designed to help
                               clients provide broad-based financial services to individuals (such as credit, savings, payments,
                               and insurance products) and to promote growth and employment generation by supporting
                               sustainable lending to SMEs.

                               One approach is to facilitate the use of movable assets as collateral for loans. The World Bank
                               Group does this by working on the following:

                               •	   Legal Framework. Advising governments, law and policy makers, and financial sector
                                    players on necessary improvements to the legal and regulatory environment for
                                    secured lending

                               •	   Collateral Registries. Providing technical advice to the government and other stakeholders
                                    on the creation of new collateral registries or improvement of the existing ones

                               •	   Capacity Building. Training and awareness building among key stakeholders on
                                    compliance with new laws and regulations, as well as on the use of the new system;
                                    specific training of creditors on movable asset-based lending products




                             A third way to increase JVs’ access to credit is to provide banks with guarantees or insurance.
                             Banks must provide credit to businesses, but where market failures are occurring, governments
                             may consider offering additional targeted supports, such as guarantees against losses on qualifying
                             loans. To qualify for the guarantee, the banks would have to finance businesses that meet certain
                             criteria (for example, high potential for job creation) to match policy objectives.

                             Finally, setting lending targets for banks may be appropriate in some countries. In some
                             countries governments have introduced incentives to channel more lending to the sector. These
                             can be in the form of setting targets for lending through state backed lending institutions.
                             Sometimes these are supported by state backed guarantees which are designed to reduce risk
                             for the commercial lenders. There are also opportunities for commercial risk-sharing facilities to
                             be introduced targeted at the sector.




32   |
                                                                                       #5 GET CREATIVE ABOUT COLLATERAL   |

Case Study • Namibia:
Employing a multipronged approach
In Namibia’s communal conservancies, no private land ownership exists, and lodges sub-lease
land from the government via the conservancy who holds the head-lease. This makes transferring
ownership of the company’s immovable assets difficult and therefore limits the ability of lenders to
assume control of the assets in the event of a default. The business therefore cannot provide adequate
collateral to meet lender requirements.

Neither the Communal Land Reform Act 2002 nor its 2005 amendment explicitly allow for
conservancies to transfer the land-use right for commercial purposes. Although, in theory, the
community courts would likely honor the partnership agreement under customary law (this has not
yet been tested) it is viewed as too risky for commercial lenders, who report that they would require a
legal transfer of land-use rights to the asset-holder (lodge owner). In early 2014, amendments to the
Communal Land Reform Bill were submitted to the National Council, stipulating changes to Section 31
to allow for leaseholds to be awarded to community-based organizations (including conservancies)
and for such organizations to legally sublease to a third party. This amendment is intended to provide
the legal clarity that has been absent from the previous act regarding the ability to sublease.

Despite this effort, commercial lenders indicate that to accept a lease as collateral, they would
additionally require some kind of a guarantee, which is not currently available. The state may
examine the possibility of providing a guarantee to back the lease, although, notably, a previous
guarantee program closed because of a high default rate. A repeat of this situation may be
avoidable with more rigorous, systematic due diligence.

Namibia made a step toward accelerating SME finance with the SME Bank opening in December
2012. Capitalization will eventually reach N$1 billion, and the bank is required to have 30 percent of
its loan portfolio secured by future cash flows rather than fixed asset collateral. Approximately 10
percent of the portfolio is expected to be allocated for tourism and hospitality. The banks confirmed
that they would be open to financing community-private sector partnerships provided the
businesses could present a strong project proposal with credible financial forecasts and, preferably,
be verified by a third party.




Key takeaways for managing risk
Facilitate use of movable assets as collateral
Adapting the legal framework and developing collateral registries can greatly increase firms’
access to finance.

Strengthen the lease agreement
Legislate for and support projects that rely on lease agreements as security.

Support banks with guarantees
Consider how facilities can be introduced to reduce risk for the lender in a targeted way, such as
through guarantees, or risk-sharing financial structures.

Set targets for banks
Policy makers can incentivize or encourage banks to lend to SMEs without movable assets.



                                                                                                                          | 33
     |   GETTING FINANCE: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURSISM



                                                       #6 Professionalize
                                                       business operations
                                                       The profitability of any business is naturally affected by the way
                                                       it is run. The experience, capacity, and professionalism of lodge
                                                       management—particularly with regard to operations, revenue, and
                                                       expenditure—and community relationships are therefore of great
                                                       importance. Lodge location, size, and structure typically present a
                                                       series of operational challenges that require skilled management.




                                                       Private sector partners are savvy, like-minded risk takers. Private sector
           This tip is relevant for                    partners in these types of ventures fall across a spectrum from experienced global
           the private sector and                      or regional operators with extensive portfolios to one-off entrepreneurs with
               governments                             strong personal motivations. All of them tend to be risk takers with capital and
                                                       often have other business interests. They are largely innovators and usually prefer
                                                       to trade in areas where no one else is trading. Many have commercial successes
                                                       and failures under their belts and believe that they know what it takes to make
                                                       a business succeed. They see their investment in a community partnership as a
                                                       business choice they have made because of a set of specific criteria.10 They are
                                                       largely owner/operator/investors, as opposed to distant venture capital investors,
                                                       and usually are part of a network of like-minded people with a broad range of
                                                       contacts—from builders, engineers, and architects to trusted field guides and
                                                       tour operators. With high levels of practical, hands-on business acumen, some of
                                                       them may, however, be lacking in experience of working with communities and in
                                                       standard financial accounting practices—skills that become necessary when faced
                                                       with various operational challenges.

                                                       Operational challenges are derived from the nature of the business. Typical
     10 FENATA (2010) ‘A Private Sector Point of
     View: Conservancy Based Tourism Enterprises
                                                       operational challenges faced by lodge management stem from the often isolated
     (CBTEs) in Namibia and the Business of Tourism’   locations of the lodges and the resulting logistical and connectivity challenges.

                                                                                                                                   photo credit: WWF-Namibia




         The profitability

         of any business is

         naturally affected by

         the way it is run



34   |
                                                                                 #6 PROFESSIONALIZE BUSINESS OPERATIONS                  |
Many lodges face high input costs because of the limited number of suppliers of food, beverages,
and other goods in their location, meaning longer travel distances, longer wait times, and increased
stock levels. In Namibia’s rural conservancies, for example, sampled lodges revealed a 20 percent to 25
percent higher input cost than in the capital, Windhoek. High repair and maintenance costs also are
common—for example, the regular replacement of motor vehicles every five to six years, attributable
to difficult terrain and more significant wear and tear. Higher fixed-cost structures also are a
common feature, with proportionally high costs in labor, labor benefits, power, rent, insurance, and
lease charges. Such opportunities to manage fixed costs are limited in the lodging industry, however,
and are even more limited in the case of JV lodges. These properties are highly specialized tourism
assets, whereas downtown hotels attract a range of markets and provide space that can be used
for meetings, events, and social functions. In Namibia, some lodges report a 67 percent fixed-cost
structure, which makes maintaining occupancies and generating revenue all the more imperative.

Of these fixed costs, labor is significant, and many lodge operators cite high staff turnover and
poor productivity as operating challenges. Other operators often poach the more talented staff
members. Several private sector partners have commented over the years that they accept
the principle of giving preference for employment within a particular community, but they also
want the freedom to hire more competitively.

Many of these challenges are faced not only by community JV lodges but also by all rural
accommodation providers. The specific costs of working directly with community partners,
however, are an additional challenge that directly affects the viability of the enterprises. Most
significant are the costs that result from preinvestment delays in finalizing agreements and those
that result in delays in attainment of breakeven.




  Case Study • Namibia:
  Working with communities to manage costs
  According to the Federation of Namibian Tourism Associations, their 2010 study finds that
  on average, a private sector partner in a typical JV lodge for photographic tourism lodge had
  an investment of N$15 million, had 32 beds, and had 55 staff members.

  Preinvestment delays, which result in opportunity costs for idle capital, add about 12 percent to
  the capital investment and cause a reduction of 7.5 percent in the average operator’s annual net
  income. Delays also reduce the 20-year net present value of the investment by approximately
  12 percent and the 20-year financial rate of return for the operator from 15 percent to 12 percent.

  Delays in reaching breakeven have a significant impact on the cash flow of JVs and reduce their
  20-year financial net present value of the investment by 14 percent. Delays in breakeven reduce
  JVs’ financial internal rate of return over 20 years from 15 percent to 12 percent.

  Extrapolation of the findings suggests that the costs of induction are currently causing
  communities to lose N$2.2 million in income from JVs over a 20 year period. Losses in
  economic income (gross national income) from photographic JVs as a result of induction costs
  amount to approximately N$6.7 million, and those from hunting JVs are estimated at about
                                                                                                          11 FENATA, (2010) ‘A Private
  N$1.0 million.                                                                                          Sector Point of View:
                                                                                                          Conservancy Based Tourism.
                                                                                                          Enterprises (CBTEs) in
  Source: FENATA, 201011
                                                                                                          Namibia and the Business of
                                                                                                          Tourism’




                                                                                                                                         | 35
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM


                                 Given these challenges, community JVs are not for everyone. Opportunities to participate in
                                 community–private sector JVs have increased globally over the past few years, and a perception
                                 exists among financiers that supply may exceed demand in some markets. This means that private
                                 sector partners can be selective. This state of affairs poses a potential problem for community
                                 partners, with limited guidance or benchmarks to help them evaluate the proposition.

                                 To help attract the interest and commitment of the best, most experienced private sector players,
                                 authorities may consider staggering the supply of such opportunities in the marketplace and
                                 introducing a competitive process for the most attractive sites, through open or limited tender
                                 processes. This role could be filled by a one-stop shop or convening board that also offers
                                 other facilitation services for investment and ongoing mediation or support. The WBG Trade &
                                 Competitiveness Global Practice provides hands-on technical assistance in assessing investment
                                 opportunities, as well as advice on how to structure and implement promotion and outreach
                                 activities to attract appropriate investment partners.

                                 The marketing function is paramount to success. Of crucial importance to the financial health of
                                 JVs is their ability to generate revenue through sales. Maximizing occupancies at the lodges is largely
                                 driven through marketing, most of which is carried out by the businesses. Community partners in
                                 developing countries will not likely possess the sales and marketing experience or the leadership
                                 resources to achieve target occupancy levels over the short and long term. Brand equity and the
                                 horsepower of the private sector partner thus become paramount to the enterprises’ success.


                                           “You all have heard my mantra—‘If you build it … they may not come’ unless
                                           the enterprise has marketable assets; a solid, strategic marketing strategy;
                                           and an established sales/distribution system.”

                                                                                              —Jim Sano, Vice President,
                                                                                Travel, Tourism and Conservation, WWF


                                 Continual, high-quality hospitality training for the operator and all staff members is fundamental.
                                 Wilderness Safari’s custom digital video and online training program (powered by Lobster Ink) is truly
                                 groundbreaking in this respect; however, this type of training entails a substantial upfront investment.



                                   Business Edge: WBG Filling a gap in the SME
                                   training market
                                   Business Edge™ is a training system designed to improve the management skills of SME owners
                                   and managers. This classroom-based program offers practical management training that is
                                   adapted to the local business context and delivered by a network of local partners.

                                   The program is delivered by certified trainers in the local market and comprises 55 courses,
                                   including human resources, marketing, finance, operations, personal productivity, and
                                   tourism. The hospitality and tourism courses offered include caring for guests, marketing
                                   accommodation services, retaining hotel staff members, running a sustainable business, saving
                                   costs in accommodation business, and selling accommodation services. All of these are areas of
                                   operational and management weakness typically found in SMEs, including community JVs.

                                   WBG has found that the tool directly strengthens management skills of owners, managers, and staff
                                   of tourism SMEs, increases profits for SMEs, and often increases access to finance. The program is
                                   currently being rolled out in nearly 30 countries in Africa, Central Asia, and the Middle East.


              Read more at http://www.businessedgeafrica.com.


36   |
                                                                        #6 PROFESSIONALIZE BUSINESS OPERATIONS           |

Key takeaways for managing risk
Reduce the cost of sales                                      Encourage participation of the private sector
Management of high input costs is critical for managing       The growing supply of JV opportunities and increasing
risk as these can easily get out of control. Professional     demand should increase competition from the private
management practices can reduce use and waste and             sector. Where appropriate, competitive procurement
achieve efficiencies.                                         processes such as tenders or auctions could be used
                                                              to secure partnerships with the most suitable and
Manage human resources                                        experienced operators.
Partnership agreements must strike an equitable balance
between maintaining their important social obligations        Focus on marketing and promotion
and ensuring an adequate financial return. Agreements         Lodges must recognize the significance of their
ideally retain some flexibility in key areas, such as staff   marketing and promotional efforts to spread high
hiring, and also make provisions for adequate training        fixed costs over a greater number of tourists. Lack of
and enhanced productivity. Working on a longer-term           marketing can result in low capacity utilization and
investment outlook would provide incentive for such           depress revenues and profits. The national tourism
behavioral change.                                            authorities and organizations can provide support in a
                                                              convening and mobilizing role.
Improve the value proposition
Businesses should evaluate the value proposition for          Provide training for better practices
tourists through more efficient pricing of food and           Destinations may consider extending training efforts
beverages, improved cost management, and innovation           to private sector partners and JV businesses, with a
and product development, and they should likewise             particular emphasis on financial management, accounting,
evaluate activities revenues. Above all, lodges can           revenue management, and marketing. Such efforts will
increase occupancies by more effectively managing             improve profitability, reduce risks, and create a more
room stocks and by extending the shoulder season.             compelling investment proposal.




                                                                                                                         | 37
     |   GETTING FINANCE: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURSISM



                                          #7 Develop compelling
                                          proposals
                                          Developing sound project proposals is an integral part of securing
                                          financing. Plans are submitted to lenders to explain the project, make
                                          a case for investment, and allay concerns. Banks evaluate these plans
                                          to make a decision about whether and on what terms to make an
                                          investment, so these proposals must be as strong as possible.

                                          Weak project proposals are a well-documented problem for SMEs across the
                                          world, with banks and other lending (or even grant) organizations consistently
                                          raising the issue.

                                          Proposals can show weakness in various ways, but the key issues are as follows:

                                          1.	   Poor presentation of project concepts

                                          2.	 Inadequate accompanying financial information

                                          Project concepts are typically weakened through the omission or poor
                                          presentation of data and ideas. Lenders highlight the following as typical flaws: a
         This tip is relevant for the     poor management team with insufficient experience and/or the wrong skills mix for
          private sector and the          the needs of the business; a narrow customer base; inadequate marketing; under- or
               support sector             overpricing of products; poor product and service quality; emotional or autocratic
                                          managers; and undefined or undeveloped product-market mix.

                                          Financial information often is lacking in substance and credibility.

                                          •	    Speaking the same language Businesses need to speak the same financial
                                                accountancy language as the lending community to ensure common
                                                understandings of account categorizations such as costs, income, and
                                                departmental revenues. This universal language is known globally as the Uniform
                                                System of Accounts for the Lodging Industry or Uniform System (see www.ahlei.
                                                org) and is the industry standard for all financial accounting in hotels and lodging
                                                accommodations. Many otherwise sound projects are rejected every day because
                                                of misallocated or misrepresented data that distorts a balance sheet; using the
                                                Universal System prevents this distortion.

                                          •	    Making projections and benchmarking When lenders evaluate a financial
                                                proposal, they like to see forecasted projections of business operations
                                                and financial management. Banks complain that often when projections
                                                are included, the benchmarks, or industrywide data used to calculate these
                                                projections, are either incorrect or inappropriate. Given the current niche
                                                status of the community-JV sector, most countries do not collect specific
                                                data of relevance, and businesses are left using estimates or very generic,
                                                inappropriate data.

                                          •	    Getting into the numbers Banks assess a project’s ability to meet minimum
                                                thresholds for several financial ratios and performance indicators, such as debt/
                                                equity, debt service cover, and current ratios to ensure that the project’s cash
                                                flow will be significantly robust to comfortably repay the loan. Debt service


38   |
                                                                                            #7 DEVELOP COMPELLING PROPOSALS          |
    coverage ratio (DSCR) is calculated by dividing the firm’s available cash flow after operations
    by the amount it owes on interest, principal, and lease payments. Usually banks require this
    ratio to be in the range of 1.15 to 1.5.

A current ratio is calculated by dividing current assets by current liabilities and is mainly used to give
an idea of a company’s ability to meet its short-term liabilities (debt and payables) with its short-term
assets (cash, inventory, and receivables). The higher the current ratio, the more capable a business
is of paying its obligations. Quick ratio includes only cash or cash-equivalent current assets in the
numerator, and the denominator is still current liabilities. As a consequence, the quick ratio is usually
lower than the current ratio. Quick ratio assesses a business’s current liquidity, or the ability to pay off
its current debt.



                                                                                           Read more at

   WBG SME Toolkit supports businesses                                                     http://www.smetoolkit.org/smetoolkit/en

   to develop better proposals for banks
   The SME Toolkit is a complementary product to            Specifically developed for securing commercial
   Business Edge™. It is an online, interactive program     finance, the toolkit provides guidance on the
   that uses the latest information and communication       following topics:
   technologies to help SMEs in emerging markets            •	   Information on how to finance your business
   improve their management practices. The toolkit
   provides thousands of articles and tools covering        •	   Sample business plans
   the following areas of business management:              •	   Demand forecasting
   accounting and finance, international business,
                                                            •	   Preparation of your production plan
   marketing and sales, human resources, legal and
   insurance, operations, and technology.                   •	   Cover letter for loan application




   Key takeaways for managing risk
   Employ the Uniform System                                 Use reliable sector data for projections
   The Uniform System of Accounts for the Lodging            The development of reliable benchmark and
   Industry establishes standardized formats and             performance scenario data for the sector
   account classifications to guide individuals in           (and, indeed, the subsector of small lodges or
   the preparation and presentation of financial             comparable community enterprises) is essential,
   statements for lodging operations. The system             and businesses should use the data once
   is published by the American Hotel and Motel              developed.
   Association and is regularly revised.
                                                             Use proposal checklists
   Employ professionals                                      Various organizations, including WBG, have
   Lenders are more comfortable with a proposal that         developed tools to support businesses in
   has been independently reviewed by a chartered            developing plans.
   accountant or is presented together with a robust
   feasibility study. These steps can involve additional
   costs but could be the key factor in successfully
   securing financing.




                                                                                                                                     | 39
     |   GETTING FINANCE: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURSISM



                                          #8 Improve sector data
                                          Without good industry data, accurate projections about the
                                          performance of the industry are limited—for banks, businesses,
                                          and other stakeholders. People tend to avoid what they do not
                                          understand.
                                          In many emerging destinations, reliable financial and operating data is hard to come
                                          by, and data for sector niches—such as the community-private sector partnership
                                          segment—is virtually nonexistent. As a result, most financial forecasts and lodge pro
                                          forma statements are currently based on varying and often divergent views of the
                                          industry, which makes planning and decision making very difficult.

                                          Banks: When the projected viability of projects varies so greatly, banks struggle
           This tip is relevant for       to make industry comparisons or to test prospective proposals against reliable
         governments, the private         benchmark data. Without reference points, these proposals carry more risk.
         sector, the support sector,
                                          Businesses: A lack of clear, reliable, and easily available industry data can lead to
                  and banks               poorly conceived project concepts, flawed financial planning, and, occasionally,
                                          oversupply of facilities in the marketplace, driving overall occupancies down and
                                          reducing business viability.

                                          Other stakeholders: Lack of data and understanding about industry performance
                                          and viability makes assessing risks, making long-term plans, or deciding how best
                                          to support the industry harder for governments, NGOs, and other groups. Inflated
                                          numbers or forecasts can, in some cases, lead to the creation of inappropriate
                                          policies, legislation, and incentives that damage the industry in the long term.

                                          Collecting this kind of operational data is notoriously challenging. Some of the
                                          online schemes that work best provide incentives for the data providers (hotels)
                                          to contribute. In this model, usually larger hotels contribute their data online and,
                                          in return, immediately receive the aggregated data from a preselected sample of
                                          their competitors. This data is useful for owners and operators for benchmarking.
                                          Destinations working in partnership with benchmarking and data reporting
                                          systems, such as STR Global, have access to a wide pool of aggregated data that
                                          could also be made available to banks. Additional reports are available that track
                                          changes in market dynamics covering top-line performance, supply, demand,
                                          industry forecasts, profitability, and segmentation data.




         People tend to avoid

         what they do not

         understand




40   |
                                                                                                  #8 IMPROVE SECTOR DATA      |

                                   “The challenges of good data collection”
                                                                                 Gitta PAETZOLD, CEO,
                                                                     Hospitality Association of Namibia
                                   “We collect occupancy rates and figures for Average Daily Rate, but only on a voluntary
                                   membership basis. We have 350 members, but only a few of these are conservancy-
                                   private sector partnership lodges. First National Bank and FENATA produce a quarterly
                                   tourism index with overall growth and occupancy trends. While this is a good start, as a
                                   tool to inform qualified decision making across the industry, it is far too limited.”




                                                                 Read more at www.caribbeanhotelassociation.com/InvestmentFund.php

Case Study •
Caribbean mutually beneficial data generation
The Caribbean Hotel and Tourism Association (CHTA) wanted to introduce a tourism
investment fund to help fill a financing gap in the regional market—specifically, for owner-
operators of resorts with up to 150 rooms looking to expand, renovate, or take over
underperforming assets. CHTA engaged an audit, tax, and advisory services firm and
Caribbean Financial Services Corporation KPMG to act as advisers to the fund and signed a
strategic partnership agreement with the commercial bank FirstCaribbean International Bank.

FirstCaribbean agreed to fund data collection and research done by CHTA. Helping to
generate this kind of information was in the interest of the bank to inform their understanding
of present realities and to forecast future trends.




 Key takeaways for managing risk
 Support organizations to gather more and better data
 State statistics organizations, private sector associations, and other relevant bodies can be
 encouraged to capture and submit more data. Incentivized, online schemes often work well.
 Independent organizations or outsourced partner firms can also process and package the data
 for use by industry and banks.

 Build an evidence-based supporting narrative
 The stories that lie behind the numbers often provide deeper insight into why some
 enterprises fail and others succeed. Collecting, developing, and promoting a series of JV
 partnership case studies can help to educate financiers and other stakeholders in any market.

 Reach out to banks
 Proactively present data and engage with the lending community to familiarize banks with the
 sector, answer questions, and assuage risk.



                                                                                                                              | 41
     |   GETTING FINANCE: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM



                                          #9 Maintain a community
                                          support system
                                          Behind the scenes are a network of authorities, third-party advisers,
                                          and support groups working closely with communities. These
                                          advisers have a critical role to play in preparing for and facilitating
                                          the partnerships and in ongoing support and troubleshooting
                                          once the business is operational. The influence of such advisers is
                                          fundamental to the success of the ventures, and their role cannot be
                                          underestimated.



                                          Recognize when to pass responsibility to others. NGOs play a valuable role
            This tip is relevant for      in communities through capacity building and empowerment, providing advice
         governments, communities,        on livelihood choices, training, benefit distribution, and the creation of networks,
           and the support sector         advocacy, monitoring of outcomes, and sharing good practice. NGOs must
                                          recognize, however, the areas in which they may not be neutral or in which they
                                          have limited expertise. In these situations, they should advise communities to seek
                                          alternative support. Private sector partners in various countries have reported that
                                          some NGOs are ill equipped to be providing advice to the community—specifically,
                                          in relation to the nuances of a business deal—and that sometimes their predisposed
                                          mistrust of the private sector is transferred to communities 12.

                                          Although the long-term commitment of communities and their support agencies
                                          is vital, avoiding donor dependency is essential, and it is an all-too-common
                                          feature of Community-Based Tourism. “Free” money reduces community
                                          ownership, commitment, and motivation and the prospects of long-term success
                                          for an enterprise.

                                          Have a strong convening body. In more developed destinations, a convening body
                                          often is mandated to coordinate between actors and ensure that basic standards
                                          are being met. Typical challenges noted by these bodies include managing the links
                                          between three cultures: the traditional or community culture, whose process may
                                          be slow and prolonged; the corporate culture, which has little time and wants to
                                          strike deals with the lowest costs and highest returns; and the NGO, or development
                                          culture, which focuses on benefits to low-income people, or other non-business
                                          objectives such as conservation or community development.

                                          The support sector itself needs support— especially those organizations
                                          or individuals working directly with communities, often in remote or difficult
                                          conditions. Regular trainings, experience-sharing and mentoring can be a great
                                          help, coordinated by the convening body. Regulation may or may not be an
                                          effective way to improve performance within this sector but development of
                                          guidelines, best practices, templates and tip-sheets for the various activities
                                          undertaken can help improve overall delivery.



                                           12 FENATA (2010) ‘A Private Sector Point of View: Conservancy Based Tourism. Enterprises (CBTEs) in
                                           Namibia and the Business of Tourism’



42   |
                                                                                   #9 MAINTAIN A COMMUNITIY SUPPORT SYSTEM




   Case Study • Namibia’s NACSO has been an
   effective coordinator
   The Namibian Association of Community Based Natural Resource Management Support
   Organizations (NACSO) is an umbrella association of Namibia’s community-based natural
   resource management support organizations, which currently includes nine NGOs and the
   University of Namibia. NACSO reports to its members but also coordinates closely with the
   Ministry of Environment and Tourism. It is led by a small Secretariat of three staff members, who
   report to its board.

   NACSO is mandated to coordinate the provision of support services to communal
   conservancies in the arenas of natural resource management, institutional governance, and
   business development and to monitor the development, performance and impacts of the
   national Community-Based Natural Resource Management Programme. NACSO facilitates JV
   lodge support through its Business, Enterprise and Livelihoods (BEL) working group, which
   is composed of regionally based NGO field staff supported by qualified tourism advisers
   provided by NACSO through WWF in Namibia. The BEL working group develops training
   methodologies, lodge viability assessments and business plans, standardized JV contract
   templates, facilitation and brokering, and dispute resolution services to existing and emerging
   JV lodges in Namibia’s communal conservancies.

   In 2011, with the support of the Millennium Challenge Account, NACSO produced 27 training
   modules for communities, including training guidance for the trainers. Modules cover diverse
   topics such as financial management, staff recruitment and public speaking. So far, the
   training modules have been deployed to more than 50 conservancies and affiliated staff and
   enterprises. All stakeholders agree that training cannot happen just once; it must happen
   regularly, especially when the governance structure of the community partner changes.
   NACSO provides a structured set of training events, which are then followed up with clear,
   focused technical assistance. The private sector was so adamant about the followup that
   they indicated a willingness to share the costs (provided they were agreed on as part of the
   contract), and they recommended extending this learning to relevant NGOs.

   NACSO is presently too small and understaffed to meet the growing demands of the
   conservancy movement, but it has provided a successful model for coordinating support
   services to conservancies on a geographic or thematic basis.

   Additional requests from the private sector include establishment of a neutral community JV
   business support center, independent of private sector, government, traditional, and regional
   authorities and NGOs. The support center must be well funded, professionally staffed, governed
   by a dedicated board, and have access to data and information to assist JV development.




The role of supporters in marketing often is undervalued. Of crucial importance to the financial
health of JVs is their ability to generate revenue through sales. Maximizing occupancies at the lodges
is largely driven through marketing, much of which is carried out by the businesses but which also can
be supported by the state and other convening bodies. The longer it takes for a product to become
known in the marketplace, the longer it will be before the enterprise earns profits and fulfills the
profit share part of the contract. Forming public-private partnerships is therefore in the interest of not
only the lodges but also the communities, their supporters, and the state. Partnerships that develop
and execute a well-structured marketing plan, invest in professional skills training, and monitor the
marketing function will have the best chance of success.


                                                                                                                         | 43
     |   GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM


                              Consider this word of caution. A fine line exists between supporting a nascent sector and driving
                              it. Because a business sector is starting to produce results does not mean it is necessarily ready for
                              large-scale replication. Lenders must first consider the overall size and growth of any subsector. Rapid
                              growth in numbers of JVs is not necessarily an indicator of success. Lenders question whether growth
                              is an accurate reflection of demand or if other supply-side factors are at play, with strong political
                              support creating incentives for rapid, but potentially unfounded, growth.




                                Key takeaways for managing risk
                                Secure a strong political champion
                                An individual with strong governmental and private sector networks can operate as an
                                effective champion for community–private sector JVs, securing support from other ministries,
                                securing budget, and building a sense of national ownership and pride for the sub-sector.

                                Mandate, establish, empower, and provide resources for a coordinating unit
                                This entity can take various forms, but a coordinating body with some government
                                participation has been highlighted as critical for success in almost all destinations where JVs
                                are gaining prominence. This body may also assist in data collection for the subsector.

                                Train the trainers
                                Regular creation and updates of training tools, methodologies, and systems are necessary
                                in this environment. Best results usually occur when developing material together with
                                lead trainers or technical advisers. Employ a “train the trainers” approach to help NGO and
                                governmental staff train communities.

                                Know when to bring in professionals
                                The support sector must recognize its limitations. All actors need to recognize when to bring
                                in professionals with necessary expertise such as lawyers, accountants and mediators.

                                Foster community-to-community learning
                                Conservancies in Namibia requested a mechanism for interconservancy experience sharing
                                and communication so that they can learn from one another. This mechanism has been
                                successfully applied in large numbers of conservancies across Namibia, generating both
                                synergy and connectivity between conservancies in various regions of the country.




44   |
                                   #9 MAINTAIN A COMMUNITIY SUPPORT SYSTEM




“One of the most satisfying processes
in my life.”
                                               Chris WEAVER,
                          Managing Director of WWF–Namibia

Q. 	 What is the role of WWF in Namibia?

A. 	 We provide advice and assistance to our partner organizations, like NACSO
     members and the government of Namibia, to assist communities in forming
     conservation areas to manage and benefit from their wildlife. We help find
     investors and offer business training to conservancy members. Namibia’s
     market-based conservation model has inspired hope for countries and
     communities around the globe. Twenty different countries have sent
     delegations to come and learn from Namibia’s experiences and successes.

Q. 	 What functions do local NGOs play?

A. 	 They are directly involved at the grassroots level, interacting on a regular basis
     with the community and the conservancy management. They provide advice
     and training and report back to the National CBNRM Programme through
     NACSO on progress made.

Q. 	 How do you interact with the government?

A. 	 Assisting Namibia’s conservancy movement to grow and produce
     conservation impacts on a national scale has been one of the most
     satisfying processes in my life. This has been achieved through an excellent
     collaborative relationship with Namibia’s very progressive government. We
     work side-by-side in conducting analysis, sharing best practice, revising
     legislation, and empowering other organizations within this space.
THEME        |




     Library card of
     useful resources
         Title                    Date   Author/Organization       Pages   Summary                            Access
         Facilitating Tourism     2012   The World Bank Group       36     Case study giving detailed         https://www.wbginvestmentclimate.
         Investment in the                                                 insights into ‘The Investment      org/uploads/MER_CaseStudy.pdf
         Maputo Elephant                                                   Generation Approach (IGA)’
         Reserve: The                                                      and how it was used to secure
         Tourism Investment                                                private investment for an
         Generation Approach                                               eco-lodge in the Maputo
                                                                           Elephant Reserve in southern
                                                                           Mozambique.
         Facilitating Large-      2012   The World Bank Group       40     Describes an approach aimed        https://www.wbginvestmentclimate.
         Scale Tourism Resorts                                             at improving the investment        org/uploads/CoastalResortsStudy.pdf
         in Mozambique: The                                                climate in the tourism sector
         Tourism Investment                                                by facilitating strategic
         Generation Approach                                               investments in select protected
                                                                           and coastal areas, as well as
                                                                           through focused reforms in the
                                                                           regulatory environment.
         Ecotourism joint         2012   Susan Synman,              8      Surveys and analysis of staff      http://www.efdinitiative.org/
         ventures between                The Enviroment for                employed at Damaraland             publications/ecotourism-joint-
         the private sector              Development Initiative            Camp in Torra Conservancy          ventures-between-private-sector-and-
         and communities: An             (EfD)                             and of households in Torra         communities-updated-analysis-torra
         updated analysis of                                               Conservancy, providing insight
         the Torra Conservancy                                             into the potential benefits of
         and Damaraland                                                    joint ventures in the context of
         Camp partnership,                                                 poverty reduction, local socio-
         Namibia                                                           economic development and
                                                                           changes in attitudes.
         Tips for Joint Venture   2011   Ministry of Environment    79     Booklet informs Private            http://www.nacso.org.na/dwnlds/refs/
         Partnerships in                 and Tourism of Namibia            Operators about how to develop     WWF-MET%20JV%20Booklet%20
         Tourism                         & NASCO (Namibia                  and maintain a positive business   low%20res%202011.pdf
                                         Association of CBNRM              relationship with Conservancy
                                         Support Organizations)            partners.




46   |
                                                                                           LIBRARY CARD OF USEFUL RESOURCES                   |
Title                     Date   Author/Organization      Pages   Summary                             Access
Secured Transactions      2010   World Bank Group          152    This Toolkit provides technical     https://www.wbginvestmentclimate.
Systems and                                                       advice and guidance to World        org/uploads/
Collateral Registries                                             Bank Group staff, donor             SecuredTransactionsSystems.pdf
                                                                  institutions, government
                                                                  officials and other practitioners
                                                                  on the implementation of
                                                                  secured transactions law and
                                                                  institutional reforms in emerging
                                                                  market countries.
Scaling-Up SME            2010   IFC (International        141    The Stocktaking Report aims to      http://www.gpfi.org/sites/default/
Access to Financial              Finance Corporation)             provide the G-20 Leaders with a     files/documents/G20_Stocktaking_
Services in the                                                   summarized but comprehensive        Report_0.pdf
Developing World                                                  framework by which to
                                                                  understand the SME ﬁnance gap
                                                                  and its challenges.
A Private Sector Point    2010   Jacqueline W. Asheeke,    177    This study addresses and            Available on request from http://www.
of View                          FENATA (Federation               clarifies the many varied           fenata.org/
                                 of Namibian Tourism              perceptions about the true
Conservancy Based                Associations)                    state of affairs with regard to
Tourism Enterprises                                               the successes and/or failures
(CBTEs) in Namibia                                                and the relationships between
and the Business of                                               private-sector investors and
Tourism                                                           the communities involved in
                                                                  JVs. It highlights processes
                                                                  and challenges to contribute
                                                                  constructively towards a more
                                                                  meaningful engagement.
Namibia’s Story:          2010   Jessica Brown and         6      Research paper which                http://www.developmentprogress.
Sustainable                      Neil Bird, Overseas              demonstrates the development        org/sites/developmentprogress.org/
natural resource                 Development Institute            processes in community-based        files/namibia_environment_widlife_
management in                    (ODI), Development               wildlife conservation in Namibia.   conservation.pdf
Namibia: Successful              Progress
community-based
wildlife conservation
Community-Based           2009   Harold Goodwin &          37     Records, measures and               http://www.andamandiscoveries.com/
Tourism: a success?              Rosa Santilli, ICRT              reports the benefits accruing       press/press-harold-goodwin.pdf
                                 Occasional Paper 11              to conservation and local
                                                                  communities, through
                                                                  identifying CBT successes
                                                                  globally.
Marketing hunting         2006   Brian Child and           8      This article describes the          http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/G02926.pdf
and tourism                      Chris Weaver,                    process of empowering and
joint ventures in                IIED, Participatory              training communities to select,
community areas                  Learning and Action              negotiate with and contract
                                 55: Practical tools              private sector partners.
                                 for community
                                 conservation in
                                 southern Africa  
‘How to…?’ Series:        2005   Caroline Ashley, Clive    28     The purpose of the ‘How To…?’       http://www.odi.org.uk/sites/odi.org.
Brief 3- Building Local          Poultney, Gareth                 series is to assist tourism         uk/files/odi-assets/publications-
Partnerships                     Haysom, Douglas                  companies to take advantage         opinion-files/2259.pdf
                                 McNab and Adrienne               of opportunities to contribute
                                 Harris                           more to the local economy. The
                                                                  intended audience is tourism
                                 (ODI) Overseas                   businesses of various sizes
                                 Development Institute            and operational types. Brief
                                                                  3 provides practical tips on
                                                                  aspects of local partnerships
                                                                  drawing from the experiences of
                                                                  successes and failures.



                                                                                                                                              | 47
     |    GETTING FINANCED: 9 TIPS FOR COMMUNITY JOINT VENTURES IN TOURISM


         Title                  Date   Author/Organization       Pages    Summary                              Access
         Cape Town              2002   Cape Town Declaration          5   The declaration emphasizes the       https://www.capetown.gov.za/en/
         Declaration on                                                   commitment of stakeholders           tourism/Documents/Responsible%20
         Responsible Tourism                                              in the tourism sector to take        Tourism/Toruism_RT_2002_Cape_
         in Destinations                                                  collaborative responsibility for     Town_Declaration.pdf
                                                                          achieving economic, social and
                                                                          environmental components of
                                                                          responsible and sustainable
                                                                          tourism.
         Joint Ventures         2001   Caroline Ashley & Brian   37       This paper reviews JV                http://www.odi.org.uk/
         Between                       Jones /ODI (Overseas               experiences in Namibia within        publications/2626-joint-ventures-
         Communities and               Development Institute)             the wider regional context to        communities-tourism-investors-
         Tourism Investors:            International                      identify some key principles and     southern-africa
         Experience in                 Journal of Tourism                 challenges. 
         Southern Africa               Research Vol.3, No.2
         Cultural Tourism       2001   Sarah Ignjic,             35       Brief overview of some               http://www.rainforest-crc.jcu.edu.au/
         in the Wet Tropics            Rainforest CRC                     indigenous tourism operations,       publications/cultural_tourism.pdf
         World Heritage Area:                                             identifies key critical factors
         A Strategic Overview                                             which are essential for
         for Rainforest Bama                                              enterprise development,
                                                                          and recommends key
                                                                          elements of a strategy for
                                                                          government departments
                                                                          and indigenous organizations
                                                                          to assist Rainforest Bama to
                                                                          establish and operate tourism
                                                                          businesses.
         Getting The            2001   Dilys Roe, Maryanne                These guidelines for Namibia         http://www.propoortourism.info/
         Lion’s Share From             Grieg-Gran & Wouter                aim to provide advice on how         documents/PovertyInequalityVol2.pdf
         Tourism: Private              Schalken                           both parties can get a good
         Sector-Community              Volume II—Practical                deal from the partnership rather
         Partnerships In               Action: Guidelines                 than one side at the expense
         Namibia                       for the Development                of the other. They set out the
                                       of Private Sector                  questions both sides to the
                                       —Community                         partnership, community and
                                       Partnerships                       private sector should consider
                                                                          at each stage of the negotiation
                                                                          process and the reasons why
                                                                          these issues are important.
         Torra Conservancy &    N/A    Anna Spenceley,           37       A comprehensive outlook on           http://www.asl-foundation.
         Damaraland Camp:              The African Safari                 the initiative, policy & strategy,   org/documents/
         Namibia                       Lodge Foundation                   current tourism activities and       TorraConservancycasepresentation.pdf
                                                                          issues facing this conservancy in
                                                                          Namibia.
         Enterprise Surveys     N/A    IFC & World Bank          N/A      An Enterprise Survey is a firm-     http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/
                                                                          level survey of a representative
                                                                          sample of an economy’s private
                                                                          sector. The surveys cover a broad
                                                                          range of business environment
                                                                          topics including access to finance,
                                                                          corruption, infrastructure, crime,
                                                                          competition, and performance
                                                                          measures.


     Source: WBG




48   |
photo credit: WWF-Namibia
                About the World Bank Group              About WWF

                The World Bank Group is one             WWF is one of the world’s largest
                of the world’s largest sources          and most respected independent
                of funding and knowledge for            conservation organizations, with
                developing countries. It comprises      over 5 million supporters and a
                five closely associated institutions:   global network active in over
                the International Bank for              100 countries. WWF’s mission is to
                Reconstruction and Development          stop the degradation of the Earth’s
                (IBRD) and the International            natural environment and to build
                Development Association (IDA),          a future in which humans live in
                which together form the World           harmony with nature, by conserving
                Bank; the International Finance         the world’s biological diversity,
                Corporation (IFC); the Multilateral     ensuring that the use of renewable
                Investment Guarantee Agency             natural resources is sustainable, and
                (MIGA); and the International           promoting the reduction of pollution
                Centre for Settlement of                and wasteful consumption.
                Investment Disputes (ICSID). Each
                institution plays a distinct role in    For more information,
                the mission to fight poverty and        please visit www.wwf.org or
                improve living standards for people     www.worldwildlifefund.org
                in the developing world.

                For more information,
                please visit
                www.worldbank.org,
                www.miga.org,
                and www.ifc.org.




with support from:




and FIAS partners:
