                                                                  95971




This research was funded by the World Bank, under the Project: Sector
Analysis in the Artisanal Mining Sector of the Democratic Republic of Congo
2
3
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................................. 5
Results at a Glance ............................................................................................................................................... 7
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................................... 8
Project Description .............................................................................................................................................. 9
Methodology ......................................................................................................................................................... 9
   Second phase of data collection .................................................................................................................. 10
   Data Analysis.................................................................................................................................................. 10
Limitations ...........................................................................................................................................................10
Results ..................................................................................................................................................................10
Recommendations ..............................................................................................................................................31
   Annex 1. Qualitative Data Collection in Walungu and Kalehe.............................................................. 32
   Annex 2. Description of Field sites ............................................................................................................ 33
     Walikale (pending) .................................................................................................................................... 33
     Kalehe......................................................................................................................................................... 33
     Walungu ..................................................................................................................................................... 34




 Cassiterite dries in the sun in the town of Nyabibwe, Kalehe Territory




                                                                                             4
Executive Summary
There are few things that evoke such passionate and divergent reactions as the issues surrounding gender,
conflict and mining in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). At once reviled by international
advocacy organizations and celebrated by local communities, mining is viewed as both the scourge and savior
of a region wracked by decades of violence. This report will look at artisanal and small-scale (ASM) mining in
North and South Kivu – two of the most conflict-affected provinces in the DRC. By taking a human rights-
based approach, this project aimed to examine issues specifically relating to gender, militarization of the
extraction process and free and equal participation in political, judicial and economic systems. By speaking
with a wide variety of actors who live and work in these communities, we attempt to identify issues that are
common to mining-affected areas. While this report attempts to distill universal themes from the qualitative
research, there are geological layers of complexity in these systems that no one message can easily capture and
no one solution can easily address.

With the advent of the wars in the mid-1990s, the primary economic systems in eastern Congo, notably
agriculture and small trade, began to fall apart. As active hostilities stretched into decades of insecurity,
displacement, crop viruses, the threat of sexual violence, and constant danger of looting and predation by
armed groups lead to a disintegration of agricultural economies.

Mining emerged as one of the only viable ways to earn money – a system remarkably well-adapted to the new
realities brought by conflict. Mining towns, defined spaces that could be controlled and secured by an armed
group or branch of the national army, became attractive places for vulnerable populations seeking security and
economic opportunity. Unlike agriculture, mining accommodates displacement and poverty; it is a quick-turn-
around system that gives you cash in hand. Exploitation of minerals became increasingly entrenched as a
primary source of income for many, and along the way shaped social, economic, and political structures.

While nearly all of the research participants in this project acknowledged the exploitative nature of mining and
the vastly unequal distribution of profits, they also overwhelmingly perceived it as beneficial to their
communities. Participants extolled the virtues of this industry as a desperately needed source of income. They
also, however, described the debt bondage and misery of hard labor, sometimes portraying mining-associated
work as “slavery.” Dualities like these riddle this topic, making it difficult for policy makers, governments and
international organizations to understand how to intervene.

While women are vital actors in mining communities and fill a variety of roles, they are also among the most
vulnerable to sexual and economic predation. Women and other disenfranchised populations are generally
relegated to marginal support roles – from running restaurants and transporting materials, to participating in
transactional sex. The more profitable jobs are kept for men.

In many sites, women come from other areas seeking work. They arrive in a mining site with no social
networks, peer support or other resources to help them in their new surroundings, leaving them particularly
vulnerable to exploitation. Drug and alcohol use is described as being rampant in mining towns and inside the
quarries themselves. The effects of substance abuse are an increase in violence and a breakdown in the social
fabric of their villages. Participants often described the mining lifestyle pulling apart traditional family
structures. Men “disappear” into mining areas and build new lives. While money exists around the mines, little
of these profits seem to make it back to hungry children and sick family members back home.

People spoke particularly about HIV/AIDS as an emerging threat which the nearly non-existent health
infrastructure in these areas is not equipped to handle. Close quarters and hard labor mean that other health
issues, including physical trauma, diarrhea, tuberculosis, respiratory infections, malnutrition, and malaria are
rampant.




                                                       5
Participants in the research depicted how power structures and access to quarries were changed by war. While
discussions generally framed issues in terms of pre- and post-war eras, they also made it clear that conflict is
ongoing and continues to shape the daily realities of life in eastern Congo. The link between political
authorities in mining towns and armed groups or the national military has been widely documented in existing
literature. In communities visited throughout the course of the study, armed group control was present and
powerful, but also well hidden. Militarized regulation of mines is not overt or physical, but realized through
links to powerful cooperatives, customary authorities, and taxation.

These nexi of power go largely unchecked since the same authorities with political clout dominate the justice
system. While human rights abuses in mining towns are legion, rampant corruption in both state and non-state
institutions severely restricts access to any form of redress. Those must vulnerable to human rights abuses,
such as orphans, widows, sex workers, and displaced persons, are also those least able to access traditional and
formal justice mechanisms.

In the absence of courts and tribunals, capable national human rights institutions or ombudspersons,
participants in the research said they relied on each other and small associations as the most neutral and
capable parties for bringing some level of justice in their communities. Active systems of associations were in
fact present in every site, speaking to an enterprising spirit and desire for more inclusive political engagement.
People often self-organized to promote a common profession, cause or interest. However, these groups lack
the financial means, human capacity and political influence to make sustainable change. Often people in
associations were ignorant of the rights they have under national and international law. In particular, ignorance
and misconceptions about the new mining laws are widespread. As a result, measures purporting to be based
in the new legal code are used to further consolidate privilege in the hands of those who have always profited.
This especially evident in the continued marginalization and exploitation of women and children. Education
around mining code and rights of those in mining towns would have great power, particularly if this is coupled
with strengthening the capacity of local associations so they can continue to advocate for their own rights.
Organizing to create more effective unions and associations, while promoting grass-roots inclusive economic
cooperatives offers an intriguing opportunity for improving life in mining towns.

In the following sections, we will examine these issues more deeply using the voices of communities to better
understand the complex realities of mining areas.




                                                        6
Results at a Glance
Human Right or       CEDAW provision                  Summary of Research Finding
Gender issue

Gender-Based         General Recommendation           While women were vital actors in mining communities and filled many roles,
Violence (GBV)       No.19 by CEDAW                   they were also among the most vulnerable to sexual and economic
                     committee, specifically on       predation. Rape was described as commonplace in mining towns. Many
                     GBV                              women spoke about engaging in transactional sex out of desperation, a
                                                      profession that placed them at an increased risk of experiencing rape and
                                                      other forms of abuse. Sex workers were often migratory and without social
                                                      or financial support. Sexual predation by armed men was also described as a
                                                      concern, although it was generally less pressing that the everyday violence
                                                      and abuse that women suffered as a result of living in mining towns.
Discrimination       Art. 11: Discrimination in       The majority of actors directly involved in the extraction of minerals at
                     the field of employment, i.e.    mining sites were described as extremely poor and vulnerable. The ideas that
                     opportunities, equal             mining offers quick cash and that there is no requirement of land ownership
                     remuneration, treatment, etc.    or residency appealed to the most marginalized populations. While mining
                                                      jobs are theoretically open to everyone, actually acquiring work was dictated
                                                      by one’s ability to pay for access to the mines. Women and other vulnerable
                                                      populations were generally relegated to marginal support roles in mining
                                                      towns. For women, transactional sex was often their only means to gain an
                                                      economic foothold in mining towns. Vulnerable populations, including
                                                      children, women, the landless and the very poor, reported high levels of
                                                      economic and sexual predation in mining towns.
Right to Health      Art. 11(f): Right protection     Health problems were summarized into three categories: poor labor
                     of health and safety in          conditions; poor structure of mining tunnels; and public health problems,
                     working conditions               such as poor hygiene and high levels of infectious disease. The scarcity of
                     Art. 12                          public health facilities in mining areas, such as toilets, clean water supply,
                     Art. 14.2(b): Access to          waste systems, and primary care services, combined with close quartered
                     healthcare, i.e. available,      living conditions, led to a high prevalence of diarrhea, tuberculosis,
                     affordable, full information     respiratory infections, malnutrition, and malaria. Sexually transmitted
                                                      infections, including HIV/AIDS, were also a significant and worsening
                                                      problem.
Access to Justice/   Mechanisms/institutions          Mining communities in South Kivu stated that rampant corruption in both
Remedies and         that effectively address the     state and non-state institutions severely restricts access to justice. For the
Accountability       nature of the harm caused by     majority of participants, demands for justice after suffering human rights
                     discrimination in the field of   violations were, at best, unrealistic and, at worst, dangerous. Those must
                     economic, social, and            vulnerable to human rights abuses, such as orphans, widows, sex workers,
                     cultural rights. Institutions    and displaced persons, were also those least able to access traditional and
                     include courts and tribunals,    formal justice mechanisms.
                     administrative authorities,
                     national human rights
                     institutions, and/or
                     ombudspersons, which
                     should be accessible.
Right to             Art. 7 (b&c)                     Local, provincial, and regional actors compete for resources and control in
Participation        Art. 14.2(a): Right to           mining towns. Highly restricted access to political participation and
                     meaningful participation in      widespread discrimination were the norm in all communities sampled. While
                     formulation of policies          marginalized groups were often allowed to self-organize and form
                     Art. 14.2(e): Right to           associations to promote a common profession or interest, they lacked the
                     organize self-help groups        financial means, human capacity, and political influence to make sustainable
                     and cooperatives in order to     change.
                     obtain equal access to
                     economic opportunities in
                     all community activities




                                                                 7
Introduction
Recent studies in the DRC tend to focus on human rights abuses or on the status of women,i however few
investigations examine the link between mining and sexual violence. There is a dearth of research specifically
into the gender dimensions of artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM) as a means to economic security for
both men and women. Further, there has been insufficient analysis of the real and potential threats to women’s
human rights in the artisanal mining sector in DRC. Once these threats are identified, governmental and other
partners can be informed as to protective and restorative actions they can take to assure the rights of
vulnerable groups within mining communities.

With improved understanding of the vulnerabilities, opportunities, and human rights threats facing women in
conflict-affected small-scale mining areas, governmental and NGO partners can be better informed both how
to prevent violations of rights, as well as how to promote rights and improve economic and social outcomes
for women and communities. The ASM sector has been noted as a significant element in the ongoing conflict
in DRC, with particularly negative implications for women, but also has the potential to lead to considerable
economic gains. These are complicated, nuanced issues that must be understood more carefully in order to
ensure the rights of women, while also promoting the potential for economic security and social development
for mining communities as a whole. In order to undertake this work, the World Bank used a human rights
framework, specifically structuring the research questions around relevant articles outlined in the Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) Convention. These are outlined below and
provide the structure for the “Results at a Glance” section above.

Table 1.
 Human Right and Gender Issue               CEDAW Provision
 Gender Based Violence                      General Recommendation No.19 by CEDAW committee, specially comments
                                            on GBV
 Discrimination                             Art 11. Discrimination in the field of employment: i.e. opportunities, equal
                                            remuneration, treatment etc)
 Right to health                            Art 11 (f) and (Right protection of health and safety in working conditions,) Art
                                            12 &14.2(b) Access to healthcare i.e. available, affordable, full information)
 Access to justice/        Remedies   and   Mechanisms/institutions that effectively address the nature of the harm caused
 accountability                             by discrimination in the field of economic, social and cultural rights. Institutions
                                            include courts and tribunals, administrative authorities, national human rights
                                            institutions and/or ombudspersons, which should be accessible.
 Right to participation.                    Art 7.b&c Art 14.2(a) and (e) (Right to meaningful participation in formulation
                                            of policies), 14.2 (e) Right to organize self-help groups and Cooperatives in
                                            order to obtain equal access to economic opportunities in all community
                                            activities.

Objectives of the Research
To address existing gaps in knowledge relating to the AMS sector in South Kivu, and to ultimately identify
interventions that might be incorporated into the PROMINES project, this study will focus on gender and
human rights in artisanal and small-scale mining areas in the Kivu regions of DRC. The objectives of the study
will be to:
     (i)     Identify the key gender dimensions of ASM in the Kivus, particularly in terms of how conflict
             exacerbates or changes what is already known about the gender dimensions of ASM and to
             understand the human rights issues facing women;
     (ii)    Identify specific sources of gendered vulnerability to human rights abuses within AMS
             communities and identify ways to address these vulnerabilities;
     (iii)   Identify methodologies of resilience or positive coping in communities.


                                                           8
Project Description
To facilitate work on a number of sensitive topics, including gender relations, human rights abuses, power
structures within communities and the relationship between mining and conflict, the Harvard Humanitarian
Initiative partnered with local organizations who had a history of working closely within the target
communities. The project used a phased approach, which was characterized by undertaking waves of research
that became progressively more focused on sensitive issues. To further ensure the project “triangulated” on
important issues, a number of qualitative methodologies were used and voices from multiple diverse
populations were sought out.

This project made use of qualitative data, which is particularly suited to exploring the complex dynamics that
exist around gender, ASM and conflict in the Kivus. Sites were selected through discussions with the World
Bank and local partners and selected to highlight attributes of interest – i.e. sites with high or low levels of
NGO engagements and sites with different kinds
of minerals. Two of the three intended field sites Figure 1. Map of Research Sites
were visited: Kalehe and Walungu. The third field
site, Walikale, will be visited one the security
situation in North Kivu allows for travel to
remote areas.

The methodology is comprised of key informant
interviews (KIIs) and focus group discussions
(FGDs); and an analysis of the Congolese legal
framework. Each of these methodologies is
outlined below. The combination of these
methodologies was designed to allow and analysis
of: how ASM practices may have changes as a
result of the conflict; the gender dynamics at play
in mining towns (i.e. gendered roles, axes of
control, economic discrimination); and human
rights abuses and vulnerabilities that are inherent
to ASM practices. In addition, this study focused
on recognizing different models for participation
in ASM, with an emphasis on exploring
community-generated methodologies of resilience and protection.

This study is characterized by a two-phase approach. In Phase I, a standardized focus group instrument and
key informant interview guide was be used in all three study sites to gain a broad understanding of the
characteristics of each community and its unique profile relating to the intersection of gender, conflict and
artisanal mining. Phase II of the research provided an opportunity to explore site-specific features of gender,
ASM and conflict to allow for a more nuanced analysis of the issues.

Methodology
This study was approved by the Internal Review Board (IRB) of the Harvard School of Public Health (HSPH)
and a Congolese Community Advisory Board (CAB) of subject matter experts. All members of the research
team underwent training in ethical research practices. Qualitative questionnaires were developed to mirror the
human rights framework guiding the project, with a focus on key CEDAW provisions (see Table 1). Once
questions were developed to explore each domain of human rights, the draft questionnaire was then reviewed
by field staff of the partner NGO who worked in mining sites. The final questionnaire was translated and back
translated from English into Kiswahili. All focus groups and key informant interviews were attended by at least
one note-taker and one moderator. During Phase II of the project, the questionnaire was edited and refined
through discussions with HHI and local project staff. See Annex 1. for a description of which populations
were interviewed in each site.


                                                       9
First phase of data collection
Focusing the research question and building an evidence base
In the preliminary phases of establishing the project, local partners
facilitate introduction to the following actors in each field site: town
administration officials; customary chief; women’s group leaders; leaders
of economic cooperatives; religious leaders; key actors in mining process.
Not all of these actors were accessible in each site; rather this list
provided a guide for thinking about the types of players that could be
sought out in each context. In initial interviews, the research team
requested referrals to others stakeholders involved in the process who
could continue to inform the research.
                                                                                 A gold miner grinds the earth he has
Second phase of data collection                                                  brought out of the quarry in Walungu
Targeted questioning and site-specific dynamics
Building on the results from phase one, this work further explored gender roles; abuse and protection issues
including sexual violence; the structure of the mining industry especially as it relates to discrimination and
participation; and ways that conflict has affected the mining industry. Often, this phase of work followed
directly on the first phase, however in some cases this occurred during a second trip to communities.

Data Analysis
All focus groups were attended by at least one moderator and one note-taker. Taking notes from the
interviews, rather than recording and transcribing the interviews and focus groups will allow for near real-time
collation and analysis of the data.

Team members generated codes first independently then refined them collaboratively; this process allowed
them to identify key unifying themes, explore complexities in the narratives, and generate hypotheses where
appropriate. Codes identified as important by two team members defined categories; consistent variations
within a category were captured as subcategories.

Limitations
There are a number of challenges inherent in a project like this. Artisanal mining communities are often
remote and difficult to access. Mining is a dynamic process, so quarries active during the data collection phase
may have closed and new ones may have opened. This fluidity can change the types of answers we collect
during the work. Indeed, the concept of “artisanal and small-scale mining” is remarkably diverse. Gold, coltan,
cassiterite and tantalum all have different extraction processes and supply chains, and mining processes for
each mineral have many steps and contributing players. For this work, we chose to focus on the initial stages
of the extractive process: the on-the-ground miners in communities and the surrounding economic and social
systems. We did not confine ourselves to looking at one particular mineral. Instead, in collaboration with the
World Bank and local organizations, we chose active mining sites and examined the minerals being exploited
in those areas.

Current global mining dynamics can also influence research results. For instance, mineral prices were notably
low during the data collection. This became an issue that participants mentioned often. High prices might have
elicited different responses about challenges in communities. Highly localized factors can also influence results.
For instance, one site (Nyabibwe) had largely suspended mining activities as some of the main quarries
transitioned to mechanized water pumping. As a result, many research participants talked about this issue and
the impact of the work stoppage. This may not be an important or salient finding in the future when work
resumes.

Insecurity is a constant challenge. At the heart of the project is a goal of understanding the militarized nature
of these communities – a particularly sensitive issue in an unstable environment. The research team had to


                                                        10
suspend activities before reaching the third field site (Walikale) because of activity by the M23 rebel group. In
addition, armed group control, like the concept of mining, is heterogeneous. As discussed in the results
section, there are various ways that armed groups interact with and control mining communities. Militarization,
therefore, is not a single concept, but rather occurs to varying degrees and through different control modalities
in each place.

Fear that mines would be shut down and livelihoods lost because of negative reports from this project was
another problematic issue. Despite working with trusted and long-established local partners, and repeatedly
explaining the academic nature of the work, these concerns persisted to varying degrees on each axis. They
were most pronounced in Nyabibwe on the Kalehe axis. Nyabibwe has been the target of a great deal of
attention from the national government, multinational entities working on mining issues and NGO initiatives.
As a result, there is awareness of sensitivities around women and children working in mines and great concern
about the international perception of mineral exploitation. In sites on the Walungu axis, these issues were
much less pronounced and people talked more frankly about women’s and children’s roles in the mines.
Despite these challenges, the results of this project did triangulate in on important themes. Across highly
diverse populations and very different contexts, certain problems seemed universal.

                                Results
                                The Crucible of Conflict: A Coevolution of Mining and War
                                Mining is described as a lifeline and vital source of income in the sites visited
                                for this study. In the devastation wrought by war, older economic systems that
                                used to support the population slowly succumbed to decades of violence,
                                displacement, agricultural decline, and constant danger of looting and predation
                                by armed groups. Mining emerged as one of the only viable ways to earn
                                money. Exploitation of minerals became increasingly entrenched as a primary
                                source of income, and along the way shaped social, economic, and political
                                structures. While communities in this project emphasized the importance of
                                mining profits in their towns, they clearly outlined the detriments as well. The
                                mining system is described as inequitable to the point of being predatory,
                                dangerous, violent, and deeply entrenched in existing power dynamics.
 A man mines cassiterite in a
 quarry near Nyabibwe, KaleheHowever, it is a system well adapted to conflict. The communities in this project
described how, before the war, the primary economic activities were farming and raising livestock.
Unfortunately, these systems were some of the least suited for survival in war. Perhaps the most obvious
factor in the destruction of the agricultural system was displacement. Farming and to some extent raising
animals, by definition, requires you to stay on the same land for harvest cycles. During the war, communities
almost universally described widespread displacement. In previous HHI research, a survey conducted
throughout North and South Kivu found that over 90% of respondents reported being displaced during the
conflict and roughly one-third reported ongoing displacement. In some cases, forced population movement
seemed to be a deliberate tactic to destabilize societies creating a “domino effect” of movement from one
town to the next. As a medical provider in Mulamba described:

        These men [the Hutu militia] exploited our land and exploited our people, and used
        our labor to feed themselves. This created a domino effect as people decided to flee
        one militarized place to go to another. Now, the people that took flight left their
        homeland. This meant they had no land of their own anymore and nothing to eat.
        The native population became the slaves of those in uniform. The men in uniform
        exploited the earth and used the local population to work. After exploiting the people
        like this, they forced out other people from other places, so soon no one had
        anywhere to farm.




                                                       11
To add insult to injury, plant viruses ravaged the agricultural sector during the war, and continue to make
farming unviable in many areas. “Mosaic” is a virus that affects a number of staple crops in DRC, including
beans, cassava, and bananas. Discussions of crop virus most commonly arose in the Walungu area where the
population heavily relied on agriculture before the war. Miners’ wives from Mulamba described, “Before the
war, we farmed, we raised animals and did small commerce. Now, people don’t have work anymore. We try to
farm but the fields don’t give any more because of mosaic. So we eat only with great difficulty. The beasts
were taken, pillaged so there is nothing left to do.” Women working in the mines in Mushinga echo this
narrative:

         Before the war, the fields produced and the men were still working on the plantations
         because the latter existed. Now, we make money by growing in the fields of others
         and by carrying things from the mines. What has changed life now is that the fields
         no longer produce anything and our husbands are no longer working. The land
         became infertile because of the mosaic.

Farming also means that your entire stock of wealth – your crops – is visible and easy to loot. People described
going to harvest their crops only to discover that armed groups had already come and picked the field clean.
Livestock are also highly visible and easy to steal. In societies where wealth is often kept in highly visible goods
rather than money, looting is easy. Community leaders in Mushinga described the transition away from
agriculture spurred by the conflict:

         Before the war people had money, thanks to the soil, also to agriculture. It’s not
         everyone who used to go to the mine of Mukungwe because people were otherwise
         occupied. Some would leave to go to Fizi, Walikale, Lugushwa ... to sell the products
         of our soil and in exchange they would return with money to support their families.
         And so the community benefited. In addition, there was livestock like cows. We
         could usually raise large and small livestock but this has all been looted during the
         war, and that’s where the poverty began.

Even for those who could still farm, the insecurity on the roads and dissolution of local produce markets
meant that farmers couldn’t engage in trade. Agricultural commerce largely ceased and roads became
impassible due to crumbling infrastructure and insecurity, eventually leading to a disintegration of markets. A
community leader from Mushinga described how this drove people to mine, “After the war, people find it very
difficult to find money. Commerce is very weak, it's hard to say ... that’s why people now usually going to
Mukungwe quarry [to mine], where they are able to find money with difficulty.”

                    Comparison of agriculture (pre-war income generation) to mining (post-war income generation)
                             Agriculture                                                       Mining
  Slow return on investment                                        Cash in hand when minerals are found
  Requires travel on roads to access markets to turn goods into Markets (comptoirs or negociants are in place)
  cash (or trade for other goods)
  Wealth is highly visible and difficult to protect (field full of Wealth is in the form of cash payment, easier to protect and
  crops)                                                           conceal
  Requires access to land and long-term commitment                 Requires small start up costs, either through gifts or
                                                                   transactional sex
  Requires specialized knowledge, often passed down through Requires little or no specialized knowledge
  generations
  High perceived risk of looting and sexual violence from High perceived risk of injury from dangerous work, risk of
  militarized armed groups                                         sexual violence



The fear of sexual violence during conflict was specifically cited as a reason that people ceased farming. These
results are similar to those found in a previous HHI project surveying six communities in North and South
Kivu. Women in the mining town of Nzibera described how rape in particular affected farming, “If people


                                                               12
went to their farm, they can get raped or even gang raped, because we think if we say ‘no.,’ they will kill us.” A
young woman in Nzibera explained, “There is lots of hunger here. But if you have been raped on your farm,
you will never return, and the farm will just die.”

While mining activities existed before the war, they were largely described as haphazard, individually owned
operations. People noted that mines were accessible but not particularly appealing since there were better
options for making a living. There were fewer conditions on being able to enter mines, and, without the
involvement of military and state actors, communities profited more directly from mineral exploitation. Miners
in Mulamba described this:

           Also before the war, people mined minerals in the forest without difficulties and we
           benefited and got money… Now, we only mine minerals only because there is no
           more farming, and no more way to raise animals.

In other cases, participants noted that local big men controlled mines and profited off of those who didn’t
own land or were migratory workers. However, the majority of the population didn’t seek work in mines since
they had other options:

          Before the war, the mines were owned by the administration of the territory, the
          chief of the group, and the person who owned that particular hill or the customary
          chief…People would take a little on the side secretly sometimes and the people that
          mined paid taxes. It didn’t benefit the population at large. During this time, those
          who owned the mines still used people for manpower (main d’ouvre) because there
          are no machines. Before the war, the people who worked in the mines were those
          who didn’t have their own land, people who had sold their fields, people who came
                               from far away, or mendicants –those who had nothing. So,
                               before the war, people who were the chiefs of the hills got rich
                               off of the work of those who had nothing.1
            _________
                               All focus group discussions illustrated how power structures, roles in mining
         There is lots of      towns, and access to quarries were changed by war. While participants generally
       hunger here. But if     framed things in terms of pre- and post-war eras, they also made it clear that
         you have been         conflict is ongoing and continues to shape the daily realities of life in eastern
      raped on your farm,      Congo. They particularly noted how the conflict changed power structures,
         you will never        community allegiances, and labor practices in mining areas. Armed groups fought
      return, and the farm for control of land traditionally ruled by customary authorities. As militias
          will just die.       proliferated during the war, towns became battlegrounds for groups looking to
                               consolidate power and find profits to keep them going. Nzibera miners described
            _________          this dynamic, saying:

                                Yes, mining has changed because of war. Now, for example, some mines are
                                controlled by FDLR so you can’t access these areas. Things changed … it is
                                because of war, because of war people couldn’t access certain areas… We are
           very close to where [there is] mining, but you wont arrive because you will get stopped by the FDLR.
           Today there isn’t mining much because of FDLR presence.

As the war ended and people returned home, issues over land rights persisted. Insecurity continued to restrict
many from accessing their farms. A healthcare provider in Mulamba summarized what it was like in his
community:



1   Healthcare provider Mulamba


                                                        13
            After the war, those who took flight came back, but they had to re-find their place in
            the community. They had nothing, no seeds, no hoes, no shovels, no money and no
            jobs. They lived like displaced people. They had nothing, not even fields. These
            people had trouble reintegrating and poverty was at the heart of this.

To begin farming again you need, most importantly, land. But you also need equipment, seeds, a family
structure (since mining roles are often split between different members of the household), and enough money
to survive while your crops mature. Deep insecurity continues to persist, making people wary of farming. In
Nyabibwe women described this fear as an on-going deterrent to resuming agricultural activities.

            During the war things changed, if you tried to go to the farm they would rape you,
            take your things, the biggest consequence of war is that it locked people in, there was
            no freedom to move to different areas to sell your goods or to look for work… After
            the big war still things remain difficult, people tell you there is peace and that it is OK
            to go to the farm, but when you go, if they don’t kill you they will rape you, so now
            we still are scared to go do different activities.

In addition, people noted that markets and roads are still closed due to violence, so people are unable to sell
the goods they cultivate. Participants repeatedly described how reduced access to farms led to the rise in the
prominence of mining in many areas. With a dearth of livelihood options and corruption in the mining sector,
women transporters from Mushinga portrayed the general post-war feeling among mining communities, “thus,
after the war, it's resourcefulness [that keeps us going].”
                                                                                                  ______
Mining towns – defined spaces that can be controlled and secured by an armed group or
branch of the national army – became attractive places for vulnerable populations             Everyone has
seeking security and economic opportunity. It is safer to be in a place controlled by an     adapted to the
armed group than in a disputed or unprotected area. Despite this, the very forces that       mining society
claimed to provide security also ruthlessly robbed miners and other vulnerable groups of      now, we can’t
any profit they made. Miners in Mulamba noted that, “Now, when you go mine, the                get back to
military take everything on the road and the price of minerals is very low and unstable.”       framing.
Older participants in this researched express a deep longing to return to social systems         ______
that were organized around agriculture instead of mining. They described the time
before the war as a golden age, which while it still had problems was characterized by
peace and modest prosperity. People could farm, raise animals, and access local markets. People were invested
in the land and had a sense of belonging to a place. The younger participants in this research often couldn’t
remember life before conflict, and looked upon farming as an outdated and unviable way to make a living. The
young women in Nyabiwe highlight this, saying, “We could do any work but farming, I could never farm!!
Everyone has adapted to the mining society now, we can’t get back to framing. When you are 14 and 15 years
old you start activities that revolve around mining, small mafuta, little things…”

Salvation and Slavery – Distribution of profits in mining towns
While nearly all participants acknowledged the exploitative nature of mining and the unequal distribution of
mining related profits, they overwhelmingly perceived it as beneficial to their communities. For many, such as
the young men in Mushinga, mining allowed them to feed their families and maintain their communities:

            This mine has become our farmland, our mother, and our greatest resource. It is the
            lifeblood2 of our economy. Today, mines are feeding all of the Kivus in particular
            and Congo in general. Now, we lament that white people (Banro) bought this mine
            [their own mining concession]. If this is the case, how we are going to live, how are


2   literally lung - ‘poumon’


                                                            14
        we going to eat, how will we send our children to study? This is the great difficulty
        that we have.

Due to the perception that mining towns offer opportunity for relatively quick profit, whether in the mines or
in associated industries, the sector tends to attract those who are desperate and have no other means of
survival. Vulnerable populations quickly become concentrated in these areas, causing informal economies to
spring up around the mines. These small businesses are set-up to provide a variety of services, including food,
alcohol, sex, and drugs to miners and others who are often far from home. The result is that mining towns
often develop a unique set of socio-economic and political structures that grow and change along with
fluctuating production levels and the winds of local and regional politics.

People invoked the concept of slavery when referring to those who work in the mines, but equally as clearly
acknowledged that the profits from mining can be a blessing for communities. Dualities and seeming
contradictions like these riddle mining-related issues, making it difficult for policy makers, governments and
well-intentioned foreigners to understand how to intervene in the mining process.

Irregular payment of salaries, fraud, theft, and disenfranchisement led many young workers in the mines to fall
into debt bondage. When they do not make enough profit to cover their bills, they put food and rent on credit.
Widespread use of drugs, prostitutes, and alcohol, contributes to the accumulation of debt. Miners are forced
to work until they pay off their bills. However, many note they are simply unable to do this, and staying in
mining long enough to find profit means they accumulate more expenses, locking them in a vicious cycle. Like
others interviewed, a healthcare provider framed such debt accumulation as a form of slavery:

        Many young people work one day and don’t get anything. They go into debt to live.
        If they don’t make any money one day, they buy groceries – a bit of flour and
        vegetables – on credit. They live to pay their debt and to accumulate more debt.
        Something that obliges you to stay but doesn’t pay anything – that is a form of
        slavery.

Repeatedly, participants portrayed how power holders in the mining industry make the
vast majority of profit, while on the ground laborers make barely enough to survive.
                                                                                                 ______
Widespread corruption and fraud in the mining industry exacerbates this inequality.
Miners in Nyabibwe pointed out that;                                                        This mine has
                                                                                             become our
        Even when things were good and we were mining a lot, we got nothing, it’s           farmland, our
        always the big men who own the mine who profit, if you have your own               mother, and our
        minerals and can’t explain where they came from they will take it from you             greatest
                                                                                            resource. It is
Young women from Nyabibwe reaffirmed this, describing a hierarchical system of
profits that leaves miners out, “Not everyone gets the benefit of being in the mine, the   the lifeblood of
miners don’t get benefit, the ones that profit are the ones [who own] the holes.”           our economy.
                                                                                                _______
Despite the consensus that distribution of mining profits is extremely unequal, all
participants still thought mining was beneficial to their community. Miners, businessmen, and restaurant and
bar owners alike described how when the mine was producing there was an increase of cash flow in their
communities, something they termed the “circulation of money.” Women who sell goods at the market or run
restaurants benefit from these cash flows, as do construction workers who see a rise in construction needs as
profits from the mine flow back into town. As miners from Nyabibwe explained:

        When there is movement in the mine, money is in circulation, for example, the big
        man will then build a house, giving work to construction workers, then the small
        miner will be able to go to the market and buy things, giving money to those who sell
        at the market – this is the circulation of cash.


                                                       15
Women traders in Mushinga described a similar phenomenon, saying:

        Oh yes everyone here enjoys (profits), in one way or another, from the activities in
        the mines of Mukungwe. This site is really profitable to everyone – it takes care of us,
        it nourishes us. For example we sellers of merchandise wouldn’t make it if the mine
        didn’t produce. There is no life here without the Mukungwe mine. It’s truly this mine
        that takes care of us here – it’s what takes care of us!

When speaking about issues related to power structures and distribution of profits, communities repeatedly
brought up how war has changed local economies, increases reliance on mining. As traditional economic
systems fall away, mining continues to circulate visible profits in communities. No matter how unequally
distributed, participants in this project noted the benefit of this system. To further examine how ASM
communities are structured, the following section will examine which actors are directly involved in the mining
trade.

Actors in the Process - “All kinds of people live in mining towns”
The majority of actors directly involved in the extraction of minerals at mining sites are described as extremely
poor and vulnerable. The idea that mining offers quick cash and that there is no requirement of land
ownership or residency is appealing to the most marginalized populations. Youth in the mining town of
Mushinga described the type of people that sought work in mines, “It is the poor, the diminished who have
nothing else to do, who go to mine to look for money, to get enough to pay their children’s school fees.” For
orphans, widows, ex-combatants, and uneducated youth, the promise of quick cash leads them to mining
towns. Many also come from broken homes where they struggle to find the means to feed their children, as
miners from Nzibera pointed out, “Those who go to the mines are the women who don’t have any husbands
or families, hunger too is what makes the women go to the mines.”

While in theory mining jobs are open to everyone, work is dictated by your ability to pay for access. In order to
join a mining team, you must offer a goat, crate of beer, or money. Family or political ties also facilitate access.
For women, transactional sex is often their only means to gain an economic foothold in mining towns.
Women might have to trade sex for any number of reasons: to be allowed to open a small restaurant, to gain
patronage for their bar; to become the “favored” beer seller in a mining tunnel. Many women said often they
had to exchange sexual favors simply to keep clientele at their restaurant or small business, offering themselves
in exchange for customer loyalty.

The role one gets in a mining town is largely determined by one’s financial means, political power, and voice
within the community. Wealthy individuals, frequently with the backing of an armed group or the national
army, control the trade and make the most profit. Poor, marginalized populations supply the labor, seeing little
if any profit at the end of each day. Miners from Nyabibwe described the large range of actors at play:

        There are all kinds of people that live in the mining areas – there are transporters,
        porters, miners, clearers, people who bring tools, those who bring sand out and into
        the river, prostitutes, restaurant owners, businessmen, many different players
        involved

While there are many ways one could theoretically becoming involved in the mining trade, individuals were
frustrated their options are almost entirely dictated by their gender, age, and socio-economic status. The
following sections will provide a brief overview of the types of roles available to those in mining towns. The
roles of women will then be further discussed to examine the role of gender in mining towns.

Transporters
Transporters are among the most vulnerable of those who work in the mining community. They are charged
with bringing raw material, often earth or stones, to the next step of processing after the mine. In the case of


                                                        16
gold or cassiterite, this means bringing earth and stones to the nearest river, where the material is pounded into
dust, washed, and the minerals are separated from waste. Caught by definition between two worlds –the mines
and their next destination – they do not have a voice or stake in either. Transporters stop near the mines only
long enough to receive their load of raw earth, and when they reach the river or village, they are paid and sent
on their way. While some of those in the mining process have been able to form cooperatives, transporters say
that they are too transient and too disempowered to get access to existing cooperatives, or to form their own.

The work they undertake is literally backbreaking. While transporting seems like a task that would be
undertaken by young men, it is often the elderly, women and children do this work, since this is one of the
most abusive and least profitable jobs to have. A community leader in Mushinga described the hardship:

           These carriers/transporters of minerals have many problems. They carry things
           beyond their weight for very little money, you will find for example a woman who
           carries 50kgs or 60kgs for 4000 francs3 at a distance which occupies the whole day,
           the cost of life is very hard, when along the way she takes a glass of banana juice
           (kasiksi), she buys flour, which costs 1000 francs ... and what you see it is very little
           money!

In many of the sites, particularly in Walikale, transporters were elderly women widowed during the war. Too
old to run restaurants or engaging in the sex trade, they are left to take whatever tasks no one else will
undertake. As one female transporter in Nyabibwe said:

           It is the women who do the transport and carrying of bags, but they do so while
           suffering because they are often deceived on the weight of the bags. For example
           they can be told the bag is 50kg when it is really 70kg, this makes women sick and
           suffer physically.

Many of these female transporters suffer prolapses and severe gynecological problems as a result of the strain
on their bodies. One female transporter describes, “Pregnant women often had children aborted because of
that, carrying too heavy of bags.” Both male and female transporters suffer hernias, trauma to their upper
bodies due to the heavy loads they carry, and extreme pain. Since transporters are paid by weight, there is an
incentive to take increasingly heavy loads beyond what one person is able to safely carry.

Miners
The only prerequisites to being a miner are fitness and strength. Having one’s own tools – hammer, awl,
flashlight, and shovel is helpful but not required. The foreman, or head of team, represents a more senior role
which is usually filled by men with family connections or enough cash to rent or buy access to a quarry.
Regardless of their roles, miners collectively cite that they saw very little profit after all of the expenses and
taxes they have to pay. A complex system of taxation relentlessly diminishes cash-in-hand profits. As one
miner describes:

           The miners are also impoverished, the negociants are the ones who are really in control,
           the miners work 24/7 but they don’t get anything, they have to then pay for food, for
           rooms, materials, to patrons, then the miners don’t get what they deserved in terms
           of work.4

Participants said that men often rotate and change roles on a daily basis, for example one day guarding a tunnel
and the next acting as a conductor. By spreading different tasks across members of the team, they ensure each
person has an opportunity to spend time looking for minerals in the tunnels. Miners in Walungu described the
different roles:

3   Roughly 4.50 USD currency
4   Site


                                                          17
            We have head of the teams, those that guard the tunnel, assistant of the head of the
            team, the conductor, the person who guides people into the whole, and the one that
            takes out and cleans sand.

While the majority of participants either deny children’s presence in the mine or avoid talking about it for fear
of backlash, those that do explain how children fill a variety of roles in the mining process. The chief nurse in
Mulamba describes,

            Children transport the broken earth and do the actual mining. Girls and boys do this
            and they don’t study as a result. You can see them walking by with bags of cassiterite
            on their heads. Carrying heavy packages is why we see a lot of trauma, especially of
            the thorax, here.

Participants in the research also describe how children are also cheated by adults. Even if they are able to
successfully navigate the numerous barriers and access the mines, they may be cheated of their hard-won pay.
As miners in Nyabibwe describe, “If they [children] actually find cassiterite it’s fine, they can work, but then
they get ripped off by adults, so usually it is not even worth it for them.”

Comptoirs and Negotiants
Miners point to the top of the division of labor, namely comptoirs
(loosely translated as counters or accountants) and negociants (merchants
or traders), as those who truly profit. Participants in the research noted                  _______
that powerful and wealthy individuals in Goma and Bukavu are
generally comptoirs, buying minerals from mining towns and exporting            [We must] show people the
them from the Congo. Most saw this step as being the most lucrative in         value of women, that they are
the entire process. Comptoirs usually purchase their minerals from             people here, they shouldn’t be
negociants, relatively well-off men living in mining communities with          worked like animals, they are
enough influence and cash to purchase or secure minerals from local            humans, respect their rights,
mines. Negociants are seen as those who profit most after comptoirs.           they are like slaves, used like
Female transporters in particular describe negociants as those who really       tools, something we throw
run mining operations, since they have immediate control over the                around like dirt and just
purchase of minerals and greater on the ground visibility than comptoirs.            throw to the side.”
As one woman notes, “Negociants are the bosses, they bring some                            ______
money there and buy kilos, then they call the women there to help carry
bags. Payment will depend on how wealthy the negociant is.”

While comptoirs and negociants are at the top of the mineral trade, the control of day-to-day mining operations is
generally run either by powerful cooperatives or traditional authorities. In areas where cooperatives are
present, they often fight for control over mines.

Congolese law for artisanal miners requires that cooperatives are created in order to control mineral
exploitation. In the sites surveyed for this project, however, cooperatives still do not exist. Instead, customary
authorities run the day-to-day operations, influencing which negociants and comptoirs buy from the mine. One
hold supervisor from Maholi mine explained that, “almost all of the miners are from the village here, only a
few from Bukavu. The Mwami5 is the one that controls all of this”. Other power holders in communities will
be further discussed in the section “Power Structures and the Political Economy of Mining Towns.”

Women in Mining Towns
While women are vital actors in mining communities and fill a variety of roles, they are also among the most
vulnerable to sexual and economic predation. Women and other vulnerable populations are generally relegated

5   Traditional king


                                                          18
to marginal support roles – from running restaurants, transporting materials, to participating in transactional
sex, while more safe and profitable jobs are kept for men. One woman described women’s various functions in
mining towns, “There are women that clean and sift sand, others do restaurants, bars, and others are
prostitutes.” The leader of a sex worker’s association in Nyabibwe summarized the situation saying, “[We
must] show people the value of women, that they are people here, they shouldn’t be worked like animals, they
are humans, respect their rights, they are like slaves, used like tools, something we throw around like dirt and
just throw to the side.”

                               Ignorance and misconceptions about the new mining laws are widespread,
             ________          particularly pertaining to the roles rights of women in mining communities.
                               People generally think the new mining code banns women from working in or
                               near mines. This allows those who don’t want women to have access to real
         There is sexual
                               employment to use a legal excuse for marginalizing women. In fact, the mining
        violence of every
                               code allows women to work in all aspects of the mining sector, but does prevent
     quality and kind here     pregnant women from engaging in hard labor.
     in Nyabibwe). When
       god built the mine      Measures purporting to be based in the new legal code are used to further
       here, he knew that      consolidate privilege in the hands of those who have always profited. Education
      rape would be there      around mining code and rights of those in mining towns would have great
        as well with the       power, particularly if this is coupled with strengthening the capacity of local
             mine.”            associations so they can continue to advocate for their own rights. Organizing to
          ______               create more effective unions and associations, while promoting grass-roots
                               inclusive economic cooperatives offers an intriguing opportunity for improving
                               life in mining towns. Women described feeling taken advantage of because they
lack of representation in decision-making bodies. Even miners describe how women are taking advantage of:

           If [a woman] does a restaurant, men eat and say they will pay later, but they never
           pay…Women also get all of their things stolen from them as well…Sometimes men
           sleep with them and then when they are done, they wont pay them anything.6

Running a restaurant, engaging in sex work, and transporting materials are by no means mutually exclusive
roles. Instead one leads to, or requires, doing another. Many women spoke about being compelled to engage in
transactional sex simply to survive. Often, this is because they do not have husband or other male relative to
bring income home, so they are forced to fend for themselves. Women in Nyabibwe explained, “When I was
carrying bags and fetching water so that my children could eat, it then turned into prostitution because they
(men) say they have no money to pay me. I have to carry bags and sand because I don’t have a husband to do
anything.” They went on to describe how giving sexual favors is one of the only ways to get patronage for
small jobs in mining towns:

           People also make women have sex with them by saying that if you don’t sleep with
           me you wont get to keep carrying bags, he tells his friends not to work with her
           because she refused to have sex with them. People do the prostitution so that they
           can get other work. You are selling youself, tiring yourself to get some money for
           your children.

This quote illustrates the close links between economic and sexual exploitation. Women described how they
aren’t paid or a underpaid for the work they do; are sexually harassed or raped while working; beaten; and
forced to perform sexual favors in order to get clients or employment. Miners, women and community leaders
all described the importance of women being forced to exchange sex simply to be able to engaging in other
economic activities. Miners described how:


6   Nyabibwe miners


                                                       19
        Women are also beaten out there [near the mines], especially those at restaurants.
        Another issue is that men will only buy things at a someone’s store if they are their
        women, so in order for a women to get clientele she needs to start sleeping with
        people, [then she] gets unwanted pregnancies.

If women refuse to perform sexual favors or attempt to protest their treatment, they are threatened or
excluded from the mines. Young sex workers in Nyabibwe said simply, “If you refuse them (sexually), they will
tell you if you return again to the area they will kill you.”

All actors interviewed in this project, wives of miners, community leaders, miners and women working mining
communities spoke frankly about the sex trade in mining towns, painting it as widespread and commonplace.
As one man said, “The soko (market) of the prostitutes is the mining quarry.” It is so commonplace, in fact that
miners described how women could be seen climbing up towards the mines with their mattresses on their
backs:

        It is [the prostitutes’] territory there [in the mines]. That is the main work there,
        actually. Once the movement in the mining area starts again, for example, you will
        see women climbing up towards the mines with their mattresses, and while you may
        think they are soldiers wives they are really prostitutes.

Exchanging sex for goods is one of the only ways women can make money to keep themselves and their
families fed. The existence of prostitution was overwhelmingly mentioned in connection with poverty. Miners
wives interviewed in the worn of Mulamba speak openly about prostitution in the town where their husbands
work, “Yes – it [prostitution] exists because of poverty. Around the mines, women prostitute themselves to get
money that them miners give them and because otherwise they wouldn’t have anything to eat.” Community
leaders in Mushinga elaborated:

        Yes, there are “loose women” here with their children. There are no women in the
        mines that belong to a particular person – so every woman belongs to the whole
        world. These women [in the mines] don’t work. They just wait until the miners find
        money and them come sleep with them, that’s their work. A man who gets ten
        dollars will go eat with five of the dollars and give five dollars to a whore and go
        spend the night with her. And that’s how life continues.

Young women spoke about the slippery slope that brings them into sex work, “It [sex for money] will happen
and you won’t even know, all of a sudden you just find yourself with a man so that you can survive.
Oftentimes we don’t tell anyone else about it because we are embarrassed…It just happens.”

In many sites, sex workers came from other areas. They arrive in a mining town with no social networks, peer
support or other resources to help them in their new surroundings. Women may also migrate from mining
town to mining town looking for a better situation. Miners emphasized the transitory nature of the work,
saying “There are also many prostitutes from all over, Uvira, Bukavu, they here when there is action
(movement) here. They call their friends, everyone comes, we don’t even know their faces.” As the leader of a
sex worker’s association explained:

        It depends, some women come for 5 months, get tired, go to a different mine. Some
        have kids here they become permanent here… [There is] movement – activities
        involving money, commerce – their bodies are their business. [They go to] Misisi,
        Moroc, Walikale. They are used to moving to different places for money.

Because engaging in sex work, these young women may not be welcomed into their home communities once
they leave due to the stigma attached to sex work and having a child out of wedlock. This means that once
women begin engaging in sex work in mining towns, they may have no choice but to continue, continually


                                                      20
traveling to look for those areas with the most profitable quarries, and by association men with disposable
income.

Possibly because the “choice” to engage in sex work is often made out of desperation and the conditions are
so coercive, participants in the research saw sexual violence and transactional sex as closely linked. While rape
was often defined as forcing a woman to have sex against her will, people also noted that there were other
ways women were raped. For instance, if a sex worker is not paid for her services or if a man and women
didn’t agree to a price before the man forced a woman to have sex with him. As one miner described, “The
meaning of rape is to take someone by force and even if you haven’t already agreed to do it you make them
have sex with you, this is a common thing in our area.” Female transporters reinforced this, saying, “When a
man is drunk he can also rape a woman without have a conversation, and even if it looks like prostitution, it is
rape. This happens a lot of time to prostitutes.” One young miner simply stated, “Ya kila qualite na aina iko hapa
nyabibwe . (There is sexual violence of every quality and kind here in Nyabibwe). When god built the mine here
he knew that rape would be there as well with the mine.”

Men also noted that is a woman’s fault is she is raped, and that women can avoid this by not dressing
provocatively or getting themselves into dangerous situations. The onus for combatting rape was put squarely
on women’s shoulders. A group of young miners explained:

        How can we fight rape? It is a personal decision. You [a woman] must protect
        yourself, if you don’t expose yourself in front of a man they cannot rape you… Here
        there is more sexual violence because there are rebels up high in the mountains, that
        is why it is here. But the real reason there is rape is here is because the women expose
        themselves and comport themselves in a certain way.

These kinds of attitudes illustrate the gross inequality that women face on a day-to-day basis. Excluded from
power structures and decision-making structures, the only thing they are perceived to be responsible for is the
violence that is perpetrated against them.

In multiple cases, the issue of rape is specifically associated with soldiers and armed men. People speak of
miners raping by promising money and not paying. In contrast, soldiers are described as engaging in the forms
of militarized rape that have become common as a result of conflict in DRC. These attacks may occur on
roads and in fields. Miners in Nyabibwe noted, “Soldiers are the ones who are used to raping people… but it is
usually driven by a gun, if people went to their farm they can get raped or even gang raped, because we think if
we say no they will kill us. But it is not that common among us civilians.” Women transporters described how,
“Is it here – yes when there is war –Ntaganda, Nkunda – their soldiers rape IDPs, then others keep the
practice going.” The leader of the sex worker’s association in Nyabibwe said, “Soldiers they usually don’t pay
for sex, sometimes demobilized soldiers as well, but even miners themselves, many don’t pay for sex after they
do it.” Rape is often associated with the use of drugs and alcohol, which are widespread in mining towns. In
the next section, we will examine how young people look upon mining towns as a kind of “Pleasure Island”.
However, like this fictional retreat, they often come to learn that the reality is far from their glamorous
perception and that it can be harder to leave than to enter.

Pleasure Island and Petri Dish - “All the divertissements you can imagine exist there”
Here we will examine how the nexus of drugs, alcohol, sex work, sexual and physical violence and easy cash
change families and societies in these areas. Throughout focus groups, parents explain how children are drawn
to the mines, drawn by the lure of money, sex, and drugs . A community leader in Nyabibwe explains how,

        When the mining area is active, when someone has 15 years, boys and girls, the
        miners come down into town to drink lots of beer, those kids will have that
        sentiment to go into the quarry because they see people with beer, drugs, and money.
        They see it as a better lifestyle. The kid sees money and doesn’t study anymore, the
        15 year old may even like his family, but then money is more important.


                                                       21
Drug and alcohol use is described as being
rampant in mining towns and inside the quarries
themselves. The effects of substance abuse are an
increase in violence and a breakdown in the social
fabric of their villages. Miners say drugs are used
to dull the suffering they experience while mining.
Alcohol and drug abuse allows them to go deep
into the earth with less fear, and makes many
more able to fight off competition when needed.
The chief of the village of Mushinga noted,
“Regarding alcohol, oh! la la! there is so much in
these neighborhoods, it is also the problem, really!
There they take the hemp, strong liqueurs, Sapilo,
Life Force with 45% alcohol which is equal to the
amount of 9 bottles of beer primus, Kanyanga7 in
any case these drugs ... really ... who could be Alcoholic “energy drinks” are commonly consumed around mines.
successful in changing this? ... It is these same The small clear bottle pictured here has as much alcohol as the nine
drugs that cause a man to be able to forcibly at a beers lined up behind it.
woman on his shoulders and rape her.” Miners in
Nyabibwe relate alcohol abuse to fuel for vehicles, saying;

            The majority of people use beer and drugs. Lots of people drink beer and smoke pot
            as “their fuel”, to go down the mine – drugs and beer help you to not be scared
            anymore, to make you strong, and to give you the ability to scare other people off
            from there so they don’t take your things.

For many respondents, drugs also offer a respite from a harsh reality, helping them to temporarily forget
traumatic experiences and poverty. Miners also acknowledge that alcohol abuse is perhaps the greatest cause of
sexual violence and other forms of violence against women. Many participants in the research drew a clear
connection between drugs and alcohol and sexual violence and physical abuse of women. Young women in
Nyabibwe explain how, “Those who do drugs and drink, no matter what, they will hit you very hard and rape
you, if you don’t agree with what they tell you to do.” A healthcare provider noted, “There are also cases of
sexual violence in these settings there, because usually after consuming these drugs these diggers force women
to sleep with them, to rape women.”

In addition to creating an atmosphere rife with violence and abuse, drugs and alcohol are depicted as eating
into the small profit that miners make, creating tension and conflict at the domestic level. In an already
unstable and unpredictable industry, drugs and alcohol create another barrier towards economic stability for
many vulnerable populations. As women in Nzibera say, “people drink instead of helping their family.”
Community leaders in Nzibera elaborate on this, noting:

            Women don’t mine, but men do, when the men get one kilo they can sometimes eat
            well, but sometimes the men just go drink, then violence enters the household, as this
            creates conflict at home because men wasted money on beer and they don’t have
            enough profit.

Mining communities, even those within a day or two walk of a village can become a black hole; Women say
their husbands leave and are gone for months. Some never return while others leave for long periods of time
without sending news (or money) back to their families. Miners may establish new homes or start new families
in mining town. The chief of Mushinga noted, “So too the fathers abandon their families and will remain in

7   A locally made liquor


                                                          22
the same mine for a year and will be with loose women.” He went on to explain how, “The young [men] also
do not marry as young or as soon as they used to. They arrive in the mine, they use prostitutes and forget to
come back to get married ...”

Participants often described the mining lifestyle pulling apart traditional family structures. Men “disappear”
into mining areas and build new lives. While money exists around the mines, little of these profits seem to
make it back to hungry children and sick family members. Instead, miner’s profits often seem to “spend their
money and sex on beers, then they don’t have any more money.”8 Community leaders in Nzibera noted,
“There are many problems for women – men sell minerals, get money, use it all for beer, wont bring it to
home, children and women sleep with hunger even though the man was able to get money.” As a healthcare
provider from Mulamba said, “Many of the sick [in our hospital] are women who have been abandoned. Their
husbands stay in the mines for months on end or disappear completely. The husbands find money and women
in the mines, they set up a new life and never come back.” Female transporters in Nyabibwe reinforced this,
saying, “It appears as if it is the women and children who suffer the most because even if your man gets
money he can use it all on prostitutes in the mining areas, and this causes ukosefu9 and diseases for women.”

The issues of sexually transmitted diseases was cited by a number of participants in the research. It was
described as an inevitable by-product of miners’ lifestyles:

           There are loose women who have a lot of sexually transmitted infections like
           gonorrhea, STIs too ... We diagnosed HIV cases and then we help them with advice
           for them to live responsibly with their disease.10

People spoke particularly about HIV/AIDS as an emerging threat, “Before the war we didn’t even know what
rape was. Rape came with the war, now rape is the habit, any man can come into the neighborhood and say ‘I
want this woman’ and then he takes her. HIV/AIDs wasn’t known about before.” However, STIs and other
health issues associated with mining often go unaddressed due to poor healthcare infrastructure in these areas.

Health
                                              Health problems in mining towns are broken down into three
                                              categories by participants; poor labor conditions; poor structure of
                                              mining tunnels; and public health problems such as poor hygiene and
                                              high levels of infectious disease. The scarcity of public health
                                              resources in mining areas, such as toilets, clean water supply, waste
                                              systems, and primary care facilities, combined with close quartered
                                              living conditions, leads to high prevalence of diarrhea, tuberculosis,
                                              respiratory infections, malnutrition, and malaria. These problems are
                                              consistent across all the sites visited. Sexually transmitted infections
                                              including HIV/AIDS are also described as significant problems,
                                              although people have such poor access to healthcare that these
                                              conditions often are not officially diagnosed. The head nurse in
                                              Mulamba describes the biggest health issues facing his community:

                                              There is a lot of kwashiorkor, and it is more
                                              common in the mining areas. There is a lot of
                                              HIV/AIDS, poverty leads women to exchange sex.
                                              There are also sanitary problems and many accidents
    A local community social worker updates   and blunt trauma from landslides and rockfalls.
    statistics on cases of women who report   There is tuberculosis in the mines. Close to the
    sexual violence.

8 Quote from young sex workers in Nyabibwe
9 Deep poverty
10 Healthcare provider Mulamba




                                                           23
        mines, we see cholera, amoebas, diarrhea, measles, and typhoid. People in the mines
        drink river water, which is very dirty. There is no clean water in the mines

Lack of access to health care due to financial or geographical obstacles exacerbates these issues. Many
participants explain how pursuing health care is not an easy choice. Miners in Mulamba illustrate the sacrifice it
often takes to get medical treatment;

        When people need care, they are transported to the nearest health center. They must
        sell their fields or goats to pay for healthcare. They can’t make enough to pay for care
        from the mines. They don’t have a “cushion” of money. There is malnutrition, there
        are no houses where you can really rest, take care of yourself; there is no clean water
        to drink or bathe; no toilets.

The head nurse in Mulamba goes even further, saying many must choose between eating and going to the
health center, and that such barriers to health services leads many to put their faith in prayer, or magic over
health care;

        You will see that in one family, if someone falls sick, the little they make is not
        enough to pay [for healthcare]. Many people die because their family decides to eat
        rather than to pay the clinic fees for one person. This is because of the kind of
        poverty we live in. People say that health problems are a result of witchcraft. They
        pray instead of getting care.

All actors present in mining communities without exception emphasize the need for improved public health
infrastructure and access to health facilities in mining areas.

Power Structures and Political Economy of Mining Towns
While political economies of mining communities vary significantly across the study sites, there are also
commonalities across the contexts where mining is the principle economic activity. Research participants
portray how a variety of local, provincial, and regional actors compete for resources and control. However, the
level of government control, extent of the regulation by mining cooperatives, and presence of the national
army and other armed groups contributes to unique political economies in each area.

Highly restricted access to political participation and widespread discrimination are the norm in all
communities sampled. Vulnerable populations, such as women, the elderly, the poor and landless, children and
the handicapped (to name a few) are almost never represented in political decision-making. This reality means
the majority of the population is denied the right to participate in the formulation of local policies and
decision-making. Power rests primarily with a small group of older males. While marginalized groups are often
left free to self-organize and form associations to promote a common profession or interest, they lack the
financial means, human capacity and political influence to make sustainable change. Entrenched power
structures, firmly in control of local economies, ensure that this cycle of disenfranchisement continues –
realized through unequal distribution of mining profits and the exclusion of vulnerable groups from decision-
making processes.

The “Wakosefo” and “Wafupi” - Vulnerable populations
This finding begs the question of who are those groups that are defined as “vulnerable” by communities?
Research participants describe women, children, and displaced persons as the most vulnerable in mining
communities. In communities where money is often seen as a condition for having power, and vice versa, lack
of representation of women and youth in power structures continues to restrict their social and economic
mobility. In focus groups, participants drew this connection between money and power through descriptions
of their own identity. In Kiswahili, the word “ukosefu” means poverty, or wanting. This word captures more
than just material destitution, but a sense of disconnect from all social as well as financial opportunity.
Participants in the research, especially young women, describe themselves as “wakusefu” – those who lack, the


                                                       24
impoverished. Women and other who felt disenfranchised from the process also described themselves as
“wafupi” – short or little people.

Participants frequently said "hawatuoni sisi wafupi", they (big men, powerful people), don't “see” us short people
(the impoverished, marginalized populations). They often used the two words together to emphasize their
point - they don't see us short, poor people. (wafupi, wakosefu).

In describing the most vulnerable, participants cite widows and single mother households, orphans, and
renters (those without their own land) as the most exposed to exploitation and discrimination. Women traders
in Mushinga spoke to some of the factors of that contribute to vulnerability:

            We can say that the women in this community are those who are most vulnerable
            because they have no shops, no money, and they carry heavy loads long distances for
            very little money. Life is really difficult for them. There are also children who do not
            study because they do not have the money.

Men are traditionally in charge of all household assets and finances, so widows and women whose husbands
left home to mine report feeling very little control over their economic status. This is cited as one of the
reasons women might then seek work in the mines themselves – to regain a sense of agency and to find a way
to make money in the absence of income from a male head of household. Young male miners agree that
gender was a major factor in vulnerability. Since young men feel as if they are part of another marginalized and
exploited group – youth – they seek to frame their plight through a gendered lens. The common perception is
that rape of women is the only issue that attracts international NGOs and humanitarian assistance. This leads
many men to express themselves as if they were also victims of such violence. As illustrated by this quote from
a young miner “Young women the most vulnerable people here, although young men are also ‘raped’ in the
sense that they have no work, no opportunities, they have their small money stolen from them. In that sense
they are raped11.”

The displaced are also some of those with the most restricted opportunities. Miners in Nyabibwe described
how, “IDPs suffer the most, they have no way to get anything, they can’t pay for homes, food, school, IDPs
are more vulnerable than autochthones12 definitely.” Having land is directly tied to vulnerability in the study sites.
Miners and others explain that given the unpredictable and unstable nature of mining work, where salaries are
erratic and debts high, those who do not own land are often most vulnerable to the vacillations of the mining
market and the luck of finding minerals. Having access to land, which one can rent or return to is a vital
“cushion” against economic shocks. Displaced persons or others forced to rent land or shelter are often kicked
out of their homes for failure to pay rent, moving from town to town in order to survive. While there is
general agreement on which segments of the population are the most vulnerable, they excluded from the
formal economic and political landscape.

Representation
Research participants overwhelmingly state that vulnerable groups in mining communities are not represented
in power structures. This results in an aura of secrecy around the decision-making, which in turn creates
mistrust. Local authorities, mining cooperatives, and armed groups, are all seen are part of the same
entrenched system. Participants express a common perception of local political economies as rampant with
corruption and nepotism. Miners from Nyabibwe state, “It is a secret of the cooperatives how they work, there
are many meetings they do that they don’t invite people, we don’t know how it really works inside.”




11   Site
12   Those originally from the area – “locals”


                                                           25
This disconnect between those with and without power
                                                                   CASE STUDY: ASSOCIATION OF THE “FREE
creates a sense among vulnerable groups that they hold
                                                                           WOMEN” IN NYABIBWE
little agency, and that everyone must look out for
themselves. Young women in Nyabibwe illustrated this          In Nyabibwe, a respected woman, Mama Angelique*
phenomenon, saying, “Leaders don’t care about people,         who had worked herself in the mines for years was
they only care about themselves, mines are like the           asked by a local leader to help address the face that
market, everyone does their work, but no one cares            many young women were flocking to the town to
                                                              become prostitutes. She decribed, “That was why
about others.” This lack of social cohesion is not            with chef de poste came and said we need to look
surprising since mining towns draw people from many           after [these young women]. Let us pick one women
areas seeking economic opportunity. Rather than having        to look after them, the beaten, raped. I was selling
a static population that has cemented trust and social        beer up at the mine, they picked me because I was
bonds over generations, it is a fluid society defined by      serious and was able to look after them.” As an
the search for opportunity.                                   active mining center, women came long distances
                                                              because of the perceptions that miners had money
                                                              to spend. The influx of these women was taxing the
The biggest population group in mining towns is               nearly non-existent town infrastructure. For
undoubtedly youth. Young men and women, often                 instance, the local hospital was becoming
uneducated, are drawn to mining areas for a variety of        overwhelmed as women who did not have the
reasons. Despite making up the majority of the labor          money to pay for vital health services for
force, they are rarely represented in political processes     themselves and their children would wait to seek
                                                              care until their medical problems were extremely
that greatly impact their lives. Miners in Nyabibwe speak     advanced. Then, they would have default on their
of failed promises, conflict between leaders, and             bills.
exclusion of youth and women from leadership
positions, “They don’t put any youth in their groups,         Mama Angelique, with the critical support of local
youth aren’t represented, they just promise people over       leaders, established an informal association of sex
                                                              workers. Each member contributed a fee of five
and over again, leaders are politicians, and they don’t
                                                              dollars, which was later used to support member’s
always understand each other, which can lead to fighting.     health care bills or to get them out of jail. The leader
Women also aren’t included.”                                  of this association described this process;

Mining Cooperatives                                           [A member] will pay some small money to enter the
According to the DRC mining code, in order for a group           association, it will stay in the mchango (pot of
                                                               contributions), many of them will have a children
of artisanal miners to exploit an area with semi-industrial
                                                               without a dad so this money helps them get health
equipment, they are required to form a mining                  support, and other support when they are sick or
cooperative. In Nyabibwe, a site targeted by a variety of                         have problems.
mining reform initiatives and mineral tagging schemes,
mining cooperatives are visibly present and powerful.         Women who became a part of this association
These cooperatives represent traditional power                describe it as one of the most important factors in
                                                              allowing them to access healthcare, withstand
structures, reinforcing discriminatory gender roles and       financial shocks and receive peer-support. This
formalizing the exploitation of vulnerable populations in     intervention was achieved with no outside financial
the mining process. While respondents generally think         input. The combination of political will, dynamic
that the aim of these groups should be to modernize the       individual change-makers and social organization
mines and increase profit, they frequently feel left out of   helped address some of these young women’s most
these processes. Female transporters in Nyabibwe              pressing problems. The young women in the
                                                              association didn’t want to be called prostitutes, so
discuss their exclusion from cooperatives;                    they described how they want to call their
                                                              association, “The Association of Free Women.”
        We don’t know how they operate because they
        don’t involve us, they don’t care about us mama *Name changed for confidentiality
        transporters, that is why these days there is no
        one work available, and while we are suffering they don’t care. These groups are
        mainly made for men, not us women.

In areas where cooperatives do exist, membership or affiliation with one is often mandatory to work in a
mining area. In Nyabibwe, conflict between two major cooperatives has erupted into violence, and
communities cite their lack of cooperation as an obstacle to development. However, community opinion of


                                                        26
cooperatives is not all negative, with some examples of positive collaboration between cooperatives benefiting
communities cited. Young women in Nyabibwe noted that, “Sometimes the cooperatives work together, for
example they might all put money together and buy a machine, and in that sense they help bring benefits to
other people.” Even though cooperatives provide occasional support to the mining processes in a way that can
benefit vulnerable communities, the main fora for marginalized people in mining towns are small associations.

Associations
Excluded from participating in local policymaking and distribution of mining profits, many residents of mining
communities turn to associations as the only fora where they can be heard. Women in Nyabibwe describe how
associations give them a united voice and opportunities to pool their resources to protect against financial
shocks:

        These [associations] unite women who don’t have any options in life, “wafupi” –
        women who can’t be seen or heard – get together, they can put in money together
        and give out small loans. For us wafupi, what should we do? There is no place else to
        go.

The most common types of association are those for community development, loans, or those that act as a
type of union of professional workers. Miners, masons, carpenters, and farmers frequently form associations in
order to both modernize their trade and limit their exploitation by those in power. Women and youth groups
are also prominent in most communities. Youth in Mushinga describe the types of associations in their
community and the benefit they brought to the population:

        Yes there are associations here at home: MED (mothers engaged for development)
        APPP, PADI, LDF, CRIS D’AFRIQUE, RECOPE, which are involved in
        agriculture, carpentry, child protection. These associations are beneficial to the
        community because the population works with them and likes the reasons these
        associations exist in our population.

Access to these associations does not generally require any financial contribution. One must simply be a
member of the relevant profession or be willing to work for the community. Some of the most effective
associations, however, do indeed charge a membership fee, although this fee is often flexible and waived if
necessary. While associations have limited impact due to a lack of resources, they are largely seen as the only
opportunity for vulnerable groups to speak up for their interests.

Armed Group Control
The link between powerful groups in mining towns and armed groups or the national military has been widely
documented in existing literature. In communities visited throughout the course of the study, armed group
control is present and powerful, but also well hidden.

Militarized control over mines is not overt or physical, but realized through links to powerful cooperatives,
customary authorities, and taxation. The a healthcare provider in Mulamba explains this invisible control:

        Now, in the mines, some of the mines are still run by armed groups, even if it is not
        visible. They run things through taxation. Of the mines, at least seven [of the eleven]
        are occupied by the government – police or military.

Taxation takes place in a variety of forms, including granting access to mines for a certain time per week to
armed groups or the national army. In Walungu, a local overseer discusses how, in order to keep his mine
operational, he is forced to give the FARDC one hour per week of access to mines, “Every Saturday for one
hour the FARDC are allowed to go up to the mine and can get all of the profit, they don’t actually mine but
they make the profit [of those who do mine] for that one hour.” This tradition of “salongo” or “community
service” has a long history in DRC. In various forms, armed groups have put civilian populations to work in


                                                      27
mines and take the profits. The same healthcare provider described how this was done during the height of the
conflict:


           But during the war, armed men threw out the traditional leaders and took over. They
           forced all of the people to work in the mines using threats. The armed men
           distributed the hills like candy; ‘you get this, you get this.’ The armed group imposed
           salongo. There were those who left because of the salongo and took refuge in
           another place. Soon, people were no longer aligned with where they came from. Such
           as someone leaving Madaka takes refuge in Mushinga. That was how the
           abandonment of the land was perpetuated.

In addition to illegal taxation, participants widely agree that the presence of armed groups in certain areas
effectively restricts access to mining areas and the movement of minerals to the market. This control of critical
roads is a powerful way to regulate the flow of minerals and profit. Young women in Nyabibwe state:

           Before the war – people were doing good mining, many different mines, men were
           going there to mine, there were no rebels on the road to block them and bother
           them, but since war came many mining areas are controlled or blocked off by rebels.



Community leaders in Nzibera add that, “There were more mines before the war, and [now] people can’t get
out to the good mines because they are controlled by armed groups, so there is not as much access.” Power
holders in mining communities are often forced to forge alliances with armed groups or the national army in
order to ensure security at their mine. While this often costs them a certain cut of their profit, it is a necessity
in the chaotic environment of rural eastern Congo. Being protected by one armed group can be a deterrent for
predation by others.

                                          Modalities of Armed Group Control
“Community Service”                                         Imposing forced work, either for long amounts of time or more
                                                            subtly by mandating that profits won on certain days or at certain
                                                            times go to the armed group
Taxation                                                    Ensuring a portion of the profits go the armed group operating in
                                                            the area
Control of roads and trade                                  Constraining access to and from mining towns, guaranteeing that
                                                            all profits coming in and leaving an area can be accessed
Direct control of mines                                     Taking charge of certain mines and manage all aspects of its
                                                            operation
Security                                                    Providing protection against other armed group and external
                                                            threats for a fee



Justice and Mediation
Mining communities in South Kivu state that rampant corruption in both state and non-state institutions
severely restricts access to justice. For the majority of participants, demands for justice after suffering human
rights violations are at best unrealistic and, at worst, dangerous. Those must vulnerable to human rights
abuses, such as orphans, widows, sex workers, and displaced persons, are also those least able to access
traditional and formal justice mechanisms. Indeed, there is a perception that those responsible for justice are
some of the worst perpetrators of human rights abuses themselves. This leads to a pronounced lack of
confidence among communities in available mechanisms for seeking and receiving justice.

Women bear the brunt of this discrimination – traditional gender imbalances in Congolese society are acutely
realized in the justice sector. Female transporters from the mining community of Mushinga framed restricted
access to justice as part of a larger picture of gender discrimination and corruption in their communities:


                                                           28
        Women are despised here – people don’t want women asserting their rights.
        However, we would like to see an organized structure to defend women's rights here
        in our community. Some of these structures do exist but they are very discriminatory,
        because one cannot help you if you have no money or if you don’t have influence in
        the organization.

Justice is therefore viewed as largely a transactional affair. Women and other vulnerable groups lack
representation in influential organizations, so their only access points become cash, material goods, or sex.
Mechanisms or institutions that effectively address the nature of harm caused by discrimination in the field of
economic, social, and cultural rights simply do not exist for the majority of people living Artisanal and Small-
Scale Mining (ASM) communities in South Kivu. Instead, paths to justice are seen as confusing, intimidating,
and predatory.

State mechanisms are largely disengaged from the judicial process due to corruption and frequent implication
in human rights abuses themselves. Participants describe the pre-requisites in gaining access to these
structures: money and influence. These create greater separation between state mechanisms and the
communities they are meant to serve. Young women in Nyabibwe described the importance of cash in getting
assistance from authorities if you have a problem in the mines:

        There are also security people there [in the mines], but they can help you only if you
        have money, if you don’t there is nothing. Even if you get help in the
        first place from an authority, if someone comes with more money your                 ______
        dossier gets put to the ground. Here there are no rights for women or
        anyone else - money is what determines all.                                  We see that the government
                                                                                      doesn’t follow-up on anything
Lacking both money and influence, vulnerable groups have no choice but to              related to the rights of people
look at the concept of justice as hopeless and resource draining. Further             (human rights) because it will
compounding this lack of confidence is the fact that agents of the state are           look like a rebellion against
often seen as the biggest perpetrators of human rights violations in mining              them, meaning that if you
areas. Miners in Nyabibwe stated:                                                     follow-up a lot on one of your
                                                                                       problems, the problem won’t
        In order to get your rights back if you had a problem you have to go to              die, but you will.
        the big men, but then the problem is that they are often the same ones
        that stole from you – this means that if your rights are violated its                    ______
        almost impossible to get them back, if he has good will he can give it
        back, if not, it’s not possible.

Thus, bringing one’s problems to authorities can expose people to more challenges than if they had stayed
silen. Young women stated that fighting for their rights could expose them to both domestic consequences
(anger from spouse) and threats from those in charge. In Nyabibwe, women described the resulting justice-
seeking fatigue, “We also feel tired because we have been stolen from so many times and now there is nowhere
to go to work, our rights are also always violated, if you follow-up on this you will be seen as an enemy of the
group in charge.”

In addition to stigma from the community or those in power, participants also stated that they fear
government retaliation for speaking out about human rights abuses. Female transporters from Nyabibwe
described the seriousness of this threat:

        We see that the government doesn’t follow-up on anything related to the rights of
        people (human rights) because it will look like a rebellion against them, meaning that
        if you follow-up a lot on one of your problems, the problem won’t die, but you will.



                                                       29
Participants described how women are often prevented from seeking justice not just due to a lack of faith in
the system, but also intimidation and harassment from perpetrators. Men use their economic power over
women to deter them from seeking justice. Women are frequently told that if they complain about abuse they
will never get a job again in or around the mine, leaving those with no viable economic alternative few options
but to drop their case.

Traditional Justice and Mediation
Customary structures for resolving disputes and delivering justice, while still often corrupt and reinforcing of
discriminatory gender roles, were portrayed as slightly friendlier to vulnerable groups than state institutions.
However, participants noted that this changed with the conflict and that these structures are not as effective as
they once were, since armed groups often purposefully killed or forced out community leaders during the
conflict. Before the major wars of the 1990s, communities often sought justice through bashamuka, local wise
men trusted by the community to make relatively fair decisions regarding community and family level disputes.
Community leaders in Mushinga reflected on this process:

        Before everything [the conflict], it was first of all the mature or wise people of the
        neighborhood who did reconciliation. We call them the “deans” or wise people
        (bashamuka) and if you still couldn’t fix the problem, you go to the justice, which is to
        say to the tribunal by way of the police. It’s like that that men resolved their
        problems here in our village. Other ways of resolving problems is through mediation.
        We call the two concerned parties and look at how to reconcile the problem by
        showing them the possible routes to a solution. If they accept – that’s it. The
        problem is resolved. If not, they go to the leaders of that area like the chef de centre, chef
        de localite, chef de groupement. Women solved their problems in the same way as men.

With the conflict came displacement and the separation of families and communities, frequently leading to a
breakdown of the social fabric in villages across eastern Congo. As security improved and people returned
home, mining towns became attractive places for vulnerable groups and those having trouble regaining rights
to their land to seek employment. Due to the large presence of “outsiders” in mining communities, traditional
and customary systems of justice became less effective and able to solve disputes and offer justice.

Resiliency in the absence of the state
The vast majority of participants of focus groups and interviews in two mining sites in South Kivu expressed a
feeling of hopelessness when discussing justice. The common saying was that the best way to get justice was to
forget about their problems and move on. When probed about last resorts to solving their problems, miners in
Nyabibwe said, “The only thing to do is to stay quiet and forget about it…People get solutions by just leaving
their problems behind, because there is no way you will actually just get a solution.”

In the absence of courts and tribunals, trusted administrative authorizes, and capable national human rights
institutions or ombudspersons, participants said they relied on each other and small associations as the most
neutral and capable parties for bringing some level of justice. For instance in Nyabibwe, the association of the
“free women,” led by a respected woman in the community, assists members of the group if their rights are
violated. While she admits that her own authority is limited due to her gender, coming together provides
support to an otherwise extremely vulnerable population. If one of them is harassed or arrested by the police,
the group will often pool together money, made from membership fees, in order to pay for her release. Due to
the absence of effective state and non-state actors to assist vulnerable groups access justice, women and youth
are increasingly relying on each other to resolve disputes and seek justice to the extent possible. In the next
section, we will suggest recommendations to address the issues that emerged from the research.




                                                          30
Recommendations

     Advance peace and security - these were seen as vital prerequisites for building equitable and
      sustainable economic systems;
     Support steady employment. This was seen as the most important solution to many problems
      mining communities face, from improving access to healthcare to reducing violence against
      women;
     Assist women access jobs other than sex work;
     Address corruption and fraud in the mining sector resulting from increasing efforts at
      government regulation of this industry;
     Provide technical assistance in the modernization of ASM;
     Engage in education around mining code and rights of those in mining towns;
      Strengthen the capacity of local associations to advocate for their own rights;
     Promote grass-roots inclusive economic cooperatives;
     Assist communities to better understand the world mining marker and reasons for price
      fluctuations;
     Provide basic water and sanitation facilities in mines, such as latrines and clean water
     Improve healthcare, with a focus on addressing infectious and sexually transmitted diseases




                                                31
         Annex 1. Qualitative Data Collection in Walungu and Kalehe

                                             Walungu Axis
Buy –in Phase                     Key Informant Interviews             Focus groups
Provincial authorities            Chief of nursing at Mulamba Health   Women transporters of minerals
“Groupement” authorities          Center                               Women traders in village
“Centre” Authorities              Chief of Center, Mubumbano           Male community leaders
Health center staff               Chief of Center, Mushinga            Men in the community (miners,
                                                                       tradesmen)
                                                                       Service providers and community
                                                                       activists



                                              Kalehe Axis
Buy –in Phase                     Key Informant Interviews             Focus groups
Provincial authorities            Leader of women’s sex work           Women transporters of minerals
“Groupement” authorities          association                          Women sex workers
“Centre” Authorities              Leaders of mining cooperative        Male miners
Local intelligence organization                                        Men in the community (tradesmen)
Mining cooperatives                                                    Service providers and community
                                                                       activists




                                                   32
Annex 2. Description of Field sites
Walikale (pending)
Approximately 40 percent of North Kivu Provinces 2010 total revenue came from the Bisie mine
located 45kilometers from the town of Walikale. From 1976-1995 the Bisie mine was managed by a
partly state-owned company SOMINKI. Cluff Minin (U.S. owned) and Canadian Banro Corporation
formed SAKIMA and co-owned the site from 1995 to 1998 when the President dissolved the
partnership. ASM continued on a smaller scale and in 2006 two Goma based companies, Mining and
Processing Congo (MPC) and Bangandula Mining Group (GMB), vied for control of the site. MPC
won out, using GPS to prove that Bisie was outside of GMBs jurisdiction. In 2007 Bisie was
declared illegal due to non-compliance with the Mining Code of 2003. Bisie is currently controlled by
the non-integrated 85th brigade of the FARDC; the area is highly militarized, there is a large ex-
combatant population in the mine that adds to the “volatile security situation.” The 85th brigade
imposes illegal taxes and fees on mineral exports and trade routes, greatly diminishing the wages of
miners who earn US$5 on a good day. 1 kilogram of cassiterite from Bisie is sold at US$1.50-3,
compared to US$5 before the ban, and US$20per kg at other mines. Miners work with rudimentary
tools and dig 150 meters into the mountain, far past the “safe” distance of 30 meters. A 45 kilometer
walking path connects Bisie to the town of Walikale. From Walikale small planes fly the minerals to
Goma and reload with supply and food on the return trip. Bisie and the two supporting villages,
Manoire and Marojé, have an estimated population of 10,000 people: 30% female, 70% male, 20%
are younger than 10 and 20% are between the ages of 10 and 18. Though there are rivers and
cultivatable soil around Bisie 95% of the food is imported, resulting in inflation and dependency on
imports. Like many mining communities alcoholism, crime, drug abuse, prostitution, malnutrition,
and poor health are common and there is no access to clean water, sanitation, health care services,
adequate shelter, electricity or schools. From July 30 to August 2 2010, a mixture of FDLR, Mayi
Mayi and CNDP combatants raided 13 villages within the Walikale territory, looted 946 homes, and
raped 303 people. As of April 2011 Global Witness reported a decrease in the military presence at
Bisie. However, Mai Mai armed forces have had an increased presence since mass rapes in July and
August of 2010.


Kalehe
  Detailed history on Kalehe, a territory in South Kivu Province, proves difficult to find. Around
1994-1995 Jean-Pierre Ondekone, a Rwandan chef in Goma, and his armed forces began crossing the
border into DRC and taking control of mines. Fieldwork interviews with the rural population of
Numbi in August of 2001 spoke to the abandonment of agriculture and cattle raising that resulted
from the quick cash appeal of mining. Large plots of grazing land have been destroyed by mining
and the local population does not have a good relationship with the mine owners because the
community is not benefiting from the mineral wealth extraction. In 2006, around the same times as
in Walike, FARDC armed forces took control of the mines. It’s estimated that 75% of the FARDC
revenue was made from illegal taxes. 1kg of casserite could be sold for US$4.00-4.50 and miners
could make up to $12 on a productive day. Since 2008 Shamika, a Canada based company as owned
Kalehe and conducted research on previous ASM sites and other potential mineral deposits.
SHamika found that 10 tons of tin a week had previously left the “traditional” mine and resources
were extracted from other sites around Nyabimbwe. The Kimia II operation of January 2010 got rid
of FDLR forces in Kalehe and Congolese armed forces replaced their presence. When Global
Witness was in the Kalimbi mine in Nyabibwe in April of 2011 the FARDC was present, sometimes
working through proxies or dressed in civilian clothes. In a February 2012 MONUSCO mission


                                                 33
forces affiliated with the FDLR, Mai Mai Nyatura and Mai Mai Kichiriko were reported in the area.
Fieldwork interviews with the rural population of Numbi in August of 2001 spoke to the
abandonment of agriculture and cattle raising that resulted from the quick cash appeal of mining.
Large plots of grazing land have been destroyed by mining and the local population does not have a
good relationship with the mine owners because the community is not benefiting from the mineral
wealth extraction.
Walungu
  Information on Walungu proves the most difficult to find and what can be found are mostly
reports of pillages and rape conducted by armed military forces. Walungu is 40 kilometers from
Bukavu and is approximately the size of Rwanda. Before the civil war in the 1990’s the towns
revenue and production was focused on agriculture and livestock, which has seen been abandoned
for mining or stolen/destroyed in raids. There are several international programs working with
Walungu: the Mugangu Foundation is constructing schools across the Walungu territory, the UNDP
began the second phase of a poverty reduction program in 2010, which focused on bringing basic
social services to the area, and an organization called Nabuur is helping purchase livestock and train
locals in how to care for and breed the livestock, along with revitalizing farming in Walungu. Several
mines sites were found: Karhembu is a tin mine, Mukungwe, which was taken over by armed forces
during a raid in March 2008, has approximately 200 child laborers, Kanyola mine experienced a
massacre of 27 people in May of 2007 that is attributed to the “rastas,” whom the FDLR claims no
affiliation with. These mines are all exploited and controlled by the FDLR. Much displacement
occurred in 2006 as violence in the area escalated. Civilians in surrounding towns walk up to 2 hours
to Walungu to spend the night with friends or in the church in the hopes of avoiding a military raid
back home. The 17th and 33rd brigades of the FARDC have been in the area. The Canadian company
Banro Corporation began industrial gold mining in Twangiza in 2011 (Twangiza is in South Kivu, it is
difficult to determine it is in the Walungu territory more specifically).


i
    Bibliography, Human Rights in the ASM Sectors of Katanga and the Kivus, NTF-DRC project, World Bank




                                                       34
