                               96108




Bosnia and Herzegovina
   The World Bank Group
 Country Opinion Survey FY14
       Report of Findings
         January 2015
The World Bank Group                 Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



Acknowledgements
The Bosnia and Herzegovina Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey
Program series of the World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion
Research Group (PORG) team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of
PORG), Jessica Cameron, Svetlana Markova and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza
provided data support. The report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of
Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP). PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Bosnia
and Herzegovina country team and the local fielding agency Prime Communications. In
particular, PORG is grateful to Anabela Abreu (Country Manager) and Jasmina Hadzic
(Communications Associate) for their ongoing support throughout the Country Opinion Survey
process.




                                               1
The World Bank Group                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5

         IV. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina .........................11

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................16

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ......................................24

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................29

       VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................34

         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group
             in Bosnia and Herzegovina ........................................................40

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................46

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................52




                                                          2
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
    Assist the World Bank Group in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
       Bosnia and Herzegovina perceive the World Bank Group;
    Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and results,
              project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
              communication and information sharing in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank Group’s future role in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
    Use data to help inform Bosnia and Herzegovina country team’s strategy.



II. Methodology
From April to June 2014, 300 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina
were invited to provide their opinions on the WBG’s assistance to the country by participating in
a country survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President
or Prime Minister; the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a
ministry, ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on
World Bank Group-supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of a project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral
agencies; private sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks;
NGOs; community-based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government
institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; and the
judiciary branch. A total of 109 stakeholders participated in the survey (36% response rate).
Respondents received questionnaires via post or email and returned them accordingly.
Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Bosnia and Herzegovina; their overall
attitudes toward the WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work
and activities; working with the WBG; the WBG’s future role in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and
the WBG’s communication and information sharing. In addition, every country that engages in
the Country Survey must include specific indicator questions that will be aggregated for the
WBG’s annual Corporate Scorecard. These questions are identified throughout the survey report.
In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 105 respondents (50% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY ’07. Because of the length of time since this past survey, these comparisons
are only presented in the Appendix (see page 136).
A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina: Respondents were asked to indicate whether
   Bosnia and Herzegovina is headed in the right direction, what they thought were the most
   important development priorities, which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty,
   which areas would contribute most to generating economic growth, and what would achieve
   “shared prosperity?.


                                                  3
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their
   familiarity with the WBG, its effectiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina, WBG staff
   preparedness, the effectiveness of its activities, to what extent it should provide capacity
   building support to certain groups, the importance and effectiveness of the WBG’s current
   capacity building work, their agreement with various statements regarding the WBG’s work,
   and the extent to which it is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked
   to indicate the sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the WBG to focus its
   resources, the WBG’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses, its most effective instruments,
   with which stakeholder groups the WBG should collaborate more, if the WBG should have
   more or less of a local presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to what they attributed
   slowed or failed reform efforts.
C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to
   which the WBG’s work helps achieve development results in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
   extent to which the WBG meets Bosnia and Herzegovina’s needs for knowledge services and
   financial instruments, the extent to which the WBG measures and corrects its work in real
   time and builds/strengthens existing country systems, and the importance of the WBG’s
   involvement and the WBG’s level of effectiveness across twenty-seven development areas.
   Respondents were also asked to indicate if WBG decisions regarding its program were made
   primarily in country or at Headquarters.
D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult WBG knowledge work and to rate the quality of the
   WBG’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant of a contribution it makes
   to development results and its technical quality.
E. Working with the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which
   various aspects of the WBG’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving
   Bosnia and Herzegovina’s development challenges and their agreement with a series of
   statements regarding working with the WBG. Respondents were asked to indicate if the
   WBG operates with too much risk and if it is adequately staffed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina: Respondents were
   asked to indicate what the WBG should do to make itself of greater value, which of its
   services the WBG should offer more of in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and which areas would
   benefit most from the WBG playing a leading role versus other development partners.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the WBG, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   WBG’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the WBG’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the WBG, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank Group as a result of the WBG’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked to evaluate the WBG’s information accessibility and
   responsiveness to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they currently collaborate with the WBG, with which WBG agencies
   they work, their exposure to the WBG in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and their geographic
   location. Respondents were also asked if their projects involved both the World Bank and the
   IFC, and if so, to indicate their view of the two institutions working together.


                                                 4
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina               Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
       For further analyses, the few respondents from the office of Minister were combined with
        the respondents from the office of the President, respondents from the financial
        sector/private banks were combined with those from the private sector, and the few
        respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, bilateral agencies, multilateral agencies,
        independent government institutions, trade unions, and private foundations were included
        in the “Other? category.




                                                  5
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Key comparisons across respondents’ specializations can be found in the Appendix (see
        page 140).




                                                 6
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       Because of the small number of respondents, those from Brcko District were combined
        with those from “Other? areas, creating one “Other Areas? category. Only significant
        geographic location differences in ratings of indicator questions will be discussed in the
        body of this report. All geographic locations comparisons can be found in the Appendix
        (see page 100).




                                                  7
The World Bank Group                  Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the World Bank Group

       Differences in responding, based on collaboration with the World Bank Group in Bosnia
        and Herzegovina, can be found in the Appendix (see page 118).




                                                8
The World Bank Group       Bosnia and Herzegovina   Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

The World Bank and IFC




                                     9
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)
Exposure to the World Bank Group
       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on exposure to the World Bank
        Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina, can be found in the Appendix (see page 148). Please
        note that where these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall
        views of the WBG, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




Familiarity with the World Bank Group
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group were significantly,
        moderately correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness, the
        WBG’s work achieving development results, and the WBG’s relevance to development
        in Bosnia and Herzegovina.




                                                10
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina               Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina Heading in the Wrong Direction?

       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG in Bosnia and Herzegovina were
        significantly less likely to indicate that Bosnia and Herzegovina is headed in the wrong
        direction, and significantly more likely to indicate that there were not sure, compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 11
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Development Priority
       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        indicate energy as one of the most important development priorities facing Bosnia and
        Herzegovina compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        energy, anti-corruption, and law and justice as one of the most important development
        priorities compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were
        significantly more likely to indicate job creation/employment as one of the most
        important development priorities facing Bosnia and Herzegovina.




                                                 12
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction

       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        indicate agricultural development and anti-corruption as factors contributing to reducing
        poverty compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups. Respondents from the
        media were also significantly more likely to indicate anti-corruption as a factor
        contributing to reducing poverty compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                13
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth
       Employees of a ministry and respondents from local government and private sector/
        financial sector/private banks were significantly less likely to indicate public sector
        governance/reform as a factor contributing to economic growth compared to respondents
        from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly less likely to indicate
        foreign direct investment compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
        as a factor contributing to economic growth.




                                                14
The World Bank Group                  Bosnia and Herzegovina           Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity?
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        better employment opportunities for young people compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG as ways to achieve “shared prosperity? in Bosnia and
        Herzegovina.




                                               15
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.

Focusing World Bank Group Resources
   Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
    indicate public sector governance/reform as an area in which the WBG should focus its
    resources compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups. Employees of ministries
    and respondents from NGOs, the media, and other organizations were significantly less likely
    to indicate economic growth as an area in which the WBG should focus its resources
    compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                16
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from Republika Srpska gave significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina compared to respondents from other geographic
        locations. Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings
        for the extent to which the WBG’s work achieves development results in Bosnia and
        Herzegovina.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the extent to which the WBG’s
        work achieves development results in Bosnia and Herzegovina compared to respondents
        who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 17
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)




Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions

       Respondents from PMUs gave the highest ratings across all of the country survey
        indicator questions whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister, NGOs,
        and other organizations gave lower ratings, although not significantly so. Responses for
        individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be found in the Appendix (see
        page 149).




                                                18
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value

       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        indicate that strategy formulation was the greatest value of the WBG compared to
        respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                 19
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Effectiveness
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s convening/facilitating and strategy formulation compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                20
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Capacity Building
       Respondents from PMUs gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at project
        implementation whereas respondents from other organizations gave significantly lower
        ratings. Respondents from PMUs, NGOs, and the media gave the highest ratings for the
        importance of the WBG being involved in citizen engagement whereas respondents from
        the office of the President/Minister gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness at project implementation and policy design compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                21
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness
       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        indicate that the WBG’s greatest weaknesses are not exploring alternative policy options
        and that its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups. Respondents from NGOs were
        significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is not enough
        public disclosure of its work compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
        Respondents from academia were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s
        greatest weakness is not being aligned with country priorities compared to respondents
        from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG’s greatest weakness is not exploring alternative policy options compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were significantly more likely to
        indicate that its greatest weakness is not enough public disclosure of its work.




                                                22
The World Bank Group                     Bosnia and Herzegovina               Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts
       Compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups, respondents from the office of
        the President/Minister were significantly more likely to indicate that they attributed failed
        or slow reform efforts to political pressures and obstacles; respondents from the office of
        the President/Minister, local government, and NGOs were significantly more likely to
        indicate that they attributed failed or slow reform efforts to the Government working
        inefficiently; and respondents from NGOs and the media were significantly more likely
        to indicate that they attributed failed or slow reform efforts to an inadequate level of
        citizen/civil society participation.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they attribute failed or slow reform efforts to political pressures and obstacles
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were significantly
        more likely to indicate poor coordination with development partners and that the World
        Bank Group works too slowly.




                                                  23
The World Bank Group           Bosnia and Herzegovina   Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                        24
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among thirteen of these
        twenty-seven areas of development. For the most part, respondents from PMUs tended to
        give the highest ratings of importance across these areas whereas respondents from the
        office of the President/Minister tended to give significantly lower ratings of importance.
        Those areas that had significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Urban development?;
             “Environmental sustainability?;
             “Poverty reduction?;
             “Foreign direct investment?;
             “Water and sanitation?;
             “Disaster management?;
             “Social cohesion?;
             “Equality of opportunity?;
             “Health?;
             “Rural development?;
             “Education?;
             “Climate change?; and
             “Agricultural development?.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings of
        importance for “Energy?, “Disaster management?, “Public sector governance/reform?,
        “Social cohesion?, “Financial markets?, “Equality of opportunity?, “Health?, “Social
        protection?, “Climate change?, and “Natural resource management? compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 25
The World Bank Group              Bosnia and Herzegovina   Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas




                                           26
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Please note the complete breakdown of respondents’ effectiveness ratings for the WBG’s
        work in these development areas can be found in the Appendix. In addition to the
        aggregate mean ratings for each area, respondents who indicated that they “Don’t Know?
        are reported in Appendix A (see page 55), suggesting that primarily informed
        stakeholders responded to these questions. A complete breakdown by stakeholder groups
        can be found in Appendix B (see page 73), by geographic locations in Appendix C (see
        page 100), by WBG-collaborators in Appendix D (see page 118), and by respondents’
        specializations/sectors in Appendix F (see page 140).

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among seven of these
        twenty-six areas of development. For the most part, respondents from PMUs tended to
        give the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness across these areas whereas
        respondents from other organizations tended to give significantly lower ratings of
        importance. Those areas that had significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Local governance and institutions?;
             “Water and sanitation?;
             “Energy?;
             “Public sector governance/reform?;
             “Health?;
             “Climate change?; and
             “Agricultural development?.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness across all but four of these twenty-six areas of development areas
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG. Those areas that did not
        have significant differences were:
            “Water and sanitation?;
            “Financial markets?;
            “Equality of opportunity?; and
            “Health?.




                                                 27
The World Bank Group                     Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, bivariate correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the
twenty-six specific areas of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results increase.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
        The areas determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at local governance and institutions;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at rural development;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at public sector governance/reform; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at water and sanitation.

       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
        suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions
        of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results. The areas determined to be
        key drivers from these analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at urban development;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at education;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at economic growth; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at foreign direct investment.




                                                  28
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Bosnia and Herzegovina

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher levels of
        agreement that the WBG plays a relevant role in development and that the WBG’s work
        is aligned with what they considered the development priorities for Bosnia and
        Herzegovina compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




Strengthening Existing Country Systems

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings that the
        WBG helps to build/strengthen existing country systems in Bosnia and Herzegovina
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                29
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions
       Respondents from the media and academia had the highest levels of agreement that
        “Working with the World Bank Group increases Bosnia-Herzegovina’s institutional
        capacity? whereas respondents from local government and other organizations had
        significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from private sector/financial sector/
        private banks and academia had the highest levels of agreement that “Where country
        systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them? whereas
        employees of ministries and respondents from local government had significantly lower
        levels of agreement.




                                                 30
The World Bank Group                  Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner
       Respondents from PMUs and academia had the highest ratings for “Collaboration with
        EC and other development partners? whereas respondents from other organizations had
        significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina had significantly lower ratings
        for “Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)? compared to
        respondents from other locations. Respondents from Republika Srpska had the highest
        ratings for “Collaboration with the Government? whereas respondents from Federation of
        Bosnia and Herzegovina had significantly lower ratings. Respondents from Republika
        Srpska had the highest ratings for “Collaboration with EC and other development
        partners? whereas respondents from Other Areas had significantly lower ratings.




                                               31
The World Bank Group                     Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner (continued)
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborated with the WBG gave higher ratings
        across all aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner compared to
        respondents who indicated that they did not collaborate, significantly so for all but two.




                                                  32
The World Bank Group       Bosnia and Herzegovina   Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Risk-Taking




Where Decisions are Made




                                    33
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities

       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG reported significantly
        more frequent usage of WBG knowledge work and activities (30% indicated
        weekly/monthly usage) compared to respondents who indicated that they did not
        collaborate (more than two-thirds indicated rarely or never using).




Meeting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
        levels of agreement that the WBG meets Bosnia and Herzegovina’s needs for knowledge
        services compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                34
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
       Respondents from the media and academia had the highest ratings for “Are source of
        relevant information on global good practices? whereas respondents from the office of
        the President/Minister and other organizations had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG gave higher ratings
        across all of these aspects of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, significantly so for all but “Are
        source of relevant information on global good practices?, “Enhance your knowledge
        and/or skills?, and “Are translated enough into local language?.




                                                35
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
        ratings regarding the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work
        compared to respondents who indicated that they do not collaborate with the WBG.




Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)




                                                36
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Most Effective Instruments

       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        indicate that sector-wide approaches are one of the WBG’s most effective instruments in
        reducing poverty compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that sector-wide approaches are one of the WBG’s most effective instruments in reducing
        poverty compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were
        significantly more likely to indicate that they don’t know.




                                                37
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Needs for Financial Instruments
(Indicator Question)

       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
        levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet the needs of Bosnia and
        Herzegovina compared to respondents who indicated that they do not collaborate with the
        WBG.




Measuring and Correcting in Real Time
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher ratings that the
        WBG measures and corrects it work in real time in Bosnia and Herzegovina compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                38
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Assistance/Advisory Work

       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister and academia gave significantly
        higher ratings that the WBG’s delivery work contributes to implementation and
        evaluation compared to respondents from local government and other organizations.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings that the
        WBG’s delivery work contributes to evaluation, design, and implementation compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                39
The World Bank Group                  Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in BH

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
       Respondents from NGOs were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should
        reach out more to groups outside of Government compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG who were significantly more likely to
        indicate that the WBG should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG financing
        compared to respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG.




                                               40
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in BH (continued)

Capacity Building

       Respondents from NGOs gave the highest ratings for the extent to which Bosnia and
        Herzegovina would benefit from WBG capacity building support to groups outside of
        government to help them more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
        whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister gave significantly lower
        ratings. Respondents from local government, the media, and academia gave the highest
        ratings for the extent to which Bosnia and Herzegovina would benefit from WBG
        capacity building support to the public sector, related to implementation of specific
        development projects, whereas respondents from other organizations gave significantly
        lower ratings.




                                                41
The World Bank Group           Bosnia and Herzegovina   Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in BH (continued)

Local Presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina




WBG Staffing in Bosnia and Herzegovina




                                        42
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in BH (continued)

Focusing Services

       Respondents from local government, private sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs,
        the media, and other organizations indicated that the WBG should offer more financial
        services in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Respondents from the office of the President/
        Minister and academia indicated that the WBG should offer more knowledge products in
        Bosnia and Herzegovina. Respondents from PMUs indicated that the combination of
        services is appropriate.




                                                43
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in BH (continued)

The Role of the WBG vs. Other Development Partners

       Respondents were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should play a
        leading role in jobs and public financial management rather than other development
        partners, whom respondents indicated should play a leading role in access to justice
        systems and access to basic services.
       Respondents from PMUs and academia were significantly more likely to indicate that
        other development partners should play a leading role in social safety nets in Bosnia and
        Herzegovina compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG should play a leading role in capacity of state institutions in Bosnia and
        Herzegovina compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 44
The World Bank Group                  Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in BH (continued)

Collaborating with Stakeholders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
   Compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups, respondents from the office of the
    President/Minister and academia were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG
    should collaborate more with academia and respondents from NGOs were significantly more
    likely to indicate that the WBG should collaborate more with NGOs.




                                               45
The World Bank Group   Bosnia and Herzegovina   Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources




                                46
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

       Respondents from local government and private sector/financial sector/private banks
        were significantly more likely to prefer e-Newsletters compared to respondents from
        other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to prefer
        seminars/workshops/conferences compared to respondents who do not collaborate with
        the WBG, who were significantly more likely to prefer e-Newsletters.




                                                47
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Access to Information




       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        obtained their requested information compared to respondents who do not collaborate
        with the WBG.




                                                48
The World Bank Group                    Bosnia and Herzegovina              Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they consult the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




Website Usage
       Nearly all respondents indicated that they had access to the Internet (97%).




                                                 49
The World Bank Group        Bosnia and Herzegovina   Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)




                                     50
The World Bank Group                  Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website/Social Media Evaluation




Information Sharing

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it and that the
        WBG is responsive to their information requests compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                               51
The World Bank Group                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 53

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 71

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations............. 98

          D. Responses to All Questions among WBG Collaborators
             and Non-Collaborators ............................................................... 116

          E. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ................... 134

          F. Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’
             Specializations/Sectors ............................................................... 138

          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ....... 146

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 147

          I. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2014 Bosnia and Herzegovina Questionnaire ............................ 148


                                      BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA




                                                      52
The World Bank Group                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=109)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Bosnia and Herzegovina is headed in...?                      (N=109)
The right direction                                                                            11.0%
The wrong direction                                                                            46.8%
Not sure                                                                                       42.2%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bosnia and
   Herzegovina. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
   important development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. (Choose no            Percentage of Respondents
   more than THREE)                                                                  (Responses Combined; N=105)
Job creation/employment                                                                        52.4%
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               36.2%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Anti-corruption                                                                                31.4%
Economic growth                                                                                28.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                            24.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                                      19.0%
Education                                                                                      18.1%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                 13.3%
Energy                                                                                         13.3%
Agricultural development                                                                       10.5%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                        10.5%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                         5.7%
Rural development                                                                              4.8%
Poverty reduction                                                                              4.8%
Health                                                                                         3.8%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               2.9%
Trade and exports                                                                              2.9%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                           2.9%
Financial markets                                                                              1.9%
Local governance and institutions                                                              1.9%
Disaster management                                                                            1.9%
Environmental sustainability                                                                   1.0%
Social cohesion                                                                                1.0%
Information and communications technology                                                      1.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                           0.0%
Urban development                                                                              0.0%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                  0.0%




                                                         53
The World Bank Group                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina?              Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                       (Responses Combined; N=107)
Job creation/employment                                                                        50.5%
Economic growth                                                                                49.5%
Agricultural development                                                                       26.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                                24.3%
Domestic private sector development                                                            23.4%
Education                                                                                      20.6%
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               19.6%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                 18.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                                      15.9%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                        11.2%
Rural development                                                                              9.3%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                         8.4%
Social cohesion                                                                                3.7%
Local governance and institutions                                                              2.8%
Energy                                                                                         2.8%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                           1.9%
Financial markets                                                                              1.9%
Trade and exports                                                                              1.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                           0.9%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               0.9%
Information and communications technology                                                      0.9%
Health                                                                                         0.9%
Disaster management                                                                            0.9%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                  0.0%
Urban development                                                                              0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                                   0.0%




                                                         54
The World Bank Group                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth          Percentage of Respondents
   in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)                            (Responses Combined; N=108)
Foreign direct investment                                                                      49.1%
Domestic private sector development                                                            38.9%
Job creation/employment                                                                        34.3%
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               30.6%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Energy                                                                                         26.9%
Anti-corruption                                                                                22.2%
Agricultural development                                                                       22.2%
Education                                                                                      9.3%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                         8.3%
Rural development                                                                              8.3%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                        8.3%
Trade and exports                                                                              7.4%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               5.6%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                           3.7%
Local governance and institutions                                                              3.7%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                 2.8%
Information and communications technology                                                      2.8%
Environmental sustainability                                                                   2.8%
Urban development                                                                              1.9%
Financial markets                                                                              1.9%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                  0.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                           0.9%
Social cohesion                                                                                0.9%
Disaster management                                                                            0.0%
Health                                                                                         0.0%




                                                        55
The World Bank Group                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

5. When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country,
   which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved                   Percentage of Respondents
   in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)                                    (Responses Combined; N=102)
Consistent economic growth                                                                           44.1%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                     41.2%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                     38.2%
businesses)
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                            22.5%
A growing middle class                                                                               16.7%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                   12.7%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                              6.9%
More reliable social safety net                                                                      4.9%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                            2.9%
Better quality public services                                                                       2.9%
Other                                                                                                2.9%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                                  1.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                              1.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                      1.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                         0.0%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                          N         DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Bosnia
                                                                                     109        0       5.89     2.29
   and Herzegovina? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Overall Effectiveness                                                                N         DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group's
   effectiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina.* (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very        94         14      5.67     2.06
    effective)


Staff Preparedness                                                                   N         DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Bosnia and Herzegovina
                                                                                     82         25      5.98     2.34
    solve its most complicated development challenges?*
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                               56
The World Bank Group                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
   on development results in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which sectoral areas
   do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources
   (financial and knowledge services) in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                     Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                       (Responses Combined; N=108)
Job creation/employment                                                                        38.0%
Economic growth                                                                                32.4%
Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness, public financial
                                                                                               29.6%
management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
Domestic private sector development                                                            29.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                                      21.3%
Rural development                                                                              17.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                                14.8%
Education                                                                                      13.9%
Agricultural development                                                                       13.9%
Energy                                                                                         13.0%
Poverty reduction                                                                              11.1%
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                                 9.3%
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                                               8.3%
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                                        7.4%
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                                         6.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                           5.6%
Trade and exports                                                                              4.6%
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                                           4.6%
Health                                                                                         2.8%
Local governance and institutions                                                              2.8%
Social cohesion                                                                                1.9%
Environmental sustainability                                                                   1.9%
Financial markets                                                                              0.9%
Urban development                                                                              0.9%
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                                  0.9%
Disaster management                                                                            0.9%
Information and communications technology                                                      0.0%




                                                         57
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                       Percentage of Respondents (N=105)
                                                                                                nd
   activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity             Greatest        2 Greatest
   is of second greatest value in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                       Value            Value              Combined
Financial resources                                                             40.0%            11.5%                51.5%
Capacity development (e.g., institutional development, training for
                                                                                16.2%                17.3%             33.5%
staff at state and entity institutions)
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                      16.2%                14.4%             30.6%
Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                    5.7%                 12.5%             18.2%
Technical assistance                                                            1.9%                 15.4%             17.3%
Policy advice, knowledge                                                        8.6%                 8.7%              17.2%
Convening/facilitating                                                          5.7%                 5.8%              11.5%
Coordination of development partners                                            1.0%                 10.6%             11.5%
Data                                                                            2.9%                 1.9%              4.8%
Other                                                                           2.9%                 0.0%              2.9%

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support                                   Effectiveness
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to achieve development results?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                               N           DK       Mean       SD
6.   Convening/Facilitating                                                               73          28        5.62      2.19
7.   Data                                                                                 85          16        6.39      2.11
8.   Policy advice, knowledge                                                             82          16        5.82      2.50
9.   Financial resources                                                                  89          15        6.65      2.30
10. Technical assistance                                                                  84          16        6.19      2.04
11. Mobilizing third party financial resources                                            75          26        6.00      2.32
12. Coordination of development partners                                                  78          20        5.94      2.16
13. Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                          83          21        5.59      2.34

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number                                     Degree
of ways in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To what degree would Bosnia and
Herzegovina benefit, if capacity building were to support …?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                  N           DK       Mean       SD
14. Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                                        100            4        5.54      2.93
    more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
15. The public sector, related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                        105            2        7.91      2.06
    projects on the ground
16. The public sector, related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                                          99           3        7.40      2.33
    sociopolitical conditions)
17. The private sector, related to institutional and policy change                      100            5        7.83      2.17




                                                               58
The World Bank Group                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the                      Effectiveness
capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Bosnia and
Herzegovina? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
below, please respond “Don’t know?) (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)   N        DK     Mean       SD
18. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                76       33      6.91     2.48
19. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)          51       54      4.80     2.18
20. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                  63       44      6.08     2.32
    goals)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bosnia and                         Importance
Herzegovina to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the
following aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure
to/experience in any of the areas listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                       N        DK     Mean       SD
21. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                96       12      7.98     2.01
22. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)          79       24      6.73     2.54
23. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                  81       26      7.41     2.30
    goals)

24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s
    greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                         Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                          (Responses Combined; N=105)
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in BH                                     35.2%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                              14.3%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                         12.4%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                            11.4%
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries                          11.4%
Don’t know                                                                                       10.5%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                            9.5%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving                    9.5%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                         8.6%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                     8.6%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                      8.6%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                   5.7%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                            4.8%
Not aligned with other development partners’ work                                                4.8%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                         3.8%
Not client focused                                                                               3.8%
Other                                                                                            3.8%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                           1.9%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                         1.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                            0.0%
Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members located in the country                       0.0%




                                                              59
The World Bank Group                            Bosnia and Herzegovina                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

25. Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are
    the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                     Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                             (Responses Combined; N=106)
Investment lending (financing specific projects)                                                    67.9%
Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other development partners)                                   26.4%
Capacity development (e.g., institutional development, training for staff at state
                                                                                                    21.7%
and entity institutions)
Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)                               16.0%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                             15.1%
Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)                        15.1%
Sector-wide approaches                                                                              8.5%
Emergency Recovery lending                                                                          8.5%
Other                                                                                               3.8%
Don’t know                                                                                          3.8%
Trust Fund management                                                                               1.9%

26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development              Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                              (Responses Combined; N=109)
Private sector                                                                                      49.5%
Local Government                                                                                    36.7%
Community of development partners                                                                   32.1%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                            24.8%
Beneficiaries                                                                                       14.7%
NGOs                                                                                                10.1%
Media                                                                                               5.5%
Parliament                                                                                          4.6%
Other                                                                                               2.8%
Don’t know                                                                                          2.8%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                                1.8%
Emerging donors                                                                                     1.8%
UN agencies                                                                                         1.8%
Foundations                                                                                         0.9%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the                       Level of Agreement
World Bank Group’s work in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                             N        DK     Mean       SD
27. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                     96       11      6.07     2.35
    development in Bosnia and Herzegovina*
28. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                     91       13      5.42     2.25
    development priorities for Bosnia and Herzegovina*
29. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                                     89       17      5.85     2.20
    realistic for Bosnia and Herzegovina
30. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bosnia and
                                                                                     89       16      7.37     2.20
    Herzegovina with respect




                                                         60
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner                        Degree
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                            N        DK      Mean       SD
31. Responsiveness*                                                                 89       17      5.71      2.26
32. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*              85       19       5.56     2.12
33. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       82       21       5.05     2.28
34. Being inclusive*                                                                80       22       5.95     2.16
35. Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                  84       20       6.77     2.43
36. Staff accessibility*                                                            90       13       7.29     2.22
37. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                83       21       6.65     2.53
38. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                    80       24       6.33     2.72
    decisions important to my work
39. Collaboration with civil society*                                               68       33       5.63     2.12
40. Collaboration with the Government*                                              84       19       7.23     1.87
41. Collaboration with EC and other development partners*                           64       39       7.28     2.18
42. Collaboration with the private sector                                           68       34       5.40     2.08
43. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                   77       24       5.08     2.03
44. Being a long-term partner                                                       84       19       7.07     2.34

45. To be a more effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, do             Percentage of Respondents
    you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?                                           (N=106)
More local presence                                                                                52.8%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                    26.4%
Less local presence                                                                                1.9%
Don't know                                                                                         18.9%

46. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
    place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                           Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                            (Responses Combined; N=108)
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                 45.4%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                    42.6%
ground
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                   40.7%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                     39.8%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                  32.4%
Poor coordination with development partners                                                         20.4%
Inadequate funding                                                                                  14.8%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                               13.0%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                  12.0%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                               6.5%
Other                                                                                               0.9%




                                                               61
The World Bank Group                              Bosnia and Herzegovina           Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results

1.    In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be           Importance
      involved in the following areas of development in Bosnia and
      Herzegovina? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)               N      DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                        97      5      8.14      2.25
2.    Information and communications technology                              95      6      7.19      2.33
3.    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                       100     3       7.75     1.98
4.    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                 99     3       7.47     2.47
5.    Urban development                                                       91    10       7.40     2.16
6.    Environmental sustainability                                            90    10       7.72     2.17
7.    Poverty reduction                                                      100     2       8.76     1.76
8.    Domestic private sector development                                    100     3       9.00     1.38
9.    Foreign direct investment                                               97     5       8.78     1.87
10.   Local governance and institutions                                       94     6       7.60     2.17
11.   Water and sanitation                                                    93     6       7.55     2.16
12.   Trade and exports                                                       94     6       7.34     2.14
13.   Economic growth                                                        101     1       8.84     1.68
14.   Energy                                                                  95     6       7.57     2.41
15. Disaster management                                                      91      7       6.58     2.55
16. Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness,
                                                                             96      4       8.05     2.11
    public financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
17. Job creation/employment                                                  101     2       9.01     1.65
18.   Social cohesion                                                        97      3       7.18     2.47
19.   Financial markets                                                      93      7       7.53     2.23
20.   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                 92      9       7.27     2.61
21.   Health                                                                 90      9       7.40     2.40
22.   Rural development                                                      97      4       7.94     2.20
23.   Education                                                              93      6       8.06     2.27
24.   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)         95      6       7.17     2.62
25.   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                          89      9       6.63     2.70
26.   Agricultural development                                               95      5       8.43     1.74
27.   Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                   95      6       7.04     2.62




                                                            62
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina           Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2.    How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of                  Effectiveness
      the work it does in the following areas of development in Bosnia and
      Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                 N        DK      Mean       SD
1.    Information and communications technology                                36       70      6.36      2.29
2.    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                         53       53      5.96      2.17
3.    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                  48       56       5.75     2.24
4.    Urban development                                                        49       56       5.86     2.25
5.    Environmental sustainability                                             56       50       6.29     2.11
6.    Poverty reduction                                                        68       37       5.93     2.41
7.    Domestic private sector development                                      64       41       6.13     2.25
8.    Foreign direct investment                                                60       45       5.95     2.34
9.  Local governance and institutions                                          64       41       6.00     2.16
10. Water and sanitation                                                       58       47       6.59     2.12
11. Trade and exports                                                          53       51       5.92     2.03
12. Economic growth                                                            69       36       6.14     2.32
13. Energy                                                                     59       45       6.54     2.25
14. Disaster management                                                        43       60       5.44     2.19
15. Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government effectiveness,
                                                                               70       32       6.19     2.26
    public financial management, public expenditure, fiscal system reform)
16. Job creation/employment                                                    63       42       5.59     2.43
17. Social cohesion                                                            54       51       5.61     2.28
18.   Financial markets                                                        59       46       6.31     2.18
19.   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                   55       50       5.95     2.30
20.   Health                                                                   56       49       6.00     2.28
21.   Rural development                                                        62       43       5.87     2.29
22.   Education                                                                57       45       5.46     2.64
23.   Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)           52       53       5.85     2.36
24. Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                              48       57       5.29     2.43
25. Agricultural development                                                   61       43       6.21     2.29
26. Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                       42       62       6.00     2.13

3.   Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support         Percentage of Respondents
     the program in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                                                  (N=108)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                      55.6%
In the country                                                                                7.4%
Don't know                                                                                    37.0%


Achieving Development Results                                                  N        DK      Mean       SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
    development results in Bosnia and Herzegovina?*                            92       16       6.03     2.12
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 63
The World Bank Group                                    Bosnia and Herzegovina           Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Existing Country Systems                                                           N       DK      Mean      SD
5. To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen
      existing country systems (e.g., procurement, financial management,
                                                                                   84      25       6.00    2.00
      etc.) in Bosnia-Herzegovina?
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                           N       DK      Mean      SD
6.    The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
      Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of Bosnia         90      19       5.12    2.33
      and Herzegovina*
7.    The World Bank Group meets Bosnia and Herzegovina’s needs for
                                                                                   84      22       5.67    2.48
      knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*


Internal Evaluation Mechanisms                                                     N       DK      Mean      SD
8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and
      corrects its work in real time in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                    74      35       5.50    2.11
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work                 Percentage of Respondents
    and activities in the work you do?                                                       (N=106)
Weekly                                                                                          10.4%
Monthly                                                                                          9.4%
A few times a year                                                                              31.1%
Rarely                                                                                          33.0%
Never                                                                                           16.0%

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, to what extent do you believe that the World                      Degree
Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                           N       DK      Mean      SD
2.    Are timely                                                                   79      26      5.53     2.18
3.    Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                                   74      28       5.38    2.26
      preparation
4.    Are relevant to Bosnia and Herzegovina's development priorities              76      27       6.09    2.37
5.    Lead to practical solutions                                                  80      23       5.94    2.11
6.    Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                         82      20       6.32    2.17
7.    Are source of relevant information on global good practices                  84      19       6.98    1.94
8.    Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                         85      18       7.13    2.14
9.    Are adequately disseminated                                                  76      27       6.39    2.19
10.   Are translated enough into local language                                    73      31       6.42    2.43
11.   Are adaptable to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s specific development
                                                                                   78      24       6.29    1.98
      challenges and country circumstances*



                                                                 64
The World Bank Group                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina          Country Opinion Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

Overall Evaluations                                                             N       DK      Mean       SD
12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results in        85      20       6.09     1.94
    your country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities?*                                     84      20       6.94     1.77
      (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)


E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank                       Degree
Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                        N       DK      Mean       SD
1.    Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                 82      22      6.16      2.09
2.    Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                            79      25       6.19     2.02
3.    Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making
                                                                                79      24       6.48     2.14
      appropriate adjustments)
4.    Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                             78      24       6.68     2.32

                                                                                     Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N       DK      Mean       SD
5.    The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                             58      45      6.71      2.42
6.    The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects
                                                                                74      31       7.19     2.28
      and programs it supports
7.    The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                                70      34       6.86     2.23
      fashion
8.    The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                                54      50       7.07     2.05
      reasonable
9.    The World Bank Group’s requirements on its lending are reasonable         69      34       6.71     2.09
10.   The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Bosnia and
                                                                                67      37       5.93     2.29
      Herzegovina
11.   Working with the World Bank Group increases Bosnia and
                                                                                85      20       7.13     2.22
      Herzegovina’s institutional capacity
12.   The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                56      48       6.86     2.31
      changes
13.   Where country systems are adequate (e.g., procurement, financial
                                                                                61      43       6.82     2.09
      mgmt., etc.), the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them*
14.   The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support (i.e.,
                                                                                66      38       7.56     1.95
      supervision of projects)

15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group           Percentage of Respondents
    operates in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                                                   (N=107)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bosnia and Herzegovina                              -
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Bosnia Herzegovina                         36.4%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                       20.6%
Don't know                                                                                   38.3%
Prefer not to answer                                                                          4.7%


                                                                  65
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Staffing in Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                 N       DK     Mean       SD
16. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately
     staffed in Bosnia and Herzegovina?                                           54       52      6.39     1.99
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina

1.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of            Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)                 (Responses Combined; N=106)
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                        31.1%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                         29.2%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., state, entity, cantonal,
                                                                                                 26.4%
municipal)
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                    22.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost,
                                                                                                 21.7%
timeliness, other terms)
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                   17.0%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                         9.4%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Bosnia-
                                                                                                  8.5%
Herzegovina’s economy
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bosnia-Herzegovina’s specific
                                                                                                  8.5%
challenges
Work faster                                                                                       5.7%
Other                                                                                             3.8%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                            1.9%
Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Bosnia-Herzegovina’s office                    1.9%

2.  When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
    offers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and taking into account its limited level of
    resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group          Percentage of Respondents
    should offer more of in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Select only ONE response)                  (N=108)
Financial services                                                                               42.6%
Knowledge products                                                                               23.1%
Convening services                                                                               14.8%
None of the above                                                                                  -
The combination is appropriate for Bosnia-Herzegovina                                            10.2%
Don't know                                                                                       9.3%




                                                                66
The World Bank Group                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                 Country Opinion Survey 2014


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

                                                   Which THREE areas below would     Which THREE areas below
                                                     benefit most from the WBG       would benefit most from
                                                    playing a leading role among       other development
3.   Please answer the following questions.         international partners in BH?        partners in BH?
     (Choose no more than THREE for each column)     (Responses Combined; N=107)     (Responses Combined; N=98)
Jobs                                                            61.7%                          28.6%
Public financial management                                     52.3%                          30.6%
Improving livelihoods                                           43.9%                          29.6%
Capacity of state institutions                                  38.3%                          28.6%
Social safety nets                                              21.5%                          32.7%
Social cohesion                                                 21.5%                          38.8%
Access to justice systems                                       20.6%                          48.0%
Access to basic services                                        10.3%                          23.5%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social               Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)         (Responses Combined; N=105)
Internet                                                                                      62.9%
Local newspapers                                                                              36.2%
Local television                                                                              32.4%
Periodicals                                                                                   24.8%
Other                                                                                         13.3%
International newspapers                                                                      7.6%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       3.8%
International television                                                                      1.9%
Blogs                                                                                         1.0%
Mobile phones                                                                                 1.0%
Instant messaging                                                                             1.0%
Local radio                                                                                   0.0%
International radio                                                                           0.0%

2.   How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?         Percentage of Respondents
     (Choose no more than TWO)                                                      (Responses Combined; N=107)
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences                                             45.8%
Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)                40.2%
e-Newsletters                                                                                 35.5%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                   35.5%
World Bank Group’s website                                                                    21.5%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       3.7%
Blogs                                                                                         1.9%
Instant messaging                                                                             0.9%
Mobile phones                                                                                 0.9%
Other                                                                                         0.9%




                                                        67
The World Bank Group                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                    Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

3.    Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy
      under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession        Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                                         (N=86)
Yes                                                                                             33.7%
No                                                                                              66.3%

4.    Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities      Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                                         (N=87)
Yes                                                                                             39.1%
No                                                                                              60.9%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                    (N=41)
Yes                                                                                             75.6%
No                                                                                              24.4%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                          (N=100)
Yes                                                                                             97.0%
No                                                                                              3.0%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?                                           (N=96)
Yes                                                                                             81.3%
No                                                                                              18.8%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                                  (N=100)
The World Bank Group's country website                                                          68.0%
The World Bank Group's main website                                                             32.0%

9.    Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank       Percentage of Respondents
      Group website?                                                                            (N=102)
High speed                                                                                      95.1%
Dial-up                                                                                         4.9%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                         Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                          N       DK      Mean       SD
10. I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few
                                                                                 97        7       6.05     2.69
    years ago
11. I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.                     85       14       7.00     2.03
12. I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.            86       12       7.74     2.00
13. The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                 53       48       5.57     2.54
    information about the institution.
14. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                                 97        8       7.31     2.47
    find it.
15. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                 70       31       7.36     2.09
    inquiries.




                                                        68
The World Bank Group                          Bosnia and Herzegovina               Country Opinion Survey 2014


H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
    (Select only ONE response)                                                            (N=108)
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                    25.9%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                           11.1%
NGO                                                                                        10.2%
Media                                                                                      8.3%
Private Sector Organization                                                                7.4%
Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project                         6.5%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                     6.5%
Other                                                                                      6.5%
Office of Minister                                                                         3.7%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                  2.8%
Multilateral Agency                                                                        2.8%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                              2.8%
Independent Government Institution                                                         1.9%
Office of the President, Prime Minster                                                      .9%
Bilateral Agency                                                                            .9%
Private Foundation                                                                          .9%
Trade Union                                                                                 .9%

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Select only ONE response)                                                            (N=105)
Other                                                                                      22.9%
Public sector governance/public financial management/anti-corruption                       16.2%
Education                                                                                  8.6%
Financial markets/banking                                                                  7.6%
Private sector development/foreign direct investment                                       7.6%
Law and justice/regulatory framework                                                       5.7%
Social protection                                                                          5.7%
Agriculture/rural development/food security                                                4.8%
Job creation/employment                                                                    4.8%
Natural resource management/environmental sustainability                                   3.8%
Generalist                                                                                 3.8%
Gender equity/equality of opportunity                                                      2.9%
Energy                                                                                     1.0%
Health/Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              1.0%
Information and communications technology                                                  1.0%
Transport                                                                                  1.0%
Urban development                                                                          1.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                       1.0%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group   Percentage of Respondents
   in your country?                                                                       (N=104)
Yes                                                                                        51.9%
No                                                                                         48.1%




                                                        69
The World Bank Group                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                  Country Opinion Survey 2014


H. Background Information (continued)

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily        Percentage of Respondents
  engage with in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Select only ONE response)                          (N=82)
The World Bank (IDA)                                                                         73.2%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                  19.5%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                          1.2%
Other                                                                                        6.1%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?                                 (N=87)
Yes                                                                                          28.7%
No                                                                                           71.3%

6. If yes, what was your view on the two institutions working together in Bosnia   Percentage of Respondents
   and Herzegovina? (Select only ONE response)                                               (N=39)
Working well together                                                                        38.5%
Don't know                                                                                   35.9%
Collaborating but needs improvement                                                          20.5%
Other                                                                                        5.1%
In conflict                                                                                    -

7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank        Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=98)
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                            38.8%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                                36.7%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                           36.7%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                               27.6%
Observer                                                                                     10.2%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
8. Which best represents your geographic location?                                          (N=105)
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                         58.1%
Republika Srpska                                                                             33.3%
Other                                                                                        6.7%
Brcko District                                                                               1.9%




                                                       70
The World Bank Group                                                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

Office of the President/Minister N=5  Employee of a Ministry N=28  PMU N=7  Local Government N=12
Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=11  NGO N=11  Media N=9  Academia N=7  Other N=18

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina

In general, how would you say that Bosnia and Herzegovina is headed in...?
                                              Office of the                                                    Private Sector/
                                               President/     Employee of                     Local           Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                       Minister       a Ministry    PMU           Government           Private Bank      NGO     Media   Academia         Other
The right direction                                 -            14.3%       28.6%           16.7%                  27.3%         9.1%      -         -              -
The wrong direction                                 -            35.7%       28.6%           33.3%                  45.5%         72.7%   66.7%     71.4%          61.1%
Not sure                                        100.0%           50.0%       42.9%           50.0%                  27.3%         18.2%   33.3%     28.6%          38.9%




                                                                                             71
The World Bank Group                                                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                      Office of the                                                   Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                              President/     Employee of                    Local           Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                                    Minister       a Ministry   PMU           Government           Private Bank      NGO            Media          Academia            Other
Social protection                                         0.0%           14.8%      28.6%           16.7%                  9.1%          11.1%          11.1%            16.7%            11.1%
Transport                                                 0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             8.3%                  9.1%          0.0%           11.1%            0.0%             0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                          20.0%           22.2%      28.6%           41.7%                  36.4%         44.4%          55.6%            66.7%            38.9%
Domestic private sector development                      40.0%           14.8%      0.0%            25.0%                  54.5%         22.2%          33.3%            33.3%            22.2%
Foreign direct investment                                 0.0%           11.1%      28.6%           33.3%                  18.2%         11.1%          33.3%            33.3%            16.7%
Water and sanitation                                      0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Energy*                                                  80.0%           18.5%      0.0%             8.3%                  0.0%          0.0%           11.1%            0.0%             16.7%
Job creation/employment                                  80.0%           40.7%      28.6%           83.3%                  63.6%         66.7%          33.3%            50.0%            50.0%
Rural development                                         0.0%           7.4%       14.3%            8.3%                  0.0%          11.1%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Financial markets                                         0.0%           3.7%       14.3%            0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Urban development                                         0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Environmental sustainability                              0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  9.1%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                   0.0%           14.8%      0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          22.2%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Health                                                    0.0%           7.4%       14.3%            0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Education                                                 0.0%           22.2%      0.0%             0.0%                  18.2%         22.2%          22.2%            16.7%            27.8%
Poverty reduction                                         0.0%           7.4%       14.3%            0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%           11.1%            16.7%            0.0%
Social cohesion                                           0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  9.1%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Climate change                                            0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Agricultural development                                 20.0%           11.1%      28.6%            8.3%                  18.2%         11.1%          0.0%             0.0%             5.6%
Trade and exports                                         0.0%           7.4%       0.0%             0.0%                  9.1%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Economic growth                                           0.0%           37.0%      42.9%           25.0%                  18.2%         22.2%          22.2%            33.3%            33.3%
Law and justice                                           0.0%           14.8%      14.3%            0.0%                  9.1%          22.2%          0.0%             0.0%             11.1%
Local governance and institutions                         0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             8.3%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             5.6%
Natural resource management                               0.0%           7.4%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             5.6%
Anti-corruption                                          60.0%           33.3%      42.9%            8.3%                  18.2%         22.2%          44.4%            33.3%            38.9%
Disaster management*                                      0.0%           0.0%       0.0%            16.7%                  0.0%          0.0%           0.0%             0.0%             0.0%
Information and communications
                                                          0.0%           0.0%       0.0%               0.0%                0.0%          11.1%           0.0%            0.0%                0.0%
technology
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    72
The World Bank Group                                                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                              Office of the                                               Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      President/   Employee of                     Local        Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                             Minister    a Ministry        PMU       Government        Private Bank         NGO           Media        Academia         Other
Water and sanitation                              0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          8.3%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Equality of opportunity                           0.0%         18.5%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             9.1%          11.1%          14.3%          5.9%
Economic growth                                   20.0%        63.0%          71.4%         50.0%              36.4%           36.4%          33.3%          28.6%          64.7%
Climate change                                    0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Rural development                                 0.0%         11.1%          14.3%          0.0%              0.0%             9.1%          11.1%          28.6%          11.8%
Urban development                                 0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Local governance and institutions                 0.0%         3.7%            0.0%          8.3%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           5.9%
Social protection                                 0.0%         25.9%          14.3%         25.0%              0.0%            27.3%          0.0%           28.6%          23.5%
Law and justice                                   0.0%         11.1%           0.0%         16.7%              18.2%            9.1%          11.1%          0.0%           11.8%
Transport                                         0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             9.1%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Information and communications
                                                  0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             9.1%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
technology
Anti-corruption*                                  60.0%        18.5%          42.9%         16.7%              9.1%             9.1%          66.7%          28.6%          11.8%
Domestic private sector development               20.0%        18.5%           0.0%         41.7%              36.4%           27.3%          22.2%          42.9%          11.8%
Foreign direct investment                         20.0%        11.1%          28.6%         25.0%              18.2%            9.1%          22.2%          14.3%          11.8%
Energy                                            20.0%        3.7%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           5.9%
Public sector governance/reform                   60.0%        7.4%           14.3%          8.3%              18.2%           27.3%          33.3%          14.3%          29.4%
Social cohesion                                   0.0%         3.7%           14.3%          0.0%              9.1%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           5.9%
Education                                         0.0%         14.8%          14.3%         16.7%              27.3%           36.4%          11.1%          28.6%          23.5%
Natural resource management                       0.0%         3.7%            0.0%          0.0%              9.1%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Environmental sustainability                      0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Health                                            0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          11.1%          0.0%           0.0%
Agricultural development*                         80.0%        14.8%          28.6%         50.0%              36.4%           27.3%          22.2%          14.3%          11.8%
Disaster management                               0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%           14.3%          0.0%
Job creation/employment                           20.0%        63.0%          42.9%         33.3%              63.6%           45.5%          33.3%          42.9%          64.7%
Financial markets                                 0.0%         0.0%           14.3%          0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          11.1%          0.0%           0.0%
Trade and exports                                 0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%              9.1%             9.1%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                           73
The World Bank Group                                                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(Choose no more than THREE)
                                                      Office of the                                                   Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                              President/     Employee of                    Local           Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                                    Minister       a Ministry   PMU           Government           Private Bank      NGO     Media   Academia           Other
Energy                                                   80.0%           35.7%      28.6%           25.0%                  9.1%          9.1%    22.2%     28.6%           23.5%
Equality of opportunity                                   0.0%           17.9%      0.0%            16.7%                  0.0%          18.2%   0.0%      0.0%            0.0%
Social protection                                         0.0%           3.6%       0.0%             0.0%                  9.1%          0.0%    11.1%     0.0%            0.0%
Climate change                                            0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%    11.1%     0.0%            0.0%
Anti-corruption                                           0.0%           17.9%      42.9%           16.7%                  0.0%          27.3%   44.4%     28.6%           29.4%
Disaster management                                       0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%    0.0%      0.0%            0.0%
Rural development                                         0.0%           7.1%       14.3%            8.3%                  9.1%          9.1%    11.1%     0.0%            11.8%
Foreign direct investment                                80.0%           46.4%      57.1%           66.7%                  36.4%         36.4%   33.3%     57.1%           52.9%
Urban development                                         0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             8.3%                  9.1%          0.0%    0.0%      0.0%            0.0%
Water and sanitation                                      0.0%           3.6%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%    0.0%      0.0%            0.0%
Trade and exports                                        20.0%           7.1%       14.3%            0.0%                  9.1%          0.0%    0.0%      28.6%           5.9%
Information and communications
                                                          0.0%           7.1%       0.0%               0.0%                0.0%          0.0%    0.0%      0.0%             5.9%
technology
Social cohesion                                          0.0%           0.0%        0.0%              0.0%                0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%             5.9%
Public sector governance/reform*                         60.0%          14.3%       42.9%             8.3%                18.2%          54.5%   55.6%    28.6%            41.2%
Domestic private sector development                      40.0%          46.4%       14.3%             50.0%               45.5%          45.5%   22.2%    28.6%            35.3%
Job creation/employment                                  0.0%           35.7%       28.6%             16.7%               36.4%          54.5%   33.3%    28.6%            41.2%
Agricultural development                                 20.0%          28.6%       28.6%             25.0%               36.4%          9.1%    11.1%    42.9%            5.9%
Transport                                                0.0%           7.1%        14.3%             0.0%                9.1%           0.0%    11.1%    0.0%             5.9%
Education                                                0.0%           7.1%        0.0%              8.3%                18.2%          18.2%   11.1%    14.3%            5.9%
Natural resource management                              0.0%           3.6%        0.0%              8.3%                0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     14.3%            5.9%
Environmental sustainability                             0.0%           3.6%        14.3%             0.0%                9.1%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%             0.0%
Health                                                   0.0%           0.0%        0.0%              0.0%                0.0%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%             0.0%
Law and justice                                          0.0%           7.1%        0.0%              8.3%                9.1%           9.1%    11.1%    0.0%             11.8%
Local governance and institutions                        0.0%           0.0%        0.0%              16.7%               9.1%           0.0%    0.0%     0.0%             5.9%
Financial markets                                        0.0%           0.0%        0.0%              8.3%                0.0%           0.0%    11.1%    0.0%             0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    74
The World Bank Group                                                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(Choose no more than TWO)
                                               Office of the                                                     Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                       President/     Employee of                      Local           Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                             Minister       a Ministry      PMU          Government           Private Bank      NGO         Media         Academia               Other
Better employment opportunities for young
                                                  80.0%          40.0%         42.9%             41.7%               20.0%          20.0%       62.5%           42.9%               47.1%
people
Better employment opportunities for
                                                   0.0%           8.0%          0.0%              0.0%                0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           14.3%                0.0%
women
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%                0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens
                                                   0.0%          12.0%         42.9%             16.7%                0.0%          20.0%       12.5%           0.0%                11.8%
to help ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for
                                                   0.0%           0.0%          0.0%              8.3%                0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%
citizens
Better entrepreneurial opportunities              20.0%          28.0%         28.6%             50.0%               60.0%          20.0%       25.0%           85.7%               41.2%
A growing middle class                            0.0%           24.0%         0.0%              8.3%                30.0%          20.0%       37.5%           0.0%                11.8%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in
                                                   0.0%          12.0%          0.0%              8.3%                0.0%          0.0%        25.0%           14.3%                0.0%
rural areas
Better opportunity for the poor who live in
                                                   0.0%           0.0%          0.0%              8.3%                0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%
urban areas
Consistent economic growth                        60.0%          36.0%         71.4%             33.3%               60.0%          60.0%        0.0%           28.6%               52.9%
More reliable social safety net                   0.0%           12.0%         0.0%              0.0%                0.0%           10.0%        0.0%           0.0%                5.9%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                   0.0%           0.0%          0.0%              8.3%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           0.0%                0.0%
Education and training that better ensure
                                                  20.0%          24.0%         14.3%             16.7%               30.0%          40.0%       12.5%           14.3%               23.5%
job opportunity
Better quality public services                    0.0%            4.0%          0.0%              0.0%                0.0%          0.0%        12.5%           0.0%                 0.0%
Other                                             20.0%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%                0.0%          0.0%        12.5%           0.0%                 5.9%




                                                                                               75
The World Bank Group                                                                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                        Office of the       Employee of a                                             Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                     President/Minister       Ministry             PMU           Local Government       Private Bank           NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                       N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work
of the World Bank Group in Bosnia      5      7.60   0.89   28   5.54   2.24   7   7.43   2.23    12   4.75    2.63   11    5.64   1.63   11   5.91   3.15   9   6.78    1.56    7     7.00   1.83    18    5.56   2.15
and Herzegovina?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                        Office of the       Employee of a                                             Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                     President/Minister       Ministry             PMU           Local Government       Private Bank           NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                       N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank
                                       5      6.20   1.79   21   5.57   1.72   7   7.14   0.90    10   4.70    2.26   10    5.20   1.99   8    6.13   2.17   9   6.67    1.80    7     6.57   2.15    16    4.88   2.39
Group’s effectiveness in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                        Office of the       Employee of a                                             Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                     President/Minister       Ministry             PMU           Local Government       Private Bank           NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                       N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the
WBG's staff is well prepared to
help Bosnia and Herzegovina solve      5      5.40   2.19   18   5.83   2.31   7   7.14   1.68    11   5.91    2.43    7    5.86   2.91   7    7.71   1.80   4   6.75    1.50    7     7.00   2.24    15    4.53   2.26
its most complicated development
challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                              76
The World Bank Group                                                              Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group
should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                Office of the                                                Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/    Employee of                      Local       Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                              Minister      a Ministry        PMU       Government        Private Bank    NGO           Media        Academia         Other
Social protection                                   0.0%           7.1%           0.0%         16.7%              9.1%        9.1%          11.1%           0.0%          17.6%
Public sector governance/reform*                   80.0%          14.3%           57.1%        25.0%              18.2%       45.5%         44.4%           14.3%         29.4%
Transport                                           0.0%           3.6%           14.3%         8.3%              9.1%        0.0%          11.1%           14.3%         17.6%
Poverty reduction                                   0.0%          21.4%           0.0%         16.7%              0.0%        0.0%          11.1%           0.0%          17.6%
Rural development                                   0.0%          14.3%           28.6%         8.3%              0.0%        27.3%         22.2%           57.1%         17.6%
Domestic private sector development                40.0%          28.6%           0.0%         25.0%              45.5%       18.2%         44.4%           42.9%         29.4%
Foreign direct investment                           0.0%          17.9%           42.9%        41.7%              9.1%        0.0%          33.3%           14.3%         29.4%
Water and sanitation                                0.0%          10.7%           14.3%        16.7%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Energy                                              0.0%          25.0%           0.0%          0.0%              18.2%       0.0%          11.1%           28.6%         11.8%
Social cohesion                                     0.0%           3.6%           0.0%          0.0%              9.1%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Job creation/employment                            100.0%         28.6%           28.6%        25.0%              54.5%       45.5%         22.2%           57.1%         35.3%
Financial markets                                   0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           5.9%
Urban development                                   0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          8.3%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Environmental sustainability                        0.0%           3.6%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           5.9%
Equality of opportunity                             0.0%          10.7%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        18.2%         11.1%           0.0%           5.9%
Health                                              0.0%           3.6%           0.0%          0.0%              9.1%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           5.9%
Education                                           0.0%          14.3%           14.3%         8.3%              27.3%       36.4%         0.0%            0.0%           5.9%
Climate change                                      0.0%           3.6%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Agricultural development                           20.0%          25.0%           28.6%         8.3%              9.1%        0.0%          22.2%           0.0%           5.9%
Trade and exports                                   0.0%           7.1%           0.0%          0.0%              18.2%       9.1%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Economic growth*                                   60.0%          21.4%           57.1%        58.3%              36.4%       18.2%         11.1%           57.1%         17.6%
Law and justice                                     0.0%           3.6%           0.0%          8.3%              9.1%        27.3%         0.0%            0.0%           5.9%
Local governance and institutions                   0.0%           3.6%           0.0%          8.3%              0.0%        9.1%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Natural resource management                         0.0%           7.1%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        9.1%          0.0%            0.0%          11.8%
Information and communications
                                                    0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          0.0%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
technology
Anti-corruption                                     0.0%          17.9%           14.3%         8.3%              0.0%        27.3%         22.2%           0.0%          23.5%
Disaster management                                 0.0%           0.0%           0.0%          8.3%              0.0%        0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          77
The World Bank Group                                                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                            Office of the                                                  Private Sector/
Greatest Value                               President/     Employee of                        Local      Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister        a Ministry        PMU         Government      Private Bank            NGO           Media         Academia           Other
Convening/facilitating                          0.0%             0.0%          14.3%            0.0%            9.1%                9.1%            0.0%          14.3%           12.5%
Data                                            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%                9.1%            0.0%          0.0%            12.5%
Policy advice, knowledge                       20.0%             7.1%           0.0%           10.0%            0.0%                0.0%           22.2%          14.3%           6.3%
Financial resources                            20.0%            53.6%          28.6%           60.0%            45.5%              36.4%           22.2%          28.6%           31.3%
Capacity development                            0.0%            14.3%          42.9%           10.0%            0.0%               27.3%           33.3%          28.6%           6.3%
Technical assistance                            0.0%             3.6%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%                0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            6.3%
Mobilizing third party financial resources     60.0%            14.3%          14.3%           20.0%            18.2%               0.0%           22.2%          0.0%            18.8%
Coordination of development partners            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%                9.1%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%
Strategy formulation                            0.0%             7.1%           0.0%            0.0%            27.3%               0.0%           11.1%          0.0%            0.0%
Other                                           0.0%             0.0%           0.0%            0.0%            0.0%                9.1%            0.0%          14.3%           6.3%

 nd                                                   Office of the                                                   Private Sector/
2 Greatest Value                                       President/     Employee of                    Local           Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                               Minister       a Ministry   PMU           Government           Private Bank      NGO     Media         Academia            Other
Convening/facilitating                                    0.0%           7.1%       14.3%            0.0%                  20.0%         9.1%    0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
Data                                                      0.0%           3.6%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%    0.0%            0.0%             6.3%
Policy advice, knowledge                                  0.0%           3.6%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          18.2%   11.1%           28.6%            18.8%
Financial resources                                       0.0%           7.1%       28.6%            0.0%                  10.0%         9.1%    22.2%           14.3%            18.8%
Capacity development                                      0.0%           17.9%      0.0%            20.0%                  40.0%         27.3%   0.0%            28.6%            12.5%
Technical assistance                                     20.0%           21.4%      14.3%           20.0%                  0.0%          18.2%   33.3%           0.0%             6.3%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                0.0%           25.0%      14.3%           20.0%                  10.0%         18.2%   0.0%            0.0%             12.5%
Coordination of development partners                     20.0%           7.1%       14.3%           20.0%                  0.0%          0.0%    11.1%           14.3%            18.8%
Strategy formulation*                                    60.0%           3.6%       14.3%           20.0%                  20.0%         0.0%    11.1%           14.3%            6.3%
Other                                                     0.0%           0.0%       0.0%             0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%    0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    78
The World Bank Group                                                                                    Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to achieve development results? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                           Private Sector/
                                       Office of the      Employee of a                                                   Financial Sector/                                             Academia/
                                    President/Minister      Ministry                PMU           Local Government          Private Bank            NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Convening/facilitating               2     7.00   1.41   18    5.78   2.26     6    7.17   1.84     8      6.38    2.39    5     4.80   3.27   5    5.60   1.67   6   5.33    1.51    7     5.29   2.14    16    4.81   2.14
Data                                 5     4.80   2.49   19    6.53   1.93     5    5.80   2.28     8      6.13    2.17    7     6.57   2.23   9    7.89   1.69   7   6.14    1.68    7     7.71   1.89    18    5.72   2.19
Policy advice, knowledge             5     5.00   2.83   18    6.61   2.30     5    5.80   2.28     9      5.22    1.99    7     5.71   3.15   8    7.50   1.69   6   4.50    2.74    7     6.57   2.44    17    4.94   2.63
Financial resources                  5     5.40   1.95   20    7.15   2.16     7    8.86   1.07    10      6.10    2.28    8     7.38   2.39   8    6.13   1.81   7   7.14    2.19    7     5.71   2.14    17    5.94   2.70
Technical assistance                 5     5.40   1.52   18    6.17   1.89     6    7.17   2.32    10      6.10    2.18    6     6.17   2.48   9    6.78   1.92   7   6.43    2.23    6     5.67   1.03    17    5.94   2.46
Mobilizing third party financial
                                     5     5.80   1.10   15    5.80   2.48     6    8.17   0.41     9      6.11    2.57    4     5.50   2.65   8    6.75   2.19   6   5.50    1.87    7     6.00   1.29    15    5.27   3.04
resources
Coordination of development
                                     5     6.00   1.41   16    6.06   2.08     5    6.80   2.17    10      6.60    2.07    7     5.86   2.55   8    6.50   2.00   6   5.50    0.84    6     5.83   1.33    15    5.00   3.00
partners
Strategy formulation                 5     5.80   1.30   18    5.67   2.17     5    7.20   2.17    10      5.40    2.50    5     6.00   2.83   9    6.67   1.73   7   4.00    2.08    7     5.86   3.34    16    5.06   2.38



The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To what degree would Bosnia and Herzegovina benefit, if capacity building were
to support…?
                                                                                                                           Private Sector/
                                       Office of the      Employee of a                                                   Financial Sector/                                             Academia/
                                    President/Minister      Ministry                PMU           Local Government          Private Bank            NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD               N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Groups outside of government to
help them more effectively engage
                                     5     3.80   1.79   23    5.30   2.87     5    6.20   2.17    12      5.33    2.67    10    4.70   3.23   11   8.55   2.34   9   5.89    2.85    7     5.00   1.83    17    4.65   3.18
and participate in development
efforts*
The public sector , related to
implementation of specific
                                     5     7.00   0.71   25    8.04   2.01     7    8.00   2.77    12      8.67    1.37    10    8.00   2.26   11   8.36   1.57   9   8.67    1.00    7     8.86   1.35    18    6.28   2.52
development projects on the
ground*
The public sector , related to
changing institutions
                                     5     7.40   2.61   24    7.21   2.32     6    6.50   2.88    11      7.64    2.11    10    7.60   3.06   10   8.20   1.32   8   8.00    1.20    7     8.86   0.69    17    6.24   2.75
(organizations or sociopolitical
conditions)
The private sector , related to
                                     5     7.40   0.89   24    7.75   2.27     5    7.00   3.39    11      7.82    1.25    11    7.09   2.95   11   8.55   1.21   9   8.56    1.42    7     8.57   2.15    17    7.65   2.62
institutional and policy change
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                  79
The World Bank Group                                                                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                                                                                          Private Sector/
                                           Office of the     Employee of a                                               Financial Sector/                                             Academia/
                                        President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                          N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other
                                         2     7.50   0.71   19   7.21   1.81   6   9.17   0.98    8      6.38    3.34    5     6.40   2.30   7    8.00   1.29   7   7.14    1.35    7     7.57   2.94    15    5.07   2.99
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                         1     7.00    .     13   4.46   2.07   1   5.00     .     4      5.75    1.26    2     6.50   2.12   6    5.17   2.14   4   5.25    0.50    6     5.17   3.06    14    4.00   2.48
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development        5     6.20   1.10   17   6.24   2.08   2   6.50   3.54    5      7.60    2.70    3     5.67   3.22   7    7.14   1.46   4   6.00    1.41    6     7.17   2.23    14    4.36   2.56
goals)
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bosnia and Herzegovina to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank
Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
                                                                                                                          Private Sector/
                                           Office of the     Employee of a                                               Financial Sector/                                             Academia/
                                        President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                          N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other
                                         5     6.80   1.30   24   8.33   1.20   7   9.14   1.57    10     8.10    2.28    7     8.57   1.13   11   7.55   2.70   8   7.63    1.77    7     9.14   1.22    17    7.00   2.72
organizational strengthening)
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                         4     3.75   3.50   19   6.68   2.08   3   8.67   1.16    8      6.63    2.56    7     6.43   3.26   9    8.33   1.23   6   8.50    1.23    7     6.29   1.98    16    6.00   2.99
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development        5     6.40   1.52   21   7.71   2.03   3   7.67   0.58    10     6.50    3.14    5     7.00   2.92   9    8.33   1.94   6   6.67    2.34    7     8.86   1.46    15    7.07   2.60
goals)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                 80
The World Bank Group                                                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                               Office of the                                               Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                       President/   Employee of                     Local        Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                             Minister     a Ministry      PMU         Government        Private Bank         NGO           Media    Academia          Other
Not exploring alternative policy options*         60.0%          7.4%         28.6%          0.0%               0.0%             9.1%          11.1%      20.0%          16.7%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social
                                                  40.0%         29.6%         28.6%          45.5%              45.5%           18.2%          44.4%     20.0%           44.4%
realities in BH
Staff too inaccessible                             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%           0.0%     20.0%           5.6%
Not enough public disclosure of its work*          0.0%         11.1%         14.3%          0.0%               9.1%            36.4%           0.0%     0.0%            0.0%
Arrogant in its approach                           0.0%          3.7%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%           0.0%     0.0%            0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities*              20.0%          3.7%         0.0%           27.3%              9.1%             9.1%          33.3%     60.0%           11.1%
The credibility of its knowledge/data              0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%           0.0%     0.0%            0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex           0.0%          3.7%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%           0.0%     20.0%           11.1%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and
                                                   0.0%          7.4%         28.6%          0.0%               9.1%            18.2%           0.0%     20.0%            5.6%
reform efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries              0.0%         14.8%         14.3%          9.1%               27.3%            0.0%          11.1%      0.0%           11.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without
                                                   0.0%         18.5%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%          22.2%     20.0%           11.1%
regard to political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow              0.0%          7.4%         14.3%          0.0%               9.1%             0.0%           0.0%     20.0%            0.0%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies
                                                   0.0%          7.4%         14.3%          0.0%               18.2%           18.2%          11.1%      0.0%            5.6%
and procedures
Not aligned with other development
                                                   0.0%          7.4%         0.0%           9.1%               0.0%             0.0%           0.0%      0.0%           11.1%
partners’ work
Not collaborating enough with non-state
                                                   0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           9.1%               9.1%            27.3%          11.1%      0.0%            0.0%
actors
Not client focused                                 0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%               9.1%             9.1%           0.0%      0.0%           11.1%
Its advice and strategies do not lend
                                                  60.0%          3.7%         0.0%           9.1%               0.0%            18.2%          11.1%      0.0%           11.1%
themselves to practical problem solving*
Not focused enough on issues that are
                                                  20.0%         14.8%         14.3%          9.1%               0.0%            18.2%          11.1%      0.0%           11.1%
unique to post-conflict countries
Inadequate number of World Bank Group
                                                   0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%           0.0%      0.0%            0.0%
staff members located in the country
Other                                              0.0%          7.4%         0.0%           0.0%               0.0%             0.0%           0.0%      0.0%           11.1%
Don’t know                                         0.0%         11.1%         14.3%          27.3%              18.2%            0.0%          11.1%      0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            81
The World Bank Group                                                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                                                Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                     President/   Employee of                      Local        Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                           Minister     a Ministry        PMU        Government        Private Bank         NGO           Media           Academia            Other
Capacity development                             0.0%         17.9%          28.6%         33.3%               18.2%           45.5%           11.1%            20.0%            11.8%
Policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                 0.0%         17.9%          14.3%          8.3%               9.1%             9.1%           44.4%             0.0%            11.8%
Government
Knowledge products/services                      0.0%         14.3%          14.3%          0.0%               36.4%            9.1%           11.1%           20.0%             29.4%
Investment lending                             100.0%         57.1%          71.4%         66.7%               45.5%           72.7%           77.8%           100.0%            76.5%
Technical assistance                            20.0%         21.4%          28.6%         16.7%               18.2%            9.1%           11.1%            0.0%             5.9%
Trust Fund management                            0.0%         3.6%           14.3%          0.0%               0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
Co-financing arrangements                        0.0%         35.7%           0.0%         50.0%               27.3%           18.2%           11.1%           20.0%             29.4%
Sector-wide approaches*                         80.0%         10.7%          14.3%          8.3%               0.0%             0.0%            0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
Emergency Recovery lending                       0.0%         3.6%           14.3%          0.0%               27.3%            0.0%           11.1%           20.0%             11.8%
Other                                            0.0%         0.0%            0.0%          0.0%               0.0%             9.1%           11.1%            0.0%             11.8%
Don’t know                                       0.0%         3.6%            0.0%          8.3%               0.0%             9.1%            0.0%           20.0%             0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your
country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of the                                                Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                         President/   Employee   of                      Local      Financial  Sector/
(Responses Combined)                               Minister     a Ministry         PMU        Government        Private Bank         NGO          Media        Academia         Other
Academia/think tanks/research institutes*           60.0%         39.3%           14.3%           8.3%              9.1%             9.1%         22.2%          85.7%           5.6%
Community of development partners                   20.0%         32.1%           42.9%          41.7%              27.3%           18.2%         33.3%          0.0%          50.0%
Media                                                0.0%          3.6%           28.6%           0.0%              18.2%            0.0%         11.1%          0.0%            0.0%
NGOs*                                                0.0%          3.6%            0.0%           8.3%              0.0%            63.6%         0.0%           0.0%          11.1%
Local Government                                    20.0%         35.7%           42.9%          75.0%              18.2%           18.2%         44.4%          57.1%         27.8%
Private sector                                     100.0%         42.9%           14.3%          50.0%              81.8%           36.4%         55.6%          42.9%         50.0%
Parliament                                           0.0%          0.0%           28.6%           0.0%              9.1%             0.0%         0.0%           14.3%           5.6%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                 0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             9.1%         11.1%          0.0%            0.0%
Beneficiaries                                        0.0%         17.9%           14.3%           8.3%              0.0%            18.2%         22.2%          0.0%          27.8%
Foundations                                          0.0%          0.0%           14.3%           0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Emerging donors                                      0.0%          3.6%            0.0%           8.3%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
UN agencies                                          0.0%          3.6%            0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             9.1%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Other*                                               0.0%          0.0%            0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          16.7%
Don’t know                                           0.0%          3.6%            0.0%           0.0%              9.1%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                             82
The World Bank Group                                                                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                        Office of the     Employee of a                                               Financial Sector/                                             Academia/
                                     President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in
                                      5     4.80   1.79   22   6.05   1.81   7   8.00   1.83    9      5.67    2.40     9    5.33   2.60   10   6.00   2.31   9   7.11    2.57    7     6.86   2.97    18    5.50   2.55
development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the
                                      5     4.60   1.95   21   5.29   2.15   6   6.67   1.51    8      5.13    2.75    10    5.50   2.72   10   6.10   1.73   8   5.88    2.53    6     7.00   2.00    17    4.29   2.09
development priorities for Bosnia
and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are
                                      5     4.40   2.19   21   5.62   1.77   6   6.67   2.25    10     5.70    2.98     8    6.75   2.55   9    6.44   1.42   8   6.25    1.91    7     7.29   1.89    15    4.73   2.25
realistic for Bosnia and
Herzegovina
The World Bank Group treats
clients and stakeholders in Bosnia    5     7.20   1.10   21   7.14   2.03   5   8.60   1.34    9      6.11    2.80     7    7.71   2.22   9    8.33   1.32   9   8.22    2.17    7     8.14   1.77    17    6.59   2.67
and Herzegovina with respect




                                                                                                              83
The World Bank Group                                                                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                                          Private Sector/
                                          Office of the     Employee of a                                                Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                       President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government          Private Bank           NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                         N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD               N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness                          5     5.20   2.17   19   5.68   2.26   5   8.20   1.10    9       6.44    2.92    9    5.00   2.83   10   5.20   1.93   9   6.00    1.80    7     5.57   1.40    16    5.31   2.33
Flexibility (in terms of the
                                        5     5.40   2.19   19   5.79   2.35   5   7.40   0.89    7       5.71    2.36    8    4.50   2.62   10   4.60   1.43   9   5.67    2.00    7     5.86   1.77    15    5.67   2.19
institution’s products and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                        5     4.00   2.24   17   5.12   2.55   5   6.00   2.00    7       4.57    2.88    7    4.57   2.30   10   4.80   1.87   9   5.89    2.15    6     6.50   2.26    16    4.56   2.16
country circumstances)
Being inclusive                         5     4.60   2.61   21   6.10   1.76   5   8.40   1.67    7       5.86    2.85    6    6.50   2.74   9    5.33   2.29   8   6.00    1.31    7     6.29   1.89    12    5.25   2.26
Openness (sharing data and other
                                        5     5.60   1.95   19   6.47   2.09   6   7.50   2.17    7       5.71    2.69    9    7.33   2.65   8    7.75   1.75   9   6.89    2.67    6     8.17   1.84    15    6.27   3.08
information)
Staff accessibility                     5     7.40   1.52   20   6.70   2.11   6   8.50   1.23    8       7.38    2.13   10    7.70   2.06   8    6.75   2.92   9   7.89    2.15    7     7.29   2.63    17    7.18   2.58
Straightforwardness and honesty         5     7.00   1.41   17   6.00   2.42   5   6.80   2.78    9       5.67    3.20    9    7.22   3.03   7    7.43   1.81   9   7.56    2.13    7     7.57   1.99    15    6.13   2.85
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making         5     5.80   1.30   19   6.05   2.61   4   9.00   1.41    7       5.86    3.24    8    6.25   3.66   6    7.33   1.86   8   7.00    2.73    7     6.14   2.34    16    5.75   3.07
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society        3     6.00   0.00   16   5.88   1.71   1   4.00    .      6       4.50    2.59    3    6.00   2.00   9    5.33   2.74   8   5.88    2.30    7     7.29   1.60    15    5.07   2.19

Collaboration with the Government       5     7.60   0.89   21   7.00   1.73   4   8.75   1.26    9       7.00    2.24    7    7.00   1.83   8    7.13   2.30   9   7.56    1.24    7     8.71   1.25    14    6.36   2.21
Collaboration with EC and other
                                        5     7.20   0.45   13   7.23   1.64   2   9.50   0.71    6       7.50    2.07    4    6.75   3.20   7    6.57   2.57   7   8.43    0.98    7     9.29   0.76    13    5.77   2.62
development partners*
Collaboration with the private
                                        5     6.40   0.89   13   5.08   1.94                      6       4.00    2.00    7    5.29   3.30   7    6.14   1.57   8   5.13    1.46    7     6.43   1.40    15    5.27   2.46
sector
The speed in which it gets things
                                        5     5.40   0.89   15   4.87   1.85   4   7.25   2.22    7       5.43    2.70    9    4.89   2.62   7    5.14   1.35   8   5.25    1.49    7     5.86   1.22    15    4.07   2.28
accomplished on the ground
Being a long-term partner               5     7.40   0.55   21   7.10   1.95   4   8.75   0.96    8       6.50    2.78    8    7.00   2.27   9    7.33   1.87   9   7.78    2.33    5     7.00   2.92    15    6.27   3.26


To be a more effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
                                             Office of the                                                Private Sector/
                                              President/    Employee of                       Local      Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      Minister      a Ministry       PMU         Government       Private Bank      NGO                                       Media            Academia              Other
More local presence                                -           42.9%          42.9%           58.3%            72.7%         80.0%                                     55.6%             100.0%               41.2%
The current level of local presence is
                                                100.0%         28.6%          57.1%             -              9.1%          10.0%                                     33.3%                 -                35.3%
adequate
Less local presence                                -              -              -            8.3%               -             -                                         -                   -                5.9%
Don't know                                         -           28.6%             -            33.3%            18.2%         10.0%                                     11.1%                 -                17.6%




                                                                                                                 84
The World Bank Group                                                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                Office of the                                                Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/   Employee of                       Local       Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                              Minister     a Ministry       PMU          Government       Private Bank           NGO            Media     Academia          Other
The World Bank Group does not do
                                                    0.0%         17.9%          0.0%            16.7%             9.1%               0.0%           0.0%       14.3%           22.2%
adequate follow through/follow-up
The World Bank Group is not sensitive
enough to political/social realities on the        40.0%         42.9%          28.6%           33.3%             36.4%             27.3%           55.6%      57.1%           55.6%
ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                   60.0%         42.9%          71.4%           41.7%             45.5%             63.6%           44.4%      14.3%           38.9%
Government
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil
                                                    0.0%         3.6%           0.0%            25.0%             0.0%              45.5%           33.3%       0.0%           11.1%
society participation*
Poor coordination with development
                                                    0.0%         21.4%          14.3%           33.3%             18.2%             18.2%           0.0%       42.9%           22.2%
partners
The World Bank Group works too slowly               0.0%         7.1%           0.0%            8.3%              0.0%               0.0%           11.1%      0.0%            16.7%
The Government works inefficiently*                60.0%         21.4%          0.0%            50.0%             36.4%             63.6%           33.3%      42.9%           16.7%
Political pressures and obstacles*                100.0%         42.9%          85.7%           33.3%             27.3%             18.2%           33.3%      28.6%           38.9%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of
                                                   40.0%         50.0%          42.9%           16.7%             27.3%             18.2%           44.4%      71.4%           44.4%
country challenges
Inadequate funding                                  0.0%         17.9%          0.0%            16.7%             0.0%              27.3%           11.1%      28.6%           16.7%
Other                                               0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%              9.1%               0.0%           0.0%       0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                               85
The World Bank Group                                                                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                       Office of the     Employee of a                                                Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                    President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government          Private Bank           NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD               N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Anti-corruption                      5     7.80   2.17   23   8.39   1.70   5   8.60   1.34    10      8.80    1.32   10    6.80   3.23   10   9.20   2.20   9   8.44    1.59    7     7.57   3.10    18    7.67   2.66
Information and communications
                                     5     6.60   1.52   22   7.50   2.13   5   9.40   0.89    10      7.10    2.18    9    6.56   3.13   11   8.00   2.19   9   6.67    2.65    7     7.71   2.06    17    6.24   2.41
technology
Transport                            5     7.40   1.95   23   8.13   1.22   6   8.67   1.21    10      8.40    1.58   11    7.18   2.18   11   7.55   2.51   9   7.67    1.80    7     9.00   1.00    18    6.72   2.65
Law and justice                      5     8.00   3.08   24   7.58   2.39   5   8.00   1.58    10      7.50    2.46   10    7.00   3.30   11   7.82   2.32   9   7.67    2.45    7     8.86   1.46    18    6.44   2.57
Urban development*                   5     5.60   1.52   22   8.00   1.63   4   8.00   1.16    9       7.67    2.00    9    7.11   2.47   10   7.70   2.11   9   7.56    1.74    7     9.14   1.57    16    5.94   2.70
Environmental sustainability*        5     6.00   2.12   22   8.59   1.26   4   9.25   0.50    8       7.75    3.01    9    6.33   2.18   10   8.70   1.16   9   8.44    1.59    6     7.33   1.97    17    6.65   2.74
Poverty reduction*                   5     7.20   2.39   24   9.17   1.13   4   9.25   0.96    11      9.36    1.03   11    9.45   0.69   11   9.45   0.82   9   9.22    1.09    7     7.71   2.06    18    7.50   2.71
Domestic private sector
                                     5     8.80   0.45   24   8.92   1.10   5   9.00   1.23    10      8.90    1.60   11    9.45   0.93   11   8.82   1.54   9   9.33    1.12    7     9.29   0.95    18    8.78   2.13
development
Foreign direct investment*           5     7.80   2.68   22   9.14   1.36   4   9.50   0.58    10      9.20    1.62   11    9.73   0.47   11   8.55   1.29   9   8.44    1.88    7     6.71   3.20    18    8.78   2.18
Local governance and institutions    5     8.60   0.55   22   7.27   1.96   4   9.00   0.82    8       8.25    2.05   10    6.80   2.62   11   7.91   1.87   9   8.11    1.45    7     7.00   3.51    18    7.33   2.50
Water and sanitation*                5     5.20   1.79   22   8.55   1.10   5   9.00   0.71    8       8.38    2.13   10    6.40   2.84   11   7.36   2.66   9   8.00    1.41    6     7.67   1.63    17    6.65   2.37
Trade and exports                    5     5.00   1.41   20   7.75   2.02   4   8.25   0.96    9       7.22    2.44   11    7.00   2.93   11   7.64   2.20   9   7.22    1.79    7     8.00   1.41    18    7.22   2.16
Economic growth                      5     8.40   0.89   24   8.75   1.73   5   9.40   0.89    11      8.64    2.73   11    8.55   1.21   11   9.18   0.87   9   9.11    1.69    7     9.14   1.07    18    8.78   2.10
Energy                               5     7.60   0.89   22   8.36   1.79   4   9.25   0.50    9       7.33    3.12   11    6.36   3.26   10   7.70   2.00   9   7.56    3.05    7     8.71   1.38    18    6.56   2.41
Disaster management*                 5     4.00   2.24   20   7.95   1.73   4   8.00   0.82    9       6.56    3.05   11    5.45   2.84   10   7.50   2.59   8   7.25    2.32    7     6.86   1.95    17    5.18   2.40
Public sector governance/ reform     5     8.40   0.89   23   7.61   2.19   5   8.20   1.30    9       7.56    2.30   10    7.90   2.60   11   8.73   1.95   9   8.33    1.73    7     9.43   1.13    17    7.71   2.57
Job creation/employment              5     8.60   0.55   25   9.00   1.58   5   9.00   1.23    11      8.73    2.69   11    9.00   1.55   11   9.27   0.91   9   9.11    1.27    7     9.86   0.38    17    8.76   2.20
Social cohesion*                     5     5.80   1.79   24   8.13   1.80   4   8.75   0.96    9       7.56    3.09   10    5.40   2.80   11   7.64   2.80   9   7.44    1.42    7     7.71   1.60    18    6.11   2.89
Financial markets                    5     6.20   1.79   22   7.86   1.91   4   9.00   1.16    8       9.00    1.20   11    7.45   2.88   11   7.82   2.23   8   7.38    1.41    7     6.14   2.97    17    6.94   2.49
Equality of opportunity*             5     5.00   1.41   23   8.13   2.01   4   9.00   1.16    7       7.86    3.13    9    5.67   3.08   11   7.82   2.40   8   7.50    2.20    7     8.14   2.67    18    6.22   2.90
Health*                              5     5.80   1.79   21   8.33   1.62   4   8.50   0.58    8       7.38    3.07   10    5.90   3.25   9    8.22   1.64   9   8.56    1.24    7     7.43   1.90    17    6.29   2.87
Rural development*                   5     6.20   1.10   23   8.91   1.51   6   9.33   0.82    10      8.20    2.66    9    6.33   2.65   10   8.40   1.43   9   8.67    1.12    7     8.71   0.95    18    6.44   2.77
Education*                           5     6.80   2.17   23   8.43   1.90   5   8.60   1.67    8       9.13    0.84   10    7.00   2.63   10   9.40   0.70   9   8.89    1.05    7     9.57   0.54    16    5.94   3.04
Social protection                    5     6.60   1.52   24   7.79   2.00   4   8.75   0.96    8       7.00    3.07   10    5.70   2.98   10   7.70   3.37   9   7.78    1.20    7     5.57   3.69    18    7.06   2.78
Climate change*                      5     4.20   2.17   20   8.10   1.52   5   8.20   1.10    8       6.50    2.20   10    4.50   3.14   9    6.89   3.55   8   8.38    1.85    7     7.29   2.50    17    5.24   2.46
Agricultural development*            5     7.60   0.89   22   8.91   1.31   5   9.20   0.45    10      9.30    0.82    9    7.78   1.64   11   8.64   0.92   8   8.75    0.89    7     9.14   1.46    18    7.17   2.81
Natural resource management          5     6.20   2.39   23   7.96   1.89   4   8.25   0.96    9       7.11    2.71   11    6.45   3.17   10   7.60   3.03   9   6.56    2.46    7     7.00   3.22    17    6.06   2.88
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                              86
The World Bank Group                                                                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                        Private Sector/
                                        Office of the     Employee of a                                                Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                     President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government          Private Bank          NGO                Media          Research Institute         Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD               N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Information and communications
                                      4     8.00   0.00   7    6.86   1.86   2   9.50   0.71    3       6.00    1.00    2    5.00   5.66   2   7.50   0.71    5   5.20    2.49    4     6.75   1.50     7    4.86   2.41
technology
Transport                             5     7.20   0.45   8    6.38   1.06   3   5.67   3.22    5       6.20    2.17    6    5.83   2.79   4   6.75   2.22    6   6.00    2.28    5     6.00   2.92    11    4.82   2.36
Law and justice                       5     7.00   1.73   8    6.00   2.00                      5       5.80    1.64    4    4.50   3.11   5   7.00   1.41    5   5.20    1.64    5     7.00   1.87    11    4.55   2.73
Urban development                     5     7.00   1.73   9    6.33   1.58   1   5.00    .      5       5.80    2.59    5    6.20   2.68   4   6.50   1.92    5   4.40    2.07    6     7.17   1.47     9    4.33   2.78
Environmental sustainability          2     6.00   2.83   12   7.33   1.23   3   6.00   3.61    6       6.33    2.73    5    6.00   1.41   4   7.00   2.58    7   6.29    0.76    7     6.57   1.27    10    4.80   2.94
Poverty reduction                     2     5.50   2.12   14   6.57   1.95   1   5.00    .      6       6.50    2.07    6    5.00   2.97   8   6.63   2.20    8   5.88    1.81    7     7.29   1.50    16    4.69   3.11
Domestic private sector
                                      5     7.00   0.00   11   5.91   1.76   1   7.00    .      5       5.80    2.78    8    6.00   3.21   7   6.57   1.62    8   5.75    2.05    7     7.43   2.07    12    5.33   2.81
development
Foreign direct investment             4     7.00   0.00   10   6.20   2.15   2   6.50   2.12    5       5.60    2.51    7    7.14   2.41   7   6.29   1.98    6   5.50    2.43    7     5.86   3.58    12    4.83   2.21
Local governance and institutions*    4     7.00   0.00   8    7.50   1.07   1   4.00    .      7       6.14    2.19    8    5.75   1.91   6   6.50   2.35    7   5.43    1.40    7     7.43   1.90    16    4.63   2.53
Water and sanitation*                 5     6.60   1.52   11   7.00   1.10   3   9.00   0.00    6       6.83    2.48    4    6.50   1.92   4   7.50   2.65    6   6.50    1.64    6     7.83   1.33    13    4.77   2.49
Trade and exports                     5     6.20   1.79   8    6.50   1.51   3   6.67   2.52    5       5.80    2.17    3    7.00   3.00   6   6.17   1.47    6   5.33    1.03    5     6.60   2.07    12    4.92   2.64
Economic growth                       5     7.20   0.45   12   6.33   1.88   2   6.00   2.83    5       6.20    1.92    7    6.71   2.14   7   6.57   2.51    8   5.50    2.14    7     7.29   2.75    16    5.06   2.84
Energy*                               5     7.80   0.45   11   6.00   1.55   3   8.67   1.53    5       6.20    2.17    5    6.40   3.05   5   7.40   1.14    6   7.50    1.87    7     7.43   2.37    12    4.83   2.66
Disaster management                   5     5.20   1.79   8    6.25   1.98   2   7.50   0.71    5       5.00    2.24    2    6.50   3.54   3   7.67   2.52    5   5.40    2.07    5     5.40   0.89     8    3.50   2.14
Public sector governance/ reform*     5     7.20   1.30   11   6.82   1.33   3   8.00   1.00    6       6.00    2.61    6    4.50   2.26   8   7.25   2.05    8   6.13    1.89    6     7.67   2.50    17    4.82   2.38
Job creation/employment               2     6.00   1.41   9    6.33   2.06   3   6.00   1.00    5       5.20    2.05    8    5.88   3.18   7   5.86   2.12    7   5.57    2.64    7     6.86   1.68    15    4.27   2.82
Social cohesion                       2     5.50   2.12   11   5.91   1.81   2   6.00   1.41    4       5.25    2.22    2    5.00   4.24   7   6.43   2.37    6   5.83    2.04    7     6.43   2.15    13    4.54   2.79
Financial markets                     5     6.20   1.79   9    5.89   2.09   2   7.00   0.00    5       7.40    1.34    7    7.29   2.43   6   6.33   1.75    7   5.43    2.23    7     6.00   3.06    11    6.18   2.48
Equality of opportunity               5     6.40   1.95   9    6.56   2.46   1   5.00    .      5       6.20    1.64    2    6.00   2.83   6   6.17   2.23    7   5.00    1.73    7     7.00   2.24    13    5.15   2.94
Health*                               5     5.60   1.52   8    7.00   1.20   3   8.67   0.58    5       6.00    1.58    4    6.75   3.95   4   7.25   2.50    6   6.00    1.41    6     6.67   0.82    15    4.27   2.55
Rural development                     5     4.80   1.79   11   6.45   1.75   4   8.25   1.71    5       6.60    2.07    4    4.75   2.63   5   6.20   2.59    8   6.00    2.00    7     6.71   1.38    13    4.46   2.76
Education                             5     6.60   2.61   8    6.13   2.42   2   6.50   2.12    5       6.40    1.95    4    5.25   4.03   5   6.40   2.88    6   5.67    1.97    7     5.86   2.67    15    3.73   2.55
Social protection                     2     6.00   1.41   10   5.90   2.18   1   4.00    .      5       7.00    1.41    3    4.67   3.51   4   7.25   2.22    7   7.00    1.83    7     5.29   2.69    13    5.00   2.68
Climate change*                       5     3.80   1.79   8    7.00   1.31   2   8.50   0.71    4       4.50    1.29    3    3.67   3.79   4   7.25   2.63    5   5.20    1.30    7     5.14   2.19    10    4.20   2.78
Agricultural development*             5     7.40   0.89   11   7.36   0.81   3   7.33   2.89    6       6.50    1.76    6    5.33   2.73   6   6.00   2.19    6   6.50    2.51    6     7.00   1.27    12    4.25   2.86
Natural resource management           4     7.75   0.50   9    6.22   1.48                      4       6.00    1.16    2    4.50   3.54   3   5.67   1.16    5   7.40    2.30    6     6.67   2.25     9    4.22   2.33
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                            Office of the                                               Private Sector/
                                             President/     Employee of                     Local      Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister       a Ministry       PMU       Government       Private Bank                                 NGO            Media            Academia              Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)      100.0%           42.9%          57.1%         41.7%            45.5%                                    50.0%          88.9%              85.7%               55.6%
In the country                                    -              -              -           16.7%            27.3%                                    10.0%            -                  -                 11.1%
Don't know                                        -            57.1%          42.9%         41.7%            27.3%                                    40.0%          11.1%              14.3%               33.3%

                                                                                                               87
The World Bank Group                                                                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                                                          Private Sector/
                                       Office of the       Employee of a                                                 Financial Sector/                                              Academia/
                                    President/Minister       Ministry               PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO                Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                      5    6.60    1.52    20    5.75   1.68   7    7.57   1.27    8      6.63    2.72    9     6.11   2.57   10   6.20   2.10   9    6.56    1.88    7     6.29   2.29    17    4.76   2.22
development results in Bosnia and
Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                                                                          Private Sector/
                                       Office of the       Employee of a                                                 Financial Sector/                                              Academia/
                                    President/Minister       Ministry               PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO                Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
To what extent does the WBG help
to build/ strengthen existing
                                     55    7.51    2.14    131   7.53   2.00   54   7.70   1.87    12     7.00    1.48    28    8.04   1.90   75   7.37   2.63   25   7.88    1.64    18    6.39   1.50    32    8.19   1.40
country systems in Bosnia and
Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                          Private Sector/
                                       Office of the       Employee of a                                                 Financial Sector/                                              Academia/
                                    President/Minister       Ministry               PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO                Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
The World Bank Group's financial
instruments meet the needs of         5    3.40    2.61    19    5.95   1.96   7    6.43   2.07    7      5.00    2.52    10    5.10   2.64   10   5.30   2.58   8    5.50    1.93    7     4.29   2.06    17    4.29   2.37
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group meets
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s needs        5    3.80    1.79    16    5.63   1.63   7    6.57   2.82    7      5.00    2.52    8     5.88   2.75   11   5.45   3.11   7    5.43    2.30    7     7.71   2.75    16    5.44   2.42
for knowledge services


                                                                                                                          Private Sector/
                                       Office of the       Employee of a                                                 Financial Sector/                                              Academia/
                                    President/Minister       Ministry               PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO                Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group measures and
                                      2    5.00    4.24    15    5.53   1.46   6    6.50   1.87    7      4.86    1.57    9     5.44   2.65   9    5.78   2.44   7    6.14    1.68    6     6.50   2.59    13    4.46   2.18
corrects its work in real time in
Bosnia-Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                 88
The World Bank Group                                                                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
                                            Office of the                                                                     Private Sector/
                                             President/   Employee of                       Local                            Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     a Ministry        PMU        Government                             Private Bank             NGO            Media            Academia              Other
Weekly                                         20.0%         10.7%           42.9%          8.3%                                     -                  10.0%            -                  -                 11.8%
Monthly                                        20.0%         7.1%               -           8.3%                                   9.1%                 40.0%          11.1%                -                   -
A few times a year                             60.0%         35.7%           14.3%          16.7%                                  45.5%                10.0%          55.6%              16.7%               29.4%
Rarely                                            -          25.0%           42.9%          25.0%                                  45.5%                30.0%          22.2%              66.7%               47.1%
Never                                             -          21.4%              -           41.7%                                    -                  10.0%          11.1%              16.7%               11.8%

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                        Office of the     Employee of a                                               Financial Sector/                                               Academia/
                                     President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government         Private Bank             NGO                Media          Research Institute         Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N     Mean   SD      N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Are timely                            5     4.60   1.95   17   5.41   1.81   6   6.00   2.10    6      5.33    1.75     8    5.13   2.64   8     6.88   2.36    7   5.86    1.95    6     5.83   2.32    16    5.13   2.60
Include appropriate level of
stakeholder involvement during        5     4.60   1.95   16   5.25   2.02   5   6.60   1.52    6      5.83    1.84     8    5.63   2.88   7     5.86   3.13    7   5.57    1.81    6     5.67   2.34    14    4.57   2.53
preparation
Are relevant to Bosnia-
                                      5     4.80   2.39   18   6.00   2.20   6   6.50   2.43    6      6.17    2.04     8    6.25   2.71   7     7.00   2.31    5   6.20    1.79    6     7.17   2.48    15    5.47   2.80
Herzegovina's development
Lead to practical solutions           5     4.80   1.79   18   6.33   1.46   6   7.17   1.33    6      6.67    1.63     8    5.63   2.56   8     6.00   2.27    7   6.14    1.57    6     7.17   2.32    16    4.69   2.60
Are accessible (well written and
                                      5     5.80   2.49   18   5.89   2.22   5   5.40   1.82    6      6.83    1.94     9    6.78   2.86   8     6.50   2.20    8   7.63    2.07    6     6.83   0.41    17    5.88   2.21
easy to understand)
Are source of relevant information
                                      5     5.80   1.79   20   6.55   1.64   5   7.00   1.58    6      7.17    1.84     9    7.00   2.12   8     7.63   1.69    8   8.75    0.89    6     8.67   1.03    17    6.00   2.26
on global good practices*
Enhance your knowledge and/or
                                      5     6.40   0.89   20   7.05   1.79   6   7.83   2.14    6      6.50    2.43     9    6.78   3.15   8     7.75   2.38    8   8.00    1.07    6     8.67   1.51    17    6.35   2.32
skills
Are adequately disseminated           5     6.60   0.89   18   6.33   2.20   6   7.00   1.79    5      6.40    2.07     6    6.17   2.56   8     6.50   2.62    8   7.38    1.60    6     7.17   1.47    14    5.29   2.76
Are translated enough into local
                                      5     6.80   1.30   16   4.94   2.54   6   5.50   1.52    6      6.33    1.97     8    7.63   2.72   6     6.83   2.48    7   7.71    1.98    6     7.83   2.40    13    6.31   2.53
language
Are adaptable to Bosnia-
Herzegovina’s specific
                                      5     6.00   1.41   18   6.22   1.77   5   5.60   1.67    6      7.00    2.19     8    6.38   2.88   7     7.00   2.24    7   6.86    1.46    6     5.83   1.60    16    6.00   2.28
development challenges and
country circumstances
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                              89
The World Bank Group                                                                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                                                                                                Private Sector/
                                         Office of the      Employee of a                                                      Financial Sector/                                           Academia/
                                      President/Minister      Ministry                 PMU            Local Government           Private Bank          NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                        N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N    Mean     SD     N Mean SD                N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
WBG's knowledge work and               5     6.20   1.10    20    6.20   1.20     7     7.00   1.73     7       5.43    2.64    9    5.89   2.57   9   6.33   1.94   8   6.38    1.06    5     6.80   2.95    15    5.40   2.35
activities make to development
results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World Bank
                                       5     6.40   0.89    22    6.73   1.49     7     7.57   1.40     7       5.57    2.23    7    7.43   1.72   8   7.25   2.32   8   7.25    1.49    4     8.75   1.26    16    6.75   1.98
Group's knowledge work and
activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Bosnia and Herzegovina’s development challenges?
                                                                                                                                Private Sector/
                                         Office of the      Employee of a                                                      Financial Sector/                                           Academia/
                                      President/Minister      Ministry                 PMU            Local Government           Private Bank          NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                        N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N    Mean     SD     N Mean SD                N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
Conceptualization (understanding
                                       5     5.40   0.89    20    6.40   1.93     5     6.00   1.87     6       5.17    1.47    9    6.22   2.73   8   7.13   1.96   6   6.83    1.84    5     7.40   1.67    17    5.47   2.55
and framing the problem)
Design (appraising and planning
                                       5     6.00   1.41    20    6.80   1.67     5     6.00   1.73     6       4.17    1.84    9    6.22   2.64   8   6.50   1.77   6   7.50    1.38    4     7.50   1.92    15    5.33   2.19
the solutions)
Implementation (executing,
carrying out, monitoring, and          5     8.20   1.10    20    6.90   2.08     4     7.00   0.82     6       5.00    1.41    9    6.67   2.45   9   6.67   1.87   6   6.50    1.87    4     8.50   1.73    15    5.13   2.36
making appropriate adjustments)*
Evaluation (assessing the impact
                                       5     8.40   0.89    19    6.84   2.12     4     7.50   1.92     6       4.83    1.94    8    6.38   2.88   9   6.78   1.99   7   8.00    1.29    4     9.00   2.00    15    5.40   2.53
and results)*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                       90
The World Bank Group                                                                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                        Private Sector/
                                        Office of the     Employee of a                                                Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                     President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government          Private Bank           NGO               Media          Research Institute         Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD               N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses
                                      5     9.00   1.73   11   6.36   2.42   7   8.00   1.00    5       5.60    3.05    6    7.67   2.66   4    7.50   1.92   5   6.20    3.03    6     5.83   2.04     9    5.33   2.24
funds promptly
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the            5     6.20   1.64   18   6.50   2.48   7   7.71   1.80    6       7.67    1.86    8    7.88   2.36   7    7.57   2.30   6   8.50    1.38    6     9.00   1.55    11    5.73   2.45
projects and programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals
and reviews are done in a timely      5     8.60   0.55   16   6.06   2.05   7   7.57   2.15    6       6.33    1.97    8    7.38   2.39   6    7.00   2.45   6   8.33    1.63    6     7.00   2.97    10    5.60   2.22
fashion
The World Bank Group’s
“Safeguard Policy? requirements       4     8.25   0.50   11   6.36   1.96   4   6.25   0.50    6       6.00    2.90    7    7.14   2.19   5    7.80   1.30   5   7.80    0.84    6     8.33   1.75     6    6.67   3.14
are reasonable
The World Bank Group’s conditions
                                      5     6.00   1.41   15   6.53   2.00   4   6.50   0.58    6       5.67    2.58    7    7.00   2.45   9    6.89   2.52   5   7.80    0.84    6     8.17   1.72    12    6.33   2.39
on its lending are reasonable
The World Bank Group takes
decisions quickly in Bosnia-          5     6.00   1.41   14   5.50   2.47   5   6.00   1.41    5       5.20    3.70    7    6.71   3.04   9    6.78   2.05   6   6.33    1.51    6     5.50   2.07    10    5.50   2.42
Herzegovina
Working with the World Bank
Group increases Bosnia-
                                      5     7.80   0.45   21   6.48   2.23   7   7.86   1.22    6       5.83    3.13    7    7.57   1.72   10   7.80   2.53   9   8.33    0.87    6     8.67   1.63    14    5.93   2.53
Herzegovina’s institutional
capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures
consistency and continuity through    2     7.50   0.71   11   5.91   2.47   6   6.33   2.58    4       6.50    1.73    4    7.75   1.71   7    8.14   1.95   5   8.60    1.34    5     8.00   3.46    12    5.75   1.87
staff changes
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group        5     6.20   2.39   14   5.64   2.31   5   7.80   1.64    5       5.80    2.05    4    8.75   0.96   7    7.57   2.15   5   7.80    1.10    6     8.17   1.33    10    6.20   1.81
makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides
                                      5     7.00   1.41   14   7.57   1.70   7   8.43   1.13    6       6.83    2.48    7    7.14   2.61   6    8.17   1.47   6   8.50    1.05    6     8.67   1.51     9    6.22   2.54
effective implementation support
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                               91
The World Bank Group                                                                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                              Office of the                                             Private Sector/
                                               President/    Employee of                     Local     Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                       Minister      a Ministry       PMU       Government      Private Bank                                 NGO            Media              Academia              Other
The World Bank Group takes too much risk
                                                    -             -              -             -               -                                        -                 -                  -                  -
in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group does not take
                                                  80.0%         25.9%         14.3%         36.4%            45.5%                                    27.3%          33.3%                28.6%              55.6%
enough risk in Bosnia and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is
                                                  20.0%         22.2%         28.6%          9.1%            9.1%                                     36.4%          33.3%                28.6%              11.1%
appropriate
Don't know                                          -           48.1%         57.1%         45.5%            45.5%                                    27.3%          22.2%                28.6%              33.3%
Prefer not to answer                                -           3.7%             -           9.1%              -                                      9.1%           11.1%                14.3%                -

                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                       Office of the       Employee of a                                              Financial Sector/                                               Academia/
                                    President/Minister       Ministry            PMU           Local Government         Private Bank           NGO                Media            Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD            N Mean SD         N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N   Mean   SD      N   Mean        SD    N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group is adequately
                                      2    6.50    0.71    9   5.56   1.81   6   6.17   1.94    5      6.60    1.67    5     5.80   1.92   7   7.29   1.60    6   6.83    2.32      5     6.80   3.03    9     6.33   2.29
staffed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                              92
The World Bank Group                                                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of the                                               Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      President/   Employee of                      Local       Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                            Minister     a Ministry       PMU         Government       Private Bank         NGO              Media         Academia            Other
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                  0.0%         18.5%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             9.1%             22.2%           0.0%              5.9%
statistics/figures on BH’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with
                                                 60.0%         25.9%          0.0%           54.5%             9.1%            18.2%             11.1%           14.3%            35.3%
Government clients
Offer more innovative financial products         60.0%         22.2%         42.9%           36.4%             18.2%           27.3%             33.3%           57.1%            17.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                 40.0%         11.1%         28.6%           18.2%             45.5%           18.2%             11.1%           0.0%             35.3%
compared to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                  0.0%         7.4%          14.3%           0.0%              9.1%            54.5%             22.2%           28.6%            23.5%
Government*
Improve the quality of its experts as related
                                                 20.0%         22.2%          0.0%           0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             11.1%           0.0%              5.9%
to Bosnia-Herzegovina’s specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services          0.0%         14.8%          0.0%           0.0%              9.1%             0.0%             11.1%           28.6%            11.8%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work            0.0%         3.7%           0.0%           9.1%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
Increase the level of capacity development
                                                  0.0%         40.7%         57.1%           27.3%             36.4%           36.4%             33.3%           14.3%            17.6%
in the country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World
                                                 20.0%         14.8%         14.3%           36.4%             18.2%            9.1%             22.2%           42.9%            35.3%
Bank Group financing
Work faster                                       0.0%         3.7%           0.0%           9.1%              9.1%             9.1%              0.0%           0.0%             11.8%
Increase the level of World Bank Group
                                                  0.0%         0.0%          14.3%           0.0%              9.1%             0.0%              0.0%           0.0%              0.0%
staffing in Bosnia-Herzegovina’s office
Other                                             0.0%         3.7%           0.0%           0.0%              9.1%             0.0%             11.1%           14.3%             0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following
do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Bosnia and Herzegovina?*
                                             Office of the                                                Private Sector/
                                              President/     Employee of                     Local       Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      Minister       a Ministry       PMU        Government       Private Bank           NGO            Media          Academia         Other
Financial services                                  -           32.1%         14.3%          72.7%             45.5%            54.5%            55.6%            28.6%          55.6%
Knowledge products                              80.0%           28.6%            -           9.1%              27.3%              9.1%           22.2%            57.1%          11.1%
Convening services                                  -           17.9%         14.3%            -               18.2%            18.2%            22.2%            14.3%          16.7%
The combination is appropriate for Bosnia
                                                20.0%           7.1%          42.9%          9.1%                -              18.2%               -               -            11.1%
Herzegovina
Don't know                                          -           14.3%         28.6%          9.1%              9.1%                 -               -               -            5.6%
None of the above                                   -             -              -             -                 -                  -               -               -               -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              93
The World Bank Group                                                                     Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Please answer the following questions. Which THREE areas would benefit most from the WBG playing a leading role among international partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina? Which THREE
areas below would benefit most from other donors in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE for each)
                                                    Office of the                     Consultant on       Private Sector/
Benefit from WBG Playing a Leading Role
Percentage of Respondents                         President/ Prime    Employee of    WBG-Supported       Financial Sector/   NGO/Private
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/ Minister    a Ministry     Project/PMU          Private Bank      Foundation           CBO       Academia       Other
Social safety nets                                      0.0%             25.9%            0.0%                 25.0%            18.2%            36.4%        22.2%         0.0%
Public financial management                            80.0%             40.7%           28.6%                 58.3%            72.7%            45.5%        55.6%        71.4%
Access to justice systems                              60.0%             18.5%            0.0%                 33.3%             9.1%            18.2%        22.2%         0.0%
Access to basic services                                0.0%             18.5%            0.0%                 16.7%             9.1%            0.0%         11.1%        14.3%
Capacity of state institutions                         60.0%             33.3%           85.7%                 16.7%            27.3%            54.5%        22.2%        42.9%
Jobs                                                   40.0%             55.6%           57.1%                 66.7%            72.7%            36.4%        66.7%       100.0%
Improving livelihoods                                  20.0%             51.9%           71.4%                 33.3%            63.6%            27.3%        44.4%        42.9%
Social cohesion                                         0.0%             25.9%           14.3%                 25.0%             9.1%            36.4%         0.0%        28.6%

                                                        Office of the                       Consultant on          Private Sector/
Benefit from Other Donors
Percentage of Respondents                             President/ Prime     Employee of     WBG-Supported          Financial Sector/   NGO/Private
(Responses Combined)                                  Minister/ Minister    a Ministry      Project/PMU             Private Bank      Foundation     CBO    Academia        Other
Social safety nets*                                         25.0%             30.4%            83.3%                    16.7%           45.5%       20.0%    12.5%          71.4%
Public financial management                                 75.0%             30.4%            16.7%                    25.0%           18.2%       10.0%    50.0%          42.9%
Access to justice systems                                   75.0%             47.8%            16.7%                    41.7%           36.4%       60.0%    50.0%          42.9%
Access to basic services                                    0.0%              34.8%            16.7%                    16.7%           18.2%       20.0%     0.0%          42.9%
Capacity of state institutions                              0.0%              21.7%             0.0%                    41.7%           54.5%       10.0%    37.5%          28.6%
Jobs                                                        75.0%             34.8%            33.3%                    41.7%           27.3%       20.0%    25.0%          0.0%
Improving livelihoods                                       0.0%              39.1%            16.7%                    25.0%           27.3%       30.0%    12.5%          57.1%
Social cohesion                                             0.0%              30.4%            66.7%                    50.0%           45.5%       40.0%    37.5%          14.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                 94
The World Bank Group                                                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                            Office of the                                               Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/   Employee   of                     Local      Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                          Minister      a Ministry      PMU         Government       Private Bank          NGO                Media         Academia            Other
Local newspapers                                40.0%         44.4%        28.6%           41.7%             40.0%            18.2%               33.3%           57.1%            25.0%
International newspapers                        0.0%          0.0%         14.3%            0.0%             30.0%             9.1%               0.0%            0.0%             18.8%
Local radio                                     0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%               0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
International radio                             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%               0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
Local television                                20.0%         40.7%        42.9%           50.0%             40.0%            27.3%               22.2%           0.0%             25.0%
International television                        0.0%          7.4%          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%               0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
Periodicals                                     0.0%          22.2%        28.6%            8.3%             40.0%            27.3%               33.3%           57.1%            18.8%
Internet                                        20.0%         63.0%        85.7%           83.3%             40.0%            81.8%               44.4%           85.7%            56.3%
Social media                                    0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%             10.0%            18.2%               0.0%            0.0%             6.3%
Blogs                                           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%               11.1%           0.0%             0.0%
Mobile phones                                   0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%               0.0%            0.0%             6.3%
Instant messaging                               0.0%          3.7%          0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%               0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
Other*                                          60.0%         11.1%         0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              0.0%               22.2%           0.0%             31.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                             Office of the                                                      Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                     President/    Employee of                      Local             Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                           Minister      a Ministry      PMU         Government              Private Bank      NGO            Media         Academia            Other
Blogs                                            0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%                    0.0%          0.0%           11.1%           0.0%             5.9%
Direct contact with World Bank Group            60.0%          37.0%        42.9%           16.7%                    36.4%         63.6%          33.3%           42.9%            47.1%
e-Newsletters*                                  20.0%          33.3%         0.0%           66.7%                    72.7%         36.4%          22.2%           14.3%            29.4%
Instant messaging                                0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%                    0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             5.9%
World Bank Group’s
                                                80.0%          55.6%        57.1%           50.0%                   45.5%          18.2%          55.6%           57.1%            17.6%
seminars/workshops/conferences
World Bank Group’s publications and other
                                                 0.0%          33.3%        42.9%            8.3%                   27.3%          45.5%          44.4%           57.1%            52.9%
written materials
Mobile phones                                    0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%                   0.0%           0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             5.9%
Social media                                     0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            8.3%                   0.0%           18.2%          11.1%           0.0%             0.0%
World Bank Group’s website                      40.0%          22.2%        57.1%           25.0%                   18.2%          9.1%           0.0%            28.6%            17.6%
Other                                            0.0%          3.7%          0.0%            0.0%                   0.0%           0.0%           0.0%            0.0%             0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                              Office of the                                                 Private Sector/
                                               President/    Employee of                      Local        Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                       Minister      a Ministry       PMU         Government        Private Bank          NGO            Media           Academia          Other
Yes                                              20.0%          28.6%            -           44.4%               22.2%            33.3%           62.5%            100.0%          27.8%
No                                               80.0%          71.4%         100.0%         55.6%               77.8%            66.7%           37.5%                -           72.2%

                                                                                              95
The World Bank Group                                                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
                                            Office of the                                                      Private Sector/
                                             President/   Employee of                         Local           Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     a Ministry           PMU        Government           Private Bank      NGO      Media    Academia          Other
Yes                                            80.0%          26.1%               -          30.0%                  45.5%         25.0%    71.4%      50.0%          40.0%
No                                             20.0%          73.9%            100.0%        70.0%                  54.5%         75.0%    28.6%      50.0%          60.0%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                             Office of the                                                     Private Sector/
                                              President/     Employee of                      Local           Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      Minister       a Ministry      PMU          Government           Private Bank       NGO     Media    Academia          Other
Yes                                            100.0%           55.6%          -             100.0%                 80.0%         100.0%   83.3%      66.7%          57.1%
No                                                 -            44.4%          -                -                   20.0%            -     16.7%      33.3%          42.9%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                             Office of the                                                     Private Sector/
                                              President/     Employee of                      Local           Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      Minister       a Ministry      PMU          Government           Private Bank       NGO     Media    Academia          Other
Yes                                            100.0%          100.0%        100.0%          91.7%                 100.0%         100.0%   100.0%    100.0%          88.9%
No                                                 -              -             -             8.3%                    -              -        -         -            11.1%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                           Office of the                                                       Private Sector/
                                            President/       Employee of                      Local           Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister         a Ministry     PMU           Government           Private Bank      NGO      Media    Academia          Other
Yes                                          100.0%             76.0%        80.0%           58.3%                 100.0%         90.0%    77.8%     100.0%          82.4%
No                                               -              24.0%        20.0%           41.7%                    -           10.0%    22.2%        -            17.6%

Which do you primarily use?
                                             Office of the                                                     Private Sector/
                                              President/     Employee of                      Local           Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      Minister       a Ministry     PMU           Government           Private Bank      NGO      Media    Academia          Other
The World Bank Group’s country website          80.0%           74.1%        16.7%           88.9%                  54.5%         72.7%    75.0%      85.7%          56.3%
The World Bank Group’s main website             20.0%           25.9%        83.3%           11.1%                  45.5%         27.3%    25.0%      14.3%          43.8%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                             Office of the                                                     Private Sector/
                                              President/      Employee of                   Local             Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      Minister        a Ministry     PMU        Government             Private Bank       NGO     Media    Academia          Other
High speed                                      100.0%           84.6%        85.7%        100.0%                  100.0%         100.0%   100.0%    100.0%          100.0%
Dial-up                                            -             15.4%        14.3%           -                       -              -        -         -               -



                                                                                             96
The World Bank Group                                                                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                                                        Private Sector/
                                         Office of the     Employee of a                                               Financial Sector/                                                Academia/
                                      President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government         Private Bank            NGO                Media            Research Institute         Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N   Mean   SD      N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N    Mean   SD      N   Mean        SD    N Mean SD            N    Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group’s
data more often than I did a few       5     7.60   0.89   26   5.85   2.77   4   8.00   2.45    9       5.44   3.13    10    5.10   2.38   11   5.45   3.45    8   6.50    2.45      7     6.14   2.41    17    6.47   2.60
years ago
I find the World Bank Group’s
                                       5     5.60   2.19   23   7.30   2.10   5   8.60   1.67    6       6.83   2.86     9    7.00   1.80   9    6.56   2.24    7   7.57    1.72      6     7.33   1.97    15    6.40   1.68
websites easy to navigate.
I find the information on the World
                                       5     8.80   0.45   23   7.48   2.15   6   8.83   1.17    6       7.33   2.81     9    7.00   2.18   8    8.13   2.03    7   8.14    1.57      6     8.67   1.37    16    7.25   2.11
Bank Group’s websites useful.
The World Bank Group’s social
media channels are valuable
                                       1     8.00    .     11   5.73   2.37   1   7.00    .      5       4.60   2.19     5    4.60   2.88   8    5.88   2.48    6   7.33    3.08      4     3.50   1.92    12    5.50   2.54
sources of information about the
institution
When I need information from the
World Bank Group I know how to         5     5.00   4.12   25   7.32   2.16   7   8.43   1.90    8       7.13   2.42    10    7.50   2.72   11   6.45   2.91    8   8.50    1.51      6     7.50   3.33    17    7.41   2.03
find it
The World Bank Group is
responsive to my information           5     7.00   1.41   17   6.76   2.08   6   8.00   2.00    5       7.40   2.30     7    7.00   2.58   7    8.00   1.41    7   8.00    1.63      4     6.75   3.78    12    7.67   2.19
requests and inquiries


H. Background Information
Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Select only ONE response)
                                              Office of the                                               Private Sector/
                                               President/   Employee of                     Local        Financial Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                       Minister     a Ministry       PMU        Government        Private Bank                                 NGO            Media              Academia              Other
The World Bank (IDA)                             40.0%         77.3%         100.0%         72.7%              57.1%                                    71.4%          100.0%              100.0%               61.5%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)      60.0%         13.6%            -              -               42.9%                                    28.6%             -                   -                 30.8%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee
                                                    -             -             -            9.1%                 -                                       -                 -                  -                  -
Agency (MIGA)
Other                                               -           9.1%            -           18.2%                 -                                       -                 -                  -                7.7%
Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of the                                              Private Sector/
Percentage of Respondents                      President/     Employee of                    Local      Financial Sector/
(Responses Combined)                            Minister       a Ministry     PMU         Government      Private Bank          NGO                                    Media              Academia              Other
Observer                                          0.0%           7.7%         0.0%           22.2%            9.1%              10.0%                                  14.3%                0.0%                20.0%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                40.0%           30.8%        14.3%          11.1%            36.4%             60.0%                                  57.1%                57.1%               53.3%
Engage in World Bank Group
                                                  0.0%           30.8%        14.3%          33.3%            36.4%             30.0%                                  28.6%                28.6%               26.7%
related/sponsored events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties    80.0%           46.2%        71.4%          33.3%            27.3%             20.0%                                  14.3%                28.6%               20.0%
Use World Bank Group website for
                                                 80.0%           34.6%        28.6%          22.2%            36.4%             30.0%                                  42.9%                42.9%               40.0%
information, data, research, etc.
                                                                                           97
The World Bank Group                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina N=61                    Republika Srpska N=35           Other Areas N=9

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina

In general, how would you say that Bosnia and Herzegovina is headed in...?
                                                      Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                               and Herzegovina              Republika Srpska         Other Areas
The right direction                                           14.8%                       8.6%                     -
The wrong direction                                           50.8%                      42.9%                  44.4%
Not sure                                                      34.4%                      48.6%                  55.6%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Please identify which of the following you consider
the most important development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                    Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                           and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska         Other Areas
Social protection                                                   19.0%                 5.9%                   0.0%
Transport                                                           0.0%                  5.9%                  11.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                     41.4%                32.4%                  33.3%
Domestic private sector development                                 19.0%                29.4%                  33.3%
Foreign direct investment                                           15.5%                20.6%                  33.3%
Water and sanitation                                                0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Energy                                                              10.3%                20.6%                   0.0%
Job creation/employment                                             60.3%                35.3%                  55.6%
Rural development                                                   3.4%                  5.9%                  11.1%
Financial markets                                                   3.4%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Urban development                                                   0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                        1.7%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                             6.9%                  5.9%                   0.0%
Health                                                              1.7%                  8.8%                   0.0%
Education*                                                          20.7%                 8.8%                  44.4%
Poverty reduction                                                   1.7%                  8.8%                   0.0%
Social cohesion*                                                    0.0%                  0.0%                  11.1%
Climate change                                                      0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Agricultural development                                            8.6%                 14.7%                  11.1%
Trade and exports                                                   1.7%                  5.9%                   0.0%
Economic growth                                                     22.4%                38.2%                  33.3%
Law and justice                                                     10.3%                 8.8%                  22.2%
Local governance and institutions                                   3.4%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Natural resource management                                         3.4%                  2.9%                   0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                     31.0%                38.2%                   0.0%
Disaster management                                                 3.4%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Information and communications technology                           1.7%                  0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                 98
The World Bank Group                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                             Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                     and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska       Other Areas
Water and sanitation                                          1.7%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                       10.2%                  8.6%                 0.0%
Economic growth                                               47.5%                 54.3%                33.3%
Climate change                                                0.0%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Rural development                                             5.1%                  14.3%                11.1%
Urban development                                             0.0%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Local governance and institutions                             3.4%                   0.0%                11.1%
Social protection*                                            23.7%                  5.7%                33.3%
Law and justice                                               11.9%                  5.7%                11.1%
Transport                                                     1.7%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Information and communications technology                     1.7%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Anti-corruption                                               28.8%                 22.9%                11.1%
Domestic private sector development                           18.6%                 28.6%                33.3%
Foreign direct investment                                     18.6%                 14.3%                11.1%
Energy                                                        0.0%                   8.6%                 0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                               20.3%                 22.9%                11.1%
Social cohesion*                                              1.7%                   2.9%                22.2%
Education                                                     15.3%                 22.9%                44.4%
Natural resource management                                   3.4%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                  0.0%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Health                                                        0.0%                   2.9%                 0.0%
Agricultural development                                      27.1%                 28.6%                22.2%
Disaster management                                           0.0%                   2.9%                 0.0%
Job creation/employment                                       50.8%                 48.6%                44.4%
Financial markets                                             1.7%                   2.9%                 0.0%
Trade and exports                                             3.4%                   0.0%                 0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            99
The World Bank Group                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                             Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                    and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska      Other Areas
Energy                                                       18.3%                40.0%                22.2%
Equality of opportunity                                      10.0%                 8.6%                 0.0%
Social protection                                             3.3%                 2.9%                 0.0%
Climate change                                                1.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                             13.3%                40.0%                11.1%
Disaster management                                           0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%
Rural development                                            10.0%                 5.7%                11.1%
Foreign direct investment                                    53.3%                42.9%                44.4%
Urban development                                             1.7%                 0.0%                11.1%
Water and sanitation                                          1.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
Trade and exports                                             8.3%                 8.6%                 0.0%
Information and communications technology*                    0.0%                 8.6%                 0.0%
Social cohesion                                               1.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                              36.7%                20.0%                44.4%
Domestic private sector development                          40.0%                31.4%                44.4%
Job creation/employment                                      40.0%                22.9%                33.3%
Agricultural development                                     16.7%                31.4%                11.1%
Transport                                                     3.3%                 5.7%                22.2%
Education                                                     8.3%                11.4%                11.1%
Natural resource management                                   1.7%                 5.7%                11.1%
Environmental sustainability                                  3.3%                 2.9%                 0.0%
Health                                                        0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%
Law and justice                                              11.7%                 2.9%                11.1%
Local governance and institutions                             3.3%                 2.9%                11.1%
Financial markets                                             1.7%                 2.9%                 0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                       and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska         Other Areas
Better employment opportunities for young people                40.0%                  47.1%                 33.3%
Better employment opportunities for women                       1.8%                    5.9%                 0.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                    0.0%                    0.0%                 0.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help
                                                                12.7%                  14.7%                 11.1%
ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens             1.8%                    0.0%                 0.0%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                            32.7%                  41.2%                 55.6%
A growing middle class                                          16.4%                  17.6%                 11.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas         12.7%                   0.0%                 0.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                                1.8%                    0.0%                 0.0%
areas
Consistent economic growth                                      49.1%                  35.3%                 44.4%
More reliable social safety net                                 7.3%                    0.0%                 11.1%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                 1.8%                    0.0%                 0.0%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                                18.2%                  26.5%                 22.2%
opportunity
Better quality public services                                  3.6%                    2.9%                 0.0%
Other                                                           0.0%                    8.8%                 0.0%




                                                             100
The World Bank Group                                            Bosnia and Herzegovina                                Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                           Federation of Bosnia
                                                                             and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                             N    Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
 How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                            61      5.57    2.50   35   6.60   1.68       9      5.44     2.07
 Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                           Federation of Bosnia
                                                                             and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                             N    Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                              49     5.24   1.90   34   6.35   1.94       8      5.13     3.00
 effectiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations

                                                                           Federation of Bosnia
                                                                             and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                             N    Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Bosnia and Herzegovina solve its most complicated          44      5.61    2.55   28   6.50   1.80       7      6.14     3.13
development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and
knowledge services) in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE) *Significantly different between locations
Percentage of Respondents                               Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                      and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska             Other Areas
Social protection                                              11.7%                    2.9%                    22.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                31.7%                   25.7%                    44.4%
Transport                                                      10.0%                    8.6%                     0.0%
Poverty reduction                                              10.0%                    5.7%                    11.1%
Rural development                                              16.7%                   22.9%                    11.1%
Domestic private sector development                            28.3%                   25.7%                    33.3%
Foreign direct investment                                      20.0%                   28.6%                    11.1%
Water and sanitation                                           6.7%                     5.7%                     0.0%
Energy                                                         11.7%                   17.1%                    11.1%
Social cohesion                                                0.0%                     2.9%                    11.1%
Job creation/employment                                        35.0%                   42.9%                    33.3%
Financial markets                                              1.7%                     0.0%                     0.0%
Urban development                                              1.7%                     0.0%                     0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                   1.7%                     0.0%                     0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                        8.3%                     5.7%                     0.0%
Health                                                         1.7%                     2.9%                    11.1%
Education                                                      10.0%                   17.1%                    22.2%
Climate change                                                 1.7%                     0.0%                     0.0%
Agricultural development                                       10.0%                   20.0%                    11.1%
Trade and exports                                              6.7%                     2.9%                     0.0%
Economic growth                                                30.0%                   34.3%                    44.4%
Law and justice*                                               13.3%                    0.0%                     0.0%
Local governance and institutions                              3.3%                     2.9%                     0.0%
Natural resource management                                    6.7%                     2.9%                     0.0%
Information and communications technology                      0.0%                     0.0%                     0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                15.0%                   14.3%                    22.2%
Disaster management                                            1.7%                     0.0%                     0.0%



                                                                         101
The World Bank Group                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
Greatest Value                                        Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                  and Herzegovina             Republika Srpska          Other Areas
Convening/facilitating                                          3.4%                       11.8%                    0.0%
Data                                                            3.4%                        0.0%                   12.5%
Policy advice, knowledge                                        8.5%                        5.9%                   25.0%
Financial resources                                             44.1%                      35.3%                   25.0%
Capacity development*                                           10.2%                      26.5%                    0.0%
Technical assistance                                            3.4%                        0.0%                    0.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                      18.6%                      14.7%                   12.5%
Coordination of development partners                            1.7%                        0.0%                    0.0%
Strategy formulation                                            5.1%                        2.9%                   25.0%
Other                                                           3.4%                        2.9%                    0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

 nd
2 Greatest Value                                        Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                 and Herzegovina              Republika Srpska          Other Areas
Convening/facilitating                                         6.8%                         6.1%                    0.0%
Data                                                           1.7%                         3.0%                    0.0%
Policy advice, knowledge                                       5.1%                        12.1%                   12.5%
Financial resources                                            10.2%                       18.2%                    0.0%
Capacity development                                           18.6%                       18.2%                   12.5%
Technical assistance                                           15.3%                       12.1%                   37.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                     15.3%                       12.1%                    0.0%
Coordination of development partners                           10.2%                        9.1%                   25.0%
Strategy formulation                                           15.3%                        6.1%                   12.5%
Other                                                          0.0%                         0.0%                    0.0%

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to achieve
development results? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                Federation of Bosnia
                                                                  and Herzegovina         Republika Srpska            Other Areas
                                                                  N    Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD        N      Mean     SD
Convening/facilitating                                           33      5.36   2.33      30    5.97   1.79       8      5.25     3.20
Data                                                             43      6.12   2.11      31    6.84   1.95       8      5.63     2.72
Policy advice, knowledge                                         40      5.58   2.58      31    6.03   2.37       8      5.63     3.07
Financial resources                                              47      6.43   2.47      31    7.35   1.85       8      5.50     2.73
Technical assistance                                             44      6.25   2.07      29    6.21   1.88       8      5.50     2.83
Mobilizing third party financial resources                       39      5.59   2.57      26    6.73   1.82       8      5.63     2.45
Coordination of development partners                             38      5.87   2.43      30    6.07   1.53       8      5.25     2.92
Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                     44      5.48   2.37      28    5.75   2.21       8      5.50     2.98




                                                             102
The World Bank Group                                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                                Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To what
degree would Bosnia and Herzegovina benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                                                          Federation of Bosnia
                                                                            and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                            N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help
                                                                           55     5.60   2.91    32   5.31   3.12       9      5.89     3.02
them more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific
                                                                           58     7.98   1.83    34   7.82   2.24       9      7.56     3.01
development projects on the ground
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                           53     7.28   2.50    33   7.21   2.22       9      8.22     1.92
sociopolitical conditions)
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change            54     7.93   2.19    33   7.67   2.15       9      7.11     2.37
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                          Federation of Bosnia
                                                                            and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                            N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)             37     6.84   2.63    31   7.29   2.18       7      5.29     2.63
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)       26     4.65   2.13    19   4.79   2.10       5      5.00     2.92
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve
                                                                           33     5.85   2.31    21   6.52   2.23       7      5.29     2.81
development goals)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bosnia and Herzegovina to help ensure better development
results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity
building? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                          Federation of Bosnia
                                                                            and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                            N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)             52     7.75   2.20    33   8.27   1.55       8      7.63     2.45
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)       42     6.83   2.58    26   6.50   2.50       8      6.50     3.02
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve
                                                                           42     7.38   2.31    28   6.82   2.45       8      8.88     0.84
development goals)




                                                                         103
The World Bank Group                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bosnia and
   Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                 Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                        and Herzegovina    Republika Srpska        Other Areas
Not exploring alternative policy options                         10.0%             18.8%                  11.1%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                 33.3%             40.6%                  33.3%
BH
Staff too inaccessible                                           0.0%               3.1%                  11.1%
Not enough public disclosure of its work*                        15.0%              0.0%                  0.0%
Arrogant in its approach                                         1.7%               0.0%                  0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                              10.0%             25.0%                  0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                            0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                         3.3%               3.1%                  0.0%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                                 10.0%              3.1%                  22.2%
efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries*                           3.3%              25.0%                  11.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                                 10.0%             12.5%                  0.0%
political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                            8.3%               0.0%                  0.0%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                 8.3%               6.3%                  22.2%
procedures
Not aligned with other development partners’ work                6.7%               0.0%                  11.1%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                   6.7%               6.3%                  0.0%
Not client focused                                               3.3%               0.0%                  11.1%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to
                                                                 11.7%              3.1%                  22.2%
practical problem solving
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-
                                                                 13.3%              9.4%                  11.1%
conflict countries
Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff
                                                                 0.0%               0.0%                  0.0%
members located in the country
Other                                                            1.7%               6.3%                  11.1%
Don’t know                                                       10.0%              9.4%                  11.1%
*Significantly different between locations

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bosnia and
Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                            Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                   and Herzegovina        Republika Srpska       Other Areas
Capacity development                                        18.3%                  21.2%                 44.4%
Policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                            15.0%                  12.1%                 33.3%
Government
Knowledge products/services                                 15.0%                  18.2%                 22.2%
Investment lending                                          70.0%                  66.7%                 55.6%
Technical assistance                                        13.3%                  24.2%                  0.0%
Trust Fund management                                        0.0%                   6.1%                  0.0%
Co-financing arrangements                                   28.3%                  21.2%                 11.1%
Sector-wide approaches                                      10.0%                   6.1%                 11.1%
Emergency Recovery lending                                  10.0%                   6.1%                  0.0%
Other                                                        3.3%                   6.1%                  0.0%
Don’t know                                                   3.3%                   3.0%                 11.1%




                                                           104
The World Bank Group                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                         Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                                and Herzegovina           Republika Srpska          Other Areas
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                 19.7%                    28.6%                   44.4%
Community of development partners                                        27.9%                    40.0%                   33.3%
Media                                                                    3.3%                     11.4%                    0.0%
NGOs*                                                                    13.1%                     0.0%                   22.2%
Local Government*                                                        42.6%                    37.1%                    0.0%
Private sector                                                           50.8%                    51.4%                   44.4%
Parliament                                                               4.9%                      2.9%                   11.1%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                     1.6%                      2.9%                    0.0%
Beneficiaries                                                            13.1%                    11.4%                   33.3%
Foundations                                                              1.6%                      0.0%                    0.0%
Emerging donors                                                          3.3%                      0.0%                    0.0%
UN agencies                                                              1.6%                      2.9%                    0.0%
Other                                                                    3.3%                      2.9%                    0.0%
Don’t know                                                               3.3%                      0.0%                    0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                       Federation of Bosnia
                                                                         and Herzegovina         Republika Srpska            Other Areas
                                                                         N    Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD        N      Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                         52     5.79   2.45      33    6.67   1.98       8      5.38     3.25
development in Bosnia-Herzegovina
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                         48     5.06   2.05      31    6.06   2.29       9      5.44     2.96
development priorities for Bosnia-Herzegovina
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                         44     5.70   2.15      33    6.12   2.09       9      6.00     2.96
realistic for Bosnia-Herzegovina
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bosnia-
                                                                         47     7.43   2.07      31    7.71   1.95       9      6.44     3.21
Herzegovina with respect




                                                                     105
The World Bank Group                                            Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in terms of each of the
following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                           Federation of Bosnia
                                                                             and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                             N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
Responsiveness                                                              48      5.33   2.41   30   6.23   1.94       9      6.00     2.40
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*          46      5.00   2.17   31   6.23   1.84       6      6.33     2.16
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                    46      4.61   2.22   27   5.70   2.16       7      5.29     2.98
Being inclusive                                                             45      5.69   2.41   27   6.11   1.74       5      7.40     1.82
Openness (sharing data and other information)                               45      6.69   2.45   28   6.93   2.34       9      6.67     2.74
Staff accessibility                                                         50      7.10   2.25   31   7.58   2.06       7      6.86     2.85
Straightforwardness and honesty                                             47      6.45   2.38   28   6.93   2.71       6      6.33     3.14
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are
                                                                            43      5.88   2.49   28   7.04   2.82       7      6.29     3.35
making decisions important to my work
Collaboration with civil society                                            39      5.31   2.27   22   6.09   1.54       5      5.60     3.21
Collaboration with the Government*                                          45      6.69   2.10   29   7.97   1.30       8      7.25     1.49
Collaboration with EC and other development partners*                       36      7.03   2.16   20   8.20   1.44       7      5.86     3.24
Collaboration with the private sector                                       39      5.36   2.17   22   5.27   2.00       5      6.40     1.82
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                42      4.83   2.13   26   5.54   1.77       7      4.71     2.14
Being a long-term partner                                                   45      6.76   2.36   28   7.75   2.01       8      6.63     2.93


To be a more effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, do you believe that the World Bank Group should
have…?
                                                       Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska        Other Areas
More local presence                                           52.5%                 54.3%                55.6%
The current level of local presence is adequate               27.1%                 28.6%                22.2%
Less local presence                                           1.7%                     -                   -
Don't know                                                    18.6%                 17.1%                22.2%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                               Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                      and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska        Other Areas
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                               13.3%                   5.7%                 33.3%
through/follow-up
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                               36.7%                  54.3%                 33.3%
political/social realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government            51.7%                  31.4%                 66.7%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                               20.0%                   5.7%                 0.0%
participation
Poor coordination with development partners                    21.7%                  14.3%                 22.2%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                           8.3%                   2.9%                 0.0%
The Government works inefficiently                             36.7%                  25.7%                 22.2%
Political pressures and obstacles                              38.3%                  42.9%                 66.7%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                               31.7%                  54.3%                 22.2%
challenges
Inadequate funding                                             11.7%                  17.1%                 22.2%
Other                                                           1.7%                   0.0%                 0.0%




                                                                        106
The World Bank Group                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                               Federation of Bosnia
                                                                 and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                 N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
Anti-corruption                                                 54      8.39   2.23   31   7.94   1.98       9      7.44     2.96
Information and communications technology                       53      7.26   2.25   31   7.29   2.24       8      6.13     2.80
Transport                                                       56      7.79   2.03   32   7.78   1.85       9      7.33     1.94
Law and justice                                                 55      7.82   2.37   32   7.28   2.36       9      6.11     2.93
Urban development                                               50      7.20   2.42   29   7.62   1.86       9      7.22     1.79
Environmental sustainability                                    51      7.75   2.35   28   7.64   2.06       8      7.38     1.69
Poverty reduction                                               58      8.95   1.84   31   8.39   1.76       8      8.75     1.04
Domestic private sector development                             57      8.91   1.65   31   9.16   0.93       9      8.78     0.83
Foreign direct investment                                       55      8.75   2.05   30   8.83   1.84       9      8.78     0.67
Local governance and institutions                               54      7.91   2.00   29   7.34   2.21       8      6.75     3.15
Water and sanitation                                            53      7.53   2.35   29   7.62   1.88       8      7.00     2.14
Trade and exports                                               54      7.20   2.33   29   7.14   1.92       8      8.50     1.41
Economic growth                                                 58      8.90   1.94   31   8.74   1.32       9      8.56     1.33
Energy                                                          53      7.53   2.56   30   7.73   2.41       9      7.44     1.59
Disaster management                                             50      6.14   2.73   29   7.34   1.95       9      6.56     3.21
Public sector governance/ reform                                54      8.11   2.14   31   7.81   2.27       8      8.88     0.64
Job creation/employment                                         58      9.00   1.94   31   9.00   1.29       9      8.89     0.78
Social cohesion                                                 55      7.40   2.68   30   6.80   1.90       9      6.33     2.87
Financial markets                                               53      7.72   2.37   28   7.32   2.04       9      7.56     2.24
Equality of opportunity                                         53      7.23   2.72   28   7.57   2.35       8      6.25     3.11
Health                                                          51      7.41   2.48   28   7.50   1.93       8      6.50     3.51
Rural development                                               54      7.78   2.52   31   8.19   1.74       9      7.44     1.74
Education                                                       51      8.25   2.37   31   7.68   2.12       8      7.88     2.59
Social protection                                               54      7.46   2.85   30   6.80   2.22       8      6.88     2.64
Climate change                                                  50      6.32   2.85   28   7.29   2.21       8      5.88     3.36
Agricultural development                                        54      8.48   1.77   30   8.57   1.43       9      7.33     2.35
Natural resource management                                     52      6.85   2.72   31   7.00   2.78       9      7.56     1.24




                                                            107
The World Bank Group                                       Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                      Federation of Bosnia
                                                                        and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                        N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
Information and communications technology                              14      6.50   2.44   17   6.47   1.97       4      6.00     3.56
Transport                                                              27      5.93   2.32   19   6.47   1.65       6      4.83     2.79
Law and justice                                                        27      5.93   2.32   16   5.44   2.03       4      5.50     3.11
Urban development                                                      24      6.00   2.28   18   6.00   2.06       6      4.67     2.81
Environmental sustainability                                           27      6.19   2.42   22   6.68   1.62       6      5.17     2.32
Poverty reduction                                                      35      5.54   2.31   23   6.52   2.47       8      5.50     2.83
Domestic private sector development                                    34      6.18   2.05   22   6.00   2.76       7      6.29     1.80
Foreign direct investment                                              32      5.66   2.15   21   6.19   2.77       6      6.67     1.97
Local governance and institutions                                      34      5.88   2.19   21   6.24   2.00       8      5.63     2.67
Water and sanitation                                                   29      6.62   2.41   21   6.81   1.63       7      5.86     2.41
Trade and exports                                                      27      5.70   2.25   18   6.33   1.68       7      5.71     2.22
Economic growth                                                        36      6.00   2.29   23   6.48   2.43       8      6.00     2.62
Energy                                                                 29      6.34   2.18   21   7.05   2.40       7      5.86     2.48
Disaster management                                                    20      5.55   2.52   18   5.33   1.72       4      5.50     3.11
Public sector governance/ reform                                       38      6.18   2.37   24   6.29   2.07       7      5.57     2.57
Job creation/employment                                                33      5.27   2.50   21   5.95   2.27       8      5.88     2.85
Social cohesion                                                        28      5.32   2.36   19   5.84   2.17       6      5.83     2.48
Financial markets                                                      31      5.87   2.20   20   6.70   2.18       7      7.00     2.08
Equality of opportunity                                                31      5.74   2.22   17   6.12   2.34       6      6.00     2.83
Health                                                                 29      5.86   2.49   19   6.21   1.69       7      5.71     3.04
Rural development                                                      32      5.31   2.13   23   6.74   1.98       6      5.33     3.50
Education                                                              30      5.30   2.62   20   5.45   2.52       6      5.83     3.55
Social protection                                                      26      5.38   2.47   19   6.21   2.04       6      6.33     2.94
Climate change                                                         22      4.91   2.58   20   5.75   1.97       5      5.00     3.74
Agricultural development                                               31      5.87   2.36   24   6.83   1.71       5      5.20     3.90
Natural resource management                                            20      5.75   2.05   16   6.38   2.36       5      5.80     2.17

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                    Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                              and Herzegovina        Republika Srpska       Other Areas
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                     55.0%                62.9%                44.4%
In the country                                               8.3%                   5.7%               11.1%
Don't know                                                   36.7%                31.4%                44.4%

                                                                      Federation of Bosnia
                                                                        and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                        N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                       48      5.90   2.09   33   6.39   2.03       8      6.00     2.67
development results in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                   108
The World Bank Group                                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)
                                                                         Federation of Bosnia
                                                                           and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                           N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
To what extent does the WBG help to build/ strengthen existing
                                                                          44      5.84   1.95   30   6.37   1.94       8      5.63     2.72
country systems in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                         Federation of Bosnia
                                                                           and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                           N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of
                                                                          48      4.79   2.46   31   5.48   2.10       8      5.63     2.67
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group meets Bosnia and Herzegovina’s needs for
                                                                          44      5.39   2.68   30   6.17   2.12       7      5.43     2.82
knowledge services

                                                                         Federation of Bosnia
                                                                           and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                           N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and
                                                                          38      5.32   2.02   26   6.00   2.10       7      5.00     2.71
 corrects its work in real time in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
                                                     Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                              and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska                         Other Areas
Weekly                                                      5.2%                    20.0%                               11.1%
Monthly                                                     10.3%                   8.6%                                11.1%
A few times a year                                          34.5%                   20.0%                               44.4%
Rarely                                                      32.8%                   40.0%                               22.2%
Never                                                       17.2%                   11.4%                               11.1%

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                         Federation of Bosnia
                                                                           and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska           Other Areas
                                                                           N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD       N      Mean     SD
Are timely                                                                39      5.28   2.19   30   5.63   1.99       8      5.88     2.95
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                          39      5.26   2.25   26   5.50   2.29       7      5.86     2.67
preparation
Are relevant to Bosnia-Herzegovina's development priorities               38      5.87   2.37   28   6.14   2.37       8      6.75     2.71
Lead to practical solutions                                               41      5.51   2.16   29   6.52   1.92       8      5.63     2.39
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                      42      6.10   2.36   30   6.40   2.03       8      7.13     1.89
Are source of relevant information on global good practices               43      6.95   2.14   31   7.10   1.80       8      6.63     1.77
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                      43      6.88   2.30   32   7.59   1.92       8      6.50     2.20
Are adequately disseminated                                               39      6.03   2.50   27   6.89   1.55       8      6.13     2.42
Are translated enough into local language                                 38      6.37   2.59   27   6.59   2.15       6      6.50     2.51
Are adaptable to Bosnia-Herzegovina’s specific development
                                                                          39      6.28   2.06   29   6.14   1.89       8      6.63     2.26
challenges and country circumstances



                                                                      109
The World Bank Group                                            Bosnia and Herzegovina                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                                           Federation of Bosnia
                                                                             and Herzegovina          Republika Srpska              Other Areas
                                                                             N    Mean     SD         N    Mean     SD          N      Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results           46      5.85    1.90     29      6.41    1.82       8      6.13     2.70
in your country?
 Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
                                                                               48     6.63 1.94        27     7.30   1.44       7      7.86     1.57
 Group's knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Bosnia and Herzegovina’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                           Federation of Bosnia
                                                                             and Herzegovina          Republika Srpska              Other Areas
                                                                             N    Mean     SD         N    Mean     SD          N      Mean     SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                   44      5.70    2.09      28     6.75    1.76       8      6.50     3.02
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                              42      5.76    1.97      27     6.89    1.72       8      6.25     2.92
Implementation (Executing, carrying out, monitoring and making
                                                                            43      6.30    2.22      26     7.04    1.73       8      6.13     2.75
appropriate adjustments)
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                               43      6.47    2.33      25     7.52    1.61       8      5.75     3.28


To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                           Federation of Bosnia
                                                                             and Herzegovina          Republika Srpska              Other Areas
                                                                             N    Mean     SD         N    Mean     SD          N      Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                               29      7.21    2.50      24     6.13    2.19       4      7.00     3.16
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the
                                                                            39      7.26    2.25      28     7.43    2.24       6      5.83     2.79
projects and programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                            38      7.00    2.33      26     6.96    2.07       5      5.40     2.51
fashion
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                            30      7.20    2.43      20     7.10    1.52       3      5.67     0.58
reasonable
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable             40      6.63    2.20      22     7.00    2.00       6      6.50     1.87
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Bosnia-Herzegovina          39      5.97    2.39      22     5.91    2.33       5      5.80     1.79
Working with the World Bank Group increases Bosnia-Herzegovina’s
                                                                            46      7.00    2.45      30     7.57    1.65       7      6.00     2.83
institutional capacity
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through
                                                                            29      6.62    2.58      22     7.23    2.07       4      7.00     1.63
staff changes
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                            32      6.88    2.25      23     6.65    2.10       5      7.40     1.14
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support              34      7.24    2.18      27     8.00    1.71       4      7.75     0.96




                                                                        110
The World Bank Group                                       Bosnia and Herzegovina                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                       Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska      Other Areas
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bosnia
                                                                -                      -                  -
and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in
                                                              44.1%                 25.7%              33.3%
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is
                                                              15.3%                 28.6%              33.3%
appropriate
Don't know                                                    33.9%                 42.9%              33.3%
Prefer not to answer                                          6.8%                   2.9%                 -

                                                                      Federation of Bosnia
                                                                        and Herzegovina           Republika Srpska              Other Areas
                                                                        N    Mean     SD          N    Mean     SD          N      Mean     SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately
                                                                       29        6.48   1.86      18      6.39   2.00       6      6.00     2.90
 staffed in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents                                     Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                            and Herzegovina                Republika Srpska            Other Areas
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                                          1.7%                      14.3%                       22.2%
statistics/figures on BH’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                   31.0%                        17.1%                       33.3%
Offer more innovative financial products                               29.3%                        28.6%                       33.3%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                                       22.4%                        20.0%                       33.3%
compared to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                         17.2%                        17.1%                       22.2%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bosnia-
                                                                          6.9%                      11.4%                       0.0%
Herzegovina’s specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services*                                 3.4%                      20.0%                       0.0%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                    1.7%                      2.9%                        0.0%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                                       39.7%                        22.9%                       22.2%
country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                       25.9%                        22.9%                       0.0%
financing
Work faster                                                               3.4%                         5.7%                     22.2%
Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in
                                                                          1.7%                         0.0%                     11.1%
Bosnia-Herzegovina’s office
Other                                                                     3.4%                         2.9%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                    111
The World Bank Group                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and taking into
account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of
in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                          Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                    and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska      Other Areas
Financial services                                                43.3%                40.0%               44.4%
Knowledge products                                                18.3%                28.6%               33.3%
Convening services                                                18.3%                11.4%               11.1%
The combination is appropriate for Bosnia
                                                                  13.3%                 8.6%                  -
Herzegovina
Don't know                                                        6.7%                 11.4%               11.1%
None of the above                                                   -                      -                  -

Please answer the following questions. Which THREE areas would benefit most from the WBG playing a leading role among
international partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina? Which THREE areas below would benefit most from other donors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE for each)
Benefit from WBG Playing a Leading Role
Percentage of Respondents                               Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                      and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska        Other Areas
Social safety nets                                             25.0%                14.7%                 22.2%
Public financial management                                    53.3%                52.9%                 66.7%
Access to justice systems                                      26.7%                 8.8%                 11.1%
Access to basic services                                       6.7%                 17.6%                 11.1%
Capacity of state institutions                                 35.0%                41.2%                 66.7%
Jobs                                                           56.7%                70.6%                 55.6%
Improving livelihoods                                          41.7%                47.1%                 44.4%
Social cohesion                                                25.0%                 8.8%                 22.2%

Benefit from Other Donors
Percentage of Respondents                               Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                      and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska        Other Areas
Social safety nets                                             32.1%                43.3%                 11.1%
Public financial management*                                   41.1%                13.3%                 22.2%
Access to justice systems                                      53.6%                36.7%                 55.6%
Access to basic services*                                      12.5%                36.7%                 55.6%
Capacity of state institutions                                 32.1%                23.3%                 11.1%
Jobs                                                           37.5%                13.3%                 22.2%
Improving livelihoods                                          23.2%                40.0%                 33.3%
Social cohesion*                                               30.4%                50.0%                 66.7%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                             112
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose
no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                       and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska       Other Areas
Local newspapers                                                40.7%               29.4%                25.0%
International newspapers                                        5.1%                 8.8%                12.5%
Local radio                                                     0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%
International radio                                             0.0%                 0.0%                 0.0%
Local television                                                28.8%               35.3%                50.0%
International television                                        0.0%                 5.9%                 0.0%
Periodicals*                                                    15.3%               38.2%                25.0%
Internet                                                        67.8%               52.9%                75.0%
Social media                                                    3.4%                 5.9%                 0.0%
Blogs                                                           0.0%                 2.9%                 0.0%
Mobile phones                                                   1.7%                 0.0%                 0.0%
Instant messaging                                               0.0%                 2.9%                 0.0%
Other                                                           15.3%               14.7%                 0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                             Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                    and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska          Other Areas
Blogs                                                        3.3%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                         41.0%                 38.2%                 50.0%
e-Newsletters*                                               39.3%                 20.6%                 62.5%
Instant messaging                                            1.6%                  0.0%                   0.0%
World Bank Group’s
                                                             41.0%                 58.8%                  12.5%
seminars/workshops/conferences*
World Bank Group’s publications and other written
                                                             36.1%                 41.2%                  25.0%
materials
Mobile phones                                                1.6%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Social media                                                 4.9%                  2.9%                   0.0%
World Bank Group’s website                                   16.4%                 32.4%                  25.0%
Other                                                        0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                       Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                and Herzegovina       Republika Srpska        Other Areas
Yes                                                            27.1%                35.7%                  62.5%
No                                                             72.9%                64.3%                  37.5%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
                                                     Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                              and Herzegovina          Republika Srpska       Other Areas
Yes                                                         43.5%                    36.7%               37.5%
No                                                          56.5%                    63.3%               62.5%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                         Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                  and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska       Other Areas
Yes                                                             76.9%               75.0%                66.7%
No                                                              23.1%               25.0%                33.3%




                                                              113
The World Bank Group                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                               Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                        and Herzegovina              Republika Srpska             Other Areas
Yes                                                                   94.5%                       100.0%                     100.0%
No                                                                    5.5%                            -                         -

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                               Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                        and Herzegovina              Republika Srpska             Other Areas
Yes                                                                   78.8%                       87.1%                      77.8%
No                                                                    21.2%                       12.9%                      22.2%

Which do you primarily use?
                                                               Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                        and Herzegovina              Republika Srpska             Other Areas
The World Bank Group’s country website                                73.7%                       54.8%                      77.8%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                   26.3%                       45.2%                      22.2%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                                       Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska                             Other Areas
High speed                                                     94.7%               97.0%                                     88.9%
Dial-up                                                        5.3%                3.0%                                      11.1%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                       Federation of Bosnia
                                                                         and Herzegovina         Republika Srpska               Other Areas
                                                                         N    Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD           N      Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than I did a few
                                                                        53      5.89   2.81      33    6.42      2.57       9      5.33     2.69
years ago
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                48      6.63   2.34      29    7.45      1.53       6      7.50     1.05
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.       47      7.62   2.13      31    7.90      1.97       6      7.67     1.37
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources
                                                                        33      5.52   2.58      14    5.57      2.59       5      5.60     2.88
of information about the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                        53      7.30   2.65      34    7.44      2.34       8      7.25     2.05
find it
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                        38      7.16   2.06      25    7.48      2.29       7      8.00     1.41
inquiries




                                                                    114
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Bosnia and Herzegovina?*
(Select only ONE response)
                                                         Federation of Bosnia
Percentage of Respondents                                  and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska       Other Areas
The World Bank (IDA)                                            67.4%               96.2%                44.4%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                     21.7%                3.8%                44.4%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)             2.2%                    -                   -
Other                                                           8.7%                    -                11.1%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                Federation of Bosnia
(Responses Combined)                                       and Herzegovina      Republika Srpska       Other Areas
Observer                                                        12.3%                9.4%                 0.0%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                               38.6%               37.5%                50.0%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                  22.8%              34.4%               37.5%
events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                     33.3%              40.6%               50.0%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data,
                                                                  36.8%              40.6%               12.5%
research, etc.




                                                              115
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Collaborators
Collaborators N=54             Non-Collaborators N=50

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina

In general, how would you say that Bosnia and Herzegovina is headed in...?*

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The right direction                                                        11.1%            12.0%
The wrong direction                                                        37.0%            62.0%
Not sure                                                                   51.9%            26.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Please identify which of the following you consider
the most important development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                          11.8%            12.2%
Transport                                                                   0.0%             6.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                            33.3%            42.9%
Domestic private sector development                                        17.6%            30.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                  19.6%            20.4%
Water and sanitation                                                        0.0%             0.0%
Energy*                                                                    19.6%             6.1%
Job creation/employment*                                                   41.2%            61.2%
Rural development                                                           5.9%             4.1%
Financial markets                                                           2.0%             2.0%
Urban development                                                           0.0%             0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                0.0%             2.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                     5.9%             6.1%
Health                                                                      3.9%             2.0%
Education                                                                  13.7%            22.4%
Poverty reduction                                                           5.9%             2.0%
Social cohesion                                                             2.0%             0.0%
Climate change                                                              0.0%             0.0%
Agricultural development                                                    9.8%            12.2%
Trade and exports                                                           5.9%             0.0%
Economic growth                                                            33.3%            26.5%
Law and justice*                                                           17.6%             2.0%
Local governance and institutions                                           2.0%             2.0%
Natural resource management                                                 3.9%             2.0%
Anti-corruption*                                                           41.2%            22.4%
Disaster management                                                         0.0%             2.0%
Information and communications technology                                   0.0%             2.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       116
The World Bank Group                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                       Collaborators     Non-Collaborators
Water and sanitation                                            1.9%               0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                         9.4%               8.2%
Economic growth                                                52.8%              44.9%
Climate change                                                  0.0%               0.0%
Rural development                                               9.4%              10.2%
Urban development                                               0.0%               0.0%
Local governance and institutions                               1.9%               4.1%
Social protection                                              18.9%              18.4%
Law and justice                                                 5.7%              12.2%
Transport                                                       1.9%               0.0%
Information and communications technology                       0.0%               2.0%
Anti-corruption                                                26.4%              20.4%
Domestic private sector development                            28.3%              20.4%
Foreign direct investment                                      15.1%              18.4%
Energy                                                          5.7%               0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                17.0%              24.5%
Social cohesion                                                 5.7%               2.0%
Education                                                      17.0%              22.4%
Natural resource management                                     1.9%               2.0%
Environmental sustainability                                    0.0%               0.0%
Health                                                          1.9%               0.0%
Agricultural development                                       30.2%              22.4%
Disaster management                                             0.0%               2.0%
Job creation/employment                                        41.5%              59.2%
Financial markets                                               1.9%               2.0%
Trade and exports                                               3.8%               0.0%




                                                           117
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Energy                                                                     33.3%            18.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                     9.3%             6.1%
Social protection                                                           1.9%             4.1%
Climate change                                                              1.9%             0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                            24.1%            22.4%
Disaster management                                                         0.0%             0.0%
Rural development                                                          11.1%             6.1%
Foreign direct investment*                                                 40.7%            61.2%
Urban development                                                           1.9%             2.0%
Water and sanitation                                                        0.0%             2.0%
Trade and exports                                                           7.4%             8.2%
Information and communications technology                                   3.7%             2.0%
Social cohesion                                                             0.0%             2.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                            29.6%            32.7%
Domestic private sector development                                        38.9%            36.7%
Job creation/employment                                                    33.3%            34.7%
Agricultural development                                                   27.8%            14.3%
Transport                                                                   3.7%             8.2%
Education                                                                   9.3%            10.2%
Natural resource management                                                 1.9%             6.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                3.7%             2.0%
Health                                                                      0.0%             0.0%
Law and justice                                                             9.3%             4.1%
Local governance and institutions                                           1.9%             6.1%
Financial markets                                                           0.0%             4.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Better employment opportunities for young people*                          51.9%            31.1%
Better employment opportunities for women                                   1.9%             4.4%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                0.0%             0.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help
                                                                          15.4%             11.1%
ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                       0.0%              0.0%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                      36.5%             40.0%
A growing middle class                                                    9.6%              24.4%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                   3.8%              11.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                                             0.0%            2.2%
areas
Consistent economic growth                                                46.2%             42.2%
More reliable social safety net                                           3.8%              6.7%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                           1.9%              0.0%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                                          21.2%             22.2%
opportunity
Better quality public services                                               3.8%            0.0%
Other                                                                        3.8%            2.2%




                                                                       118
The World Bank Group                                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                     No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                   N    Mean     SD     N       Mean      SD
 How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and
                                                                                               54    6.43 1.97      50      5.48    2.49
 Herzegovina?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                    No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N     Mean     SD     N      Mean      SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in
                                                                                                51    6.37 1.85    39      4.87    2.05
 Bosnia and Herzegovina.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                     No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                   N    Mean      SD     N      Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared to help
                                                                                             45     6.42    2.15   33       5.42    2.59
Bosnia and Herzegovina solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources
(financial and knowledge services) in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Collaborators           Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                         11.1%                     6.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                           27.8%                    34.7%
Transport                                                                  9.3%                     8.2%
Poverty reduction                                                          9.3%                    10.2%
Rural development                                                         20.4%                    16.3%
Domestic private sector development                                       22.2%                    34.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                 16.7%                    28.6%
Water and sanitation                                                       9.3%                     2.0%
Energy                                                                    11.1%                    16.3%
Social cohesion                                                            3.7%                     0.0%
Job creation/employment                                                   37.0%                    36.7%
Financial markets                                                          0.0%                     2.0%
Urban development                                                          0.0%                     2.0%
Environmental sustainability                                               0.0%                     4.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                    7.4%                     6.1%
Health                                                                     3.7%                     2.0%
Education                                                                 11.1%                    14.3%
Climate change                                                             0.0%                     2.0%
Agricultural development                                                  18.5%                    10.2%
Trade and exports                                                          5.6%                     4.1%
Economic growth                                                           38.9%                    24.5%
Law and justice                                                            5.6%                     8.2%
Local governance and institutions                                          5.6%                     0.0%
Natural resource management                                                3.7%                     6.1%
Information and communications technology                                  0.0%                     0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                           18.5%                    12.2%
Disaster management                                                        0.0%                     0.0%




                                                                      119
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Convening/facilitating                                                      3.8%              8.5%
Data                                                                        1.9%              4.3%
Policy advice, knowledge                                                    9.4%              4.3%
Financial resources                                                        32.1%             48.9%
Capacity development                                                       22.6%              8.5%
Technical assistance                                                        1.9%              2.1%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                 18.9%             14.9%
Coordination of development partners                                        1.9%              0.0%
Strategy formulation                                                        3.8%              8.5%
Other                                                                       3.8%              2.1%

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Convening/facilitating                                                      9.4%              2.2%
Data                                                                        0.0%              4.3%
Policy advice, knowledge                                                   11.3%              4.3%
Financial resources                                                         9.4%             15.2%
Capacity development                                                       13.2%             23.9%
Technical assistance                                                       22.6%              8.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                 11.3%             15.2%
Coordination of development partners                                       13.2%              8.7%
Strategy formulation                                                        7.5%             15.2%
Other                                                                       0.0%              0.0%

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to achieve
development results? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean   SD     N    Mean      SD
Convening/facilitating*                                                                39   6.28   1.97   32    4.84    2.26
Data                                                                                   43   6.60   2.08   39    6.21    2.15
Policy advice, knowledge                                                               42   6.26   2.46   37    5.32    2.53
Financial resources                                                                    46   6.98   2.12   40    6.35    2.53
Technical assistance                                                                   45   6.44   1.90   36    5.89    2.27
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                             41   6.39   2.21   32    5.59    2.46
Coordination of development partners                                                   43   6.28   1.99   33    5.45    2.37
Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)*                                          41   6.20   2.29   38    5.08    2.31
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       120
The World Bank Group                                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To what
degree would Bosnia and Herzegovina benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean   SD     N    Mean      SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them more
                                                                                        49   5.57   2.64   46    5.33    3.26
effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development projects on the
                                                                                        51   7.96   1.96   49    7.76    2.21
ground
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or sociopolitical
                                                                                        48   7.31   2.30   46    7.26    2.39
conditions)
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                         50   7.82   1.92   46    7.74    2.47
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                 No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean    SD    N     Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                         44   7.50   2.05   31     6.19   2.79
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                    26   5.15   2.19   24     4.46   2.21
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)*         36   6.58   2.14   25     5.40   2.42
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Bosnia and Herzegovina to help ensure better development
results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity
building? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                 No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean    SD    N     Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                          52   8.19   1.83   41     7.66   2.23
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                    43   6.70   2.50   33     6.67   2.70
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development goals)          44   7.36   2.06   34     7.35   2.65




                                                                       121
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Bosnia and
 Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Not exploring alternative policy options*                                  21.6%             4.1%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                          35.3%             34.7%
BH
Staff too inaccessible                                                       2.0%           2.0%
Not enough public disclosure of its work*                                    0.0%           18.4%
Arrogant in its approach                                                     0.0%           2.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                                          9.8%           18.4%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                        0.0%           0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                     2.0%           6.1%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                                             9.8%            8.2%
efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries                                        9.8%           12.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                                          11.8%              8.2%
political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                        3.9%            6.1%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                          13.7%              4.1%
procedures
Not aligned with other development partners’ work                            5.9%            4.1%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                               2.0%            8.2%
Not client focused                                                           2.0%            6.1%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to
                                                                          15.7%              4.1%
practical problem solving
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-
                                                                             9.8%           14.3%
conflict countries
Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff
                                                                             0.0%            0.0%
members located in the country
Other                                                                     3.9%               4.1%
Don’t know                                                                11.8%              6.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Bosnia and
Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Capacity development                                                       26.9%            14.3%
Policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                                          15.4%             14.3%
Government
Knowledge products/services                                               15.4%             18.4%
Investment lending                                                        65.4%             73.5%
Technical assistance                                                      21.2%             8.2%
Trust Fund management                                                     3.8%              0.0%
Co-financing arrangements                                                 19.2%             30.6%
Sector-wide approaches*                                                   15.4%             2.0%
Emergency Recovery lending                                                5.8%              10.2%
Other                                                                     5.8%              2.0%
Don’t know*                                                               0.0%              8.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       122
The World Bank Group                                      Bosnia and Herzegovina                                Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                              Collaborators         Non-Collaborators
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                              29.6%                  20.0%
Community of development partners                                     33.3%                  34.0%
Media                                                                  5.6%                   6.0%
NGOs                                                                   7.4%                  12.0%
Local Government                                                      31.5%                  44.0%
Private sector                                                        59.3%                  40.0%
Parliament                                                             7.4%                   2.0%
Community Based Organizations (CBOs)                                   0.0%                   4.0%
Beneficiaries                                                         14.8%                  16.0%
Foundations                                                            1.9%                   0.0%
Emerging donors                                                        0.0%                   2.0%
UN agencies                                                            3.7%                   0.0%
Other                                                                  0.0%                   6.0%
Don’t know                                                             0.0%                   2.0%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                  No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean   SD       N    Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Bosnia-
                                                                                       50   6.68   2.18   43     5.35    2.45
Herzegovina*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the development
                                                                                       47   6.00   2.28   41     4.85    2.09
priorities for Bosnia-Herzegovina*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Bosnia-
                                                                                       47   6.17   2.14   39     5.59    2.26
Herzegovina
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bosnia-Herzegovina with
                                                                                       49   8.00   1.68   38     6.76    2.47
respect*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                   123
The World Bank Group                                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in terms of each of the
following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                   No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                    N   Mean    SD       N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness*                                                                               47    6.55   1.98   40     4.83    2.23
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*                            44    6.34   1.88   39     4.77    2.11
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                                     42    5.71   2.42   38     4.39    1.95
Being inclusive*                                                                              42    6.55   1.94   35     5.37    2.28
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                                44    7.34   2.24   38     6.29    2.49
Staff accessibility*                                                                          48    7.96   1.76   40     6.48    2.50
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                              45    7.31   2.21   36     5.94    2.66
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making decisions
                                                                                              44    7.39   2.41   34     5.15    2.55
important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                                             34    6.29   1.80   32     5.03    2.24
Collaboration with the Government*                                                            46    7.70   1.60   36     6.72    1.97
Collaboration with EC and other development partners                                          30    7.73   1.91   33     6.97    2.33
Collaboration with the private sector                                                         32    5.91   1.77   34     5.06    2.27
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                                 39    5.72   1.69   36     4.47    2.21
Being a long-term partner*                                                                    44    7.75   1.92   37     6.43    2.54
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To be a more effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, do you believe that the World Bank Group should
have…?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators            Non-Collaborators
More local presence                                                        45.3%                     62.5%
The current level of local presence is adequate                            35.8%                     18.8%
Less local presence                                                         1.9%                        -
Don't know                                                                 17.0%                     18.8%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                                            9.3%                  16.0%
through/follow-up
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                                           42.6%                  42.0%
realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                        51.9%                  38.0%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                      11.1%                  16.0%
Poor coordination with development partners*                                               11.1%                  30.0%
The World Bank Group works too slowly*                                                     0.0%                   12.0%
The Government works inefficiently                                                         33.3%                  32.0%
Political pressures and obstacles*                                                         53.7%                  28.0%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                            44.4%                  32.0%
Inadequate funding                                                                         14.8%                  14.0%
Other                                                                                      0.0%                   2.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       124
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
              Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                No
                     the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean   SD     N    Mean      SD
Anti-corruption                                                                       47   8.53   1.56   47    7.64    2.73
Information and communications technology                                             46   7.43   2.03   46    6.76    2.54
Transport                                                                             48   8.08   1.62   49    7.31    2.22
Law and justice                                                                       48   7.88   2.10   48    6.94    2.75
Urban development                                                                     44   7.32   2.03   44    7.32    2.30
Environmental sustainability                                                          44   7.82   2.05   43    7.49    2.30
Poverty reduction                                                                     48   8.67   1.88   49    8.78    1.67
Domestic private sector development                                                   49   9.02   1.15   48    8.92    1.61
Foreign direct investment                                                             46   8.80   1.66   48    8.69    2.10
Local governance and institutions                                                     45   7.91   2.03   46    7.39    2.30
Water and sanitation                                                                  46   7.80   1.89   44    7.16    2.40
Trade and exports                                                                     44   7.36   1.88   47    7.17    2.36
Economic growth                                                                       49   9.12   1.05   49    8.49    2.12
Energy*                                                                               45   8.40   1.56   47    6.72    2.78
Disaster management*                                                                  42   7.10   2.33   46    6.00    2.68
Public sector governance/ reform*                                                     47   8.57   1.50   46    7.46    2.50
Job creation/employment                                                               49   9.31   0.90   49    8.65    2.14
Social cohesion*                                                                      46   7.67   1.97   48    6.52    2.76
Financial markets*                                                                    42   8.05   1.46   48    7.06    2.68
Equality of opportunity*                                                              42   7.93   2.22   47    6.55    2.80
Health*                                                                               43   7.84   2.09   44    6.82    2.59
Rural development                                                                     48   8.25   1.91   46    7.48    2.44
Education                                                                             45   8.16   2.03   45    7.89    2.54
Social protection*                                                                    46   7.72   2.24   46    6.61    2.87
Climate change*                                                                       42   7.19   2.54   44    5.93    2.72
Agricultural development                                                              46   8.57   1.39   47    8.23    2.04
Natural resource management*                                                          46   7.59   2.27   46    6.35    2.82
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       125
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                             Yes                   No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                 N    Mean     SD      N    Mean      SD
Information and communications technology*                                                 19     7.37   1.42     16    5.25     2.67
Transport*                                                                                 27     6.70   1.77     25    5.24     2.33
Law and justice*                                                                           23     6.52   2.00     24    5.04     2.29
Urban development*                                                                         25     6.92   1.78     23    4.83     2.19
Environmental sustainability*                                                              29     7.03   1.96     26    5.58     1.98
Poverty reduction*                                                                         34     6.59   2.48     32    5.25     2.23
Domestic private sector development*                                                       33     6.88   2.04     30    5.40     2.21
Foreign direct investment*                                                                 30     7.07   2.13     29    4.90     2.01
Local governance and institutions*                                                         30     6.93   1.87     33    5.21     2.10
Water and sanitation                                                                       34     7.06   1.81     23    5.96     2.42
Trade and exports*                                                                         29     6.62   1.64     23    5.13     2.20
Economic growth*                                                                           34     7.00   2.12     33    5.30     2.30
Energy*                                                                                    30     7.53   1.72     27    5.56     2.33
Disaster management*                                                                       24     6.46   1.74     18    4.28     2.02
Public sector governance/ reform*                                                          37     7.08   1.75     32    5.25     2.37
Job creation/employment*                                                                   29     6.34   2.32     33    5.00     2.39
Social cohesion*                                                                           26     6.46   2.02     27    4.85     2.28
Financial markets                                                                          29     6.83   1.91     29    5.83     2.36
Equality of opportunity                                                                    27     6.52   2.17     27    5.44     2.36
Health                                                                                     30     6.53   2.19     25    5.44     2.29
Rural development*                                                                         34     6.50   2.30     27    5.15     2.09
Education*                                                                                 27     6.56   2.59     29    4.45     2.34
Social protection*                                                                         27     6.56   2.03     24    5.08     2.55
Climate change *                                                                           25     6.04   2.15     22    4.50     2.56
Agricultural development*                                                                  34     7.03   1.85     26    5.19     2.45
Natural resource management*                                                               21     6.86   1.42     20    5.15     2.46
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Bosnia and Herzegovina?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators         Non-Collaborators
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                   59.3%                  57.1%
In the country                                                              7.4%                   6.1%
Don't know                                                                 33.3%                  36.7%


               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                              Yes                   No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N    Mean     SD      N    Mean      SD
 To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development
                                                                                               49   6.73 1.69       40    5.30   2.31
 results in Bosnia and Herzegovina?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       126
The World Bank Group                                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                      No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N     Mean     SD      N       Mean      SD
 To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing country
                                                                                               46   6.72 1.63       36    5.17        2.13
 systems (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) in Bosnia-Herzegovina?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                              Yes                      No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N    Mean     SD      N       Mean      SD
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Bosnia and
                                                                                            45     5.87    2.20    42       4.38     2.31
Herzegovina*
 The World Bank Group meets Bosnia and Herzegovina’s needs for knowledge
                                                                                            42    6.43 2.09        39       4.97     2.71
 services*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                       No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                   N    Mean      SD        N     Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work
                                                                                             37     6.43    1.80    34        4.59    2.05
in real time in Bosnia and Herzegovina?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
Weekly                                                                     20.4%                      -
Monthly                                                                     9.3%                    8.5%
A few times a year                                                         38.9%                   23.4%
Rarely                                                                     24.1%                   46.8%
Never                                                                       7.4%                   21.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                              Yes                      No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N    Mean     SD      N       Mean      SD
Are timely*                                                                                 44     6.32    1.84    33       4.48     2.21
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*                    42     6.29    1.94    30       4.27     2.16
Are relevant to Bosnia-Herzegovina's development priorities*                                43     6.60    2.37    31       5.39     2.23
Lead to practical solutions*                                                                45     6.51    1.95    33       5.12     2.15
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                       45     6.78    1.94    35       5.74     2.37
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                 47     7.21    1.76    35       6.69     2.19
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                                        48     7.52    1.73    35       6.66     2.53
Are adequately disseminated*                                                                44     7.07    1.74    30       5.37     2.44
Are translated enough into local language                                                   42     6.67    2.19    29       6.21     2.69
Are adaptable to Bosnia-Herzegovina’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                            44     6.77    1.64    32       5.59     2.27
circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       127
The World Bank Group                                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                  No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N     Mean     SD     N    Mean      SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                             46    6.76    1.40    37    5.27    2.24
knowledge work and activities make to development results in your country?*
 Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                                48     7.25 1.41   34    6.56    2.18
 knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Bosnia and Herzegovina’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                              Yes                   No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N    Mean      SD     N    Mean      SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                                    43    6.56    1.92    36    5.75    2.27
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)*                                              42    6.79    1.52    34    5.53    2.40
Implementation (Executing, carrying out, monitoring and making appropriate
                                                                                             40    7.03    1.56    36    6.06    2.55
adjustments)*
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)*                                               41    7.34    1.70    34    6.15    2.70
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                               Yes                  No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                                  N     Mean     SD     N    Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                                34    7.09    1.91    23    6.26    2.99
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs
                                                                                             44    7.07    2.05    29    7.48    2.57
it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion                    41    7.15    1.96    28    6.50    2.59
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable                        29    7.34    1.26    24    6.83    2.71
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                              37    6.73    1.68    31    6.71    2.55
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Bosnia-Herzegovina                           37    6.03    1.98    29    5.86    2.67
Working with the World Bank Group increases Bosnia-Herzegovina’s institutional
                                                                                             48    7.21    2.02    35    7.03    2.54
capacity
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes                35    6.71    2.20    20    7.25    2.47
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
                                                                                             37    6.57    2.02    23    7.30    2.18
of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                               40    7.73    1.75    25    7.40    2.22




                                                                       128
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bosnia and Herzegovina?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Bosnia
                                                                              -                -
and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in
                                                                          33.3%              41.7%
Bosnia and Herzegovina
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is
                                                                          29.6%              12.5%
appropriate
Don't know                                                                35.2%              37.5%
Prefer not to answer                                                      1.9%               8.3%


               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                   No
                      the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean     SD    N      Mean      SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in Bosnia-
                                                                                       32   6.53    1.70   21      6.29    2.37
Herzegovina?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                                             9.4%            6.3%
statistics/figures on BH’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                      30.2%              18.8%
Offer more innovative financial products                                  28.3%              33.3%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                                          18.9%              27.1%
compared to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                            15.1%              20.8%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Bosnia-
                                                                             9.4%            6.3%
Herzegovina’s specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                  13.2%              6.3%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                    1.9%               2.1%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                                          34.0%              29.2%
country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                          11.3%              35.4%
financing*
Work faster                                                                  7.5%            4.2%
Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in
                                                                             3.8%            0.0%
Bosnia-Herzegovina’s office
Other                                                                        1.9%            4.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       129
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and taking into
account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of
in Bosnia and Herzegovina?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Financial services                                                         33.3%            53.1%
Knowledge products                                                         29.6%            16.3%
Convening services                                                         18.5%            12.2%
The combination is appropriate for Bosnia
                                                                          11.1%             10.2%
Herzegovina
Don't know                                                                   7.4%            8.2%
None of the above                                                              -               -

Please answer the following questions. Which THREE areas would benefit most from the WBG playing a leading role among
international partners in Bosnia and Herzegovina? Which THREE areas below would benefit most from other donors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE for each)
Benefit from WBG Playing a Leading Role
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Social safety nets                                                         15.1%            26.5%
Public financial management                                                54.7%            55.1%
Access to justice systems                                                  22.6%            16.3%
Access to basic services                                                   11.3%            10.2%
Capacity of state institutions*                                            50.9%            28.6%
Jobs                                                                       56.6%            67.3%
Improving livelihoods                                                      35.8%            51.0%
Social cohesion                                                            17.0%            24.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


Benefit from Other Donors
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Social safety nets                                                         37.0%            31.3%
Public financial management                                                26.1%            35.4%
Access to justice systems                                                  47.8%            50.0%
Access to basic services                                                   26.1%            22.9%
Capacity of state institutions                                             21.7%            33.3%
Jobs                                                                       28.3%            27.1%
Improving livelihoods                                                      34.8%            25.0%
Social cohesion                                                            37.0%            41.7%




                                                                       130
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Local newspapers                                                           30.8%            41.7%
International newspapers                                                    3.8%            12.5%
Local radio                                                                 0.0%             0.0%
International radio                                                         0.0%             0.0%
Local television                                                           38.5%            27.1%
International television                                                    3.8%             0.0%
Periodicals                                                                26.9%            22.9%
Internet                                                                   63.5%            62.5%
Social media                                                                3.8%             4.2%
Blogs                                                                       0.0%             2.1%
Mobile phones                                                               0.0%             2.1%
Instant messaging                                                           0.0%             2.1%
Other                                                                      13.5%            12.5%

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Blogs                                                                       1.9%             2.0%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                       38.5%            44.0%
e-Newsletters*                                                             26.9%            46.0%
Instant messaging                                                           0.0%             2.0%
World Bank Group’s
                                                                          57.7%             30.0%
seminars/workshops/conferences*
World Bank Group’s publications and other written
                                                                          34.6%             40.0%
materials
Mobile phones                                                             0.0%              2.0%
Social media                                                              3.8%              4.0%
World Bank Group’s website                                                25.0%             20.0%
Other                                                                     0.0%              0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                        37.5%            29.5%
No                                                                         62.5%            70.5%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                        48.8%            30.0%
No                                                                         51.2%            70.0%

Were you able to obtain this information?*

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                        91.7%            50.0%
No                                                                          8.3%            50.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       131
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                       100.0%            93.8%
No                                                                           -               6.3%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                        89.1%            73.9%
No                                                                         10.9%            26.1%

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group’s country website                                     67.9%            65.9%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                        32.1%            34.1%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
High speed                                                                 92.5%            97.8%
Dial-up                                                                     7.5%             2.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                           Yes                       No
                       the World Bank Group in your country?                                N   Mean       SD       N     Mean       SD
I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than I did a few years ago*               52    6.83   2.44        43     5.16     2.74
I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate.                                   47    7.09   1.80        36     6.94     2.24
I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful.                          48    8.02   1.80        36     7.47     2.10
The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of information
                                                                                           28    5.86   2.37        24     5.33     2.75
about the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it*                   52    7.92   2.28        43     6.72     2.51
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and inquiries*               47    7.98   1.66        22     6.14     2.36
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       132
The World Bank Group                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Bosnia and Herzegovina?*
(Select only ONE response)


Percentage of Respondents                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank (IDA)                                                       79.6%            61.5%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                18.5%            19.2%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                         1.9%               -
Other                                                                         -             19.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Observer*                                                                   1.9%            18.2%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                         28.8%            52.3%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                          40.4%             13.6%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                            57.7%             11.4%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data,
                                                                          26.9%             50.0%
research, etc.*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       133
The World Bank Group                                Bosnia and Herzegovina                Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix E: Responses to Questions across Country Surveys
Comparing responses across country surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in
respondent samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter
factor, only those questions with similar response scales/options were analyzed and to facilitate
comparisons, all 5-point scales used in FY07 were converted to 10-point scales as utilized in FY14. Note
that the small number of stakeholders in FY14 and FY07 made it impractical to weight the samples to
have equivalent stakeholder groups.

FY07 N=105            FY14 N=109

Background Information

Which of the following best describes your current position? (Select only ONE response)
                                                        FY07               FY14
Percentage of Respondents                             (N=103)            (N=108)
Employees of a Ministry                                28.2%              25.9%
Other                                                   6.8%              16.7%
Local Government                                        1.9%              11.1%
Private Sector                                          1.9%              10.2%
NGO                                                    21.4%              10.2%
Media                                                   6.8%               8.3%
Academia                                                2.9%               6.5%
Project Management Unit (PMU)                             -                6.5%
Office of the President/Minster                        17.5%               4.6%
Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                       10.7%                 -
Independent Government Institution                      1.9%                 -

Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                       FY07                    FY14
Percentage of Respondents                            (N=103)                 (N=105)
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina                  63.1%                   58.1%
Republika Srpska                                      29.1%                   33.3%
Brcko District                                                                 1.9%
Other                                                  7.8%                    6.7%




                                                              134
The World Bank Group                                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                              FY07                    FY14
                                                                        N     Mean       SD      N    Mean   SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                       101    6.40      2.17    109   5.89   2.29
Bosnia and Herzegovina?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                              FY07                    FY14
                                                                        N     Mean        SD     N    Mean    SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                           94    7.47 1.66      94    5.67   2.06
 effectiveness in Bosnia and Herzegovina.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different FY14 and FY07 country surveys

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                                              FY07                    FY14
                                                                        N     Mean       SD      N    Mean   SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                        99    7.57      2.02     96   6.07   2.35
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                        98    6.66      2.34     91   5.42   2.25
development priorities for Bosnia and Herzegovina*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that
                                                                        97    6.64      2.05     89   5.85   2.20
are realistic for Bosnia and Herzegovina*
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Bosnia
                                                                        96    7.52      2.27     89   7.37   2.20
and Herzegovina with respect
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different FY14 and FY07 country surveys

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in terms of each of the
following?
                                                                                               FY07                 FY14
                                                                                     N         Mean   SD       N    Mean    SD
Staff accessibility                                                                  93        7.15   2.46    90    7.29   2.22
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                     91        7.58   2.58    83    6.65   2.53
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different FY14 and FY07 country surveys




                                                                        135
The World Bank Group                                     Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014




World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                       FY07                    FY14
                                                                 N     Mean       SD     N     Mean    SD
Anti-corruption                                                 97     7.87       2.52   97    8.14    2.25
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                         92     7.16       2.31   99    7.47    2.47
Urban development*                                              92     6.33       2.28   91    7.40    2.17
Poverty reduction*                                              99     7.95       2.01   100   8.76    1.76
Domestic private sector development*                            94     8.25       1.90   100   9.00    1.38
Economic growth*                                                100    8.31       1.70   101   8.84    1.68
Financial markets*                                              97     8.31       1.81   93    7.53    2.23
Health                                                          95     7.58       2.08   90    7.40    2.40
Education                                                       94     7.56       2.30   93    8.06    2.27
Social protection                                               94     7.65       2.40   95    7.17    2.62
Agricultural development*                                       93     7.63       2.03   95    8.43    1.74
Natural resource management*                                    95     7.75       2.23   95    7.04    2.62
*Significantly different FY14 and FY07 country surveys

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                       FY07                    FY14
                                                                  N    Mean        SD     N    Mean     SD
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                          80     5.39      2.37    48    5.75   2.24
Urban development                                                79     5.16      2.10    49    5.86   2.25
Poverty reduction                                                94     5.98      1.98    68    5.93   2.42
Domestic private sector development                              87     6.46      2.08    64    6.13   2.25
Economic growth                                                  93     6.06      1.93    69    6.14   2.32
Financial markets*                                               89     7.04      2.00    59    6.31   2.18
Health                                                           88     5.70      2.40    56    6.00   2.28
Education                                                        87     5.78      2.45    57    5.46   2.64
Social protection                                                86     5.79      2.23    52    5.85   2.36
Agricultural development                                         81     5.86      2.12    61    6.21   2.29
Natural resource management                                      81     6.14      1.99    42    6.00   2.13
*Significantly different FY14 and FY07 country surveys




                                                                 136
The World Bank Group                                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                             FY07                  FY14
                                                                       N    Mean       SD     N    Mean    SD
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                      72     7.25      2.15   74   5.38   2.26
preparation*
Lead to practical solutions*                                          73     7.55      2.03   80   5.94   2.11
Are source of relevant information on global good practices           88     7.44      2.05   84   6.98   1.94
Are adequately disseminated                                           73     6.99      2.38   76   6.39   2.19
 Are adaptable to Bosnia-Herzegovina’s specific development
                                                                         91     6.56 2.05     78    6.29 1.98
 challenges and country circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different FY14 and FY07 country surveys




Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                                            FY07                   FY14
                                                                       N    Mean       SD     N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                        69     8.14      2.22   58   6.71   2.42
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the
                                                                      77     7.71      2.23   74   7.19   2.28
projects and programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable       92     6.97      2.36   69   6.71   2.09
 Working with the World Bank Group increases Bosnia-
                                                                       74    7.49 2.00       85    7.13   2.22
 Herzegovina’s institutional capacity
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different FY14 and FY07 country surveys




Communication and Information Sharing

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                    FY07                     FY14
Yes                                                                          74.5%                    81.3%
No                                                                           25.5%                    18.8%

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                                    FY07                     FY14
The World Bank Group’s country website                                       77.3%                    68.0%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                          22.7%                    32.0%




                                                                      137
The World Bank Group                                                                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix F: Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’ Specializations/Sectors
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                                                                                                                                      Public sector
                                      Agriculture/                                                                                 Natural resource Private sector    governance /
                                          rural                   Financial    Gender equity /                   Law and justice / management / development /        public financial
                                    development /                 markets /      equality of     Job creation/      regulatory      environmental   foreign direct    mgmt. / anti-
                                     food security   Education    banking       opportunity      employment         framework        sustainability  investment        corruption     Social protection    Generalist         Other
                                      N     Mean     N     Mean   N     Mean     N      Mean      N      Mean       N      Mean      N     Mean       N     Mean       N      Mean       N      Mean       N     Mean    N        Mean
Anti-corruption                       3      8.00    7     7.00   8     7.50     3      10.00     5      9.60          6   8.50      4      7.50      8      7.88      15      8.67      5      9.00       3      8.00   26       8.31
Information and communications
                                      3      7.00    7     6.86   8     7.38     3      9.33      4      8.00          6   8.33      4      8.25      8      6.88      15      7.40      5      8.00       3      6.33   25       6.48
technology
Transport                             3      7.00    7     7.86   8     8.00     3      6.33      5      8.80          6   7.83      4      7.75      8      7.13      15      7.93      5      8.80       3      7.00   29       7.62
Law and justice                       3      7.33    7     8.43   8     8.13     3      6.67      4      8.00          6   7.33      4      7.00      8      6.50      16      7.50      5      7.80       3      7.00   28       7.82
Urban development                     2      7.50    7     8.43   8     6.38     3      10.00     4      5.50          6   7.33      4      8.25      8      7.63      13      7.46      4      8.00       3      7.67   26       7.04
Environmental sustainability          2      6.00    7     6.57   8     7.50     3      9.33      4      7.25          6   7.67      4      8.75      8      8.38      12      6.92      4      8.75       3      8.00   26       7.88
Poverty reduction                     2      9.50    8     7.13   8     9.25     3      9.67      5      8.20          6   8.83      4      9.50      8      8.63      15      8.60      6      9.33       3      9.33   28       8.79
Domestic private sector dev.          2      8.50    8     8.13   8     9.63     3      8.33      5      9.00          6   8.83      4      9.25      8      8.75      15      8.80      5      9.60       3      9.33   29       9.21
Foreign direct investment             2      9.50    8     6.25   8     9.63     3      8.67      5      9.00          6   9.33      4      9.25      8      9.00      13      8.54      5      9.00       3      8.00   28       9.04
Local governance and institutions     2      7.00    7     5.86   8     8.25     3      8.00      4      9.25          6   8.17      4      7.50      8      7.63      14      7.93      4      8.00       3      7.33   27       7.63
Water and sanitation                  3      7.33    7     6.43   8     8.38     3      6.67      5      7.00          6   8.33      4      8.50      8      7.88      14      7.50      4      7.75       3      9.33   25       7.20
Trade and exports                     2      8.50    8     7.13   8     8.13     3      8.00      5      6.60          5   8.80      4      7.25      8      8.00      13      7.15      4      6.50       3      7.33   27       7.00
Economic growth                       3      9.33    8     8.25   8     8.88     3      9.33      5      10.00         6   9.33      4      8.75      8      9.13      16      8.19      6      9.50       3      7.33   27       8.93
Energy                                2      6.50    7     7.29   8     8.50     3      8.00      5      6.80          6   8.50      4      7.25      8      7.88      12      7.50      5      9.40       3      9.33   28       7.11
Disaster management                   2      6.00    7     6.29   8     7.75     3      9.00      5      5.20          5   7.80      4      7.75      8      7.13      12      6.00      5      7.40       2      5.00   26       6.04
Public sector governance/reform       3      6.67    8     7.75   8     8.50     3      7.67      5      8.80          6   8.00      4      8.25      7      7.86      14      8.64      4      8.75       3      6.33   27       8.15
Job creation/employment               3      7.00    9     8.89   8     9.63     3      8.00      5      10.00         6   9.17      4      9.00      8      9.25      15      8.53      6      9.50       3      8.00   27       9.15
Social cohesion                       2      7.00    7     6.86   8     7.88     3      7.67      5      5.20          6   8.33      4      7.50      7      8.43      15      7.40      6      9.33       3      7.00   27       6.59
Financial markets                     2      6.50    7     6.00   8     7.88     3      8.67      4      9.00          6   9.33      4      8.50      8      8.63      13      7.46      6      8.50       3      6.67   25       7.00
Equality of opportunity               2      8.00    8     8.00   8     7.75     3      8.33      4      4.50          6   7.83      4      8.25      7      8.14      13      7.23      5      8.80       3      7.67   26       6.54
Health                                2      5.50    7     6.29   8     8.13     2      7.00      5      4.60          6   8.00      3      8.00      7      8.57      13      7.46      4      9.00       3      8.00   26       7.62
Rural development                     4      8.50    8     7.38   8     7.88     3      9.33      5      5.80          6   8.50      4      7.75      7      9.00      14      7.57      5      9.20       3      8.00   28       7.96
Education                             3      6.00    7     8.71   8     7.75     3      7.67      5      5.60          6   8.83      3      7.33      7      9.00      12      8.17      4      9.25       3      7.67   28       8.32
Social protection*                    2      6.00    7     4.43   8     8.00     3      7.33      5      5.20          6   7.83      4      6.75      7      8.14      13      7.00      5      10.00      3      7.67   28       7.36
Climate change                        3      6.00    7     6.71   7     7.29     2      9.50      5      4.00          6   7.83      4      7.25      7      7.86      12      6.67      4      7.00       3      8.00   25       6.28
Agricultural development              3      8.67    8     8.25   8     8.88     3      9.33      4      9.25          6   8.17      4      8.00      7      8.86      13      8.31      5      9.00       3      8.00   27       8.48
Natural resource management           2      6.50    7     6.86   8     8.13     3      7.67      5      5.00          6   8.50      4      6.00      8      8.25      13      7.15      5      8.20       3      6.67   27       6.81
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                 138
The World Bank Group                                                                               Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                                                                      Public sector
                                      Agriculture/                                                                                 Natural resource Private sector    governance /
                                          rural                   Financial    Gender equity /                   Law and justice / management / development /        public financial
                                    development /                 markets /      equality of     Job creation/      regulatory      environmental   foreign direct    mgmt. / anti-
                                     food security   Education    banking       opportunity      employment         framework        sustainability  investment        corruption     Social protection    Generalist         Other
                                      N     Mean     N     Mean   N     Mean     N      Mean      N      Mean       N      Mean      N     Mean       N     Mean       N      Mean       N      Mean       N     Mean    N        Mean
Information and communications
                                      2      8.00    4     5.75   4     6.25                      1      8.00          3   7.00      2      5.50      4      6.25      4       6.25                                      12       6.25
technology
Transport                             2      5.50    5     5.00   5     6.80                      3      6.33          4   6.25      2      5.50      6      6.83      8       6.38      1      7.00       1      8.00   13       5.46
Law and justice                       1      3.00    6     6.83   4     5.75                      2      7.00          5   6.40      1      4.00      6      6.83      7       5.86      1      3.00                     12       5.67
Urban development                     1      8.00    6     6.50   5     6.60                      1      7.00          4   5.75      2      5.50      7      7.14      7       5.43      1      5.00                     14       5.14
Environmental sustainability          2      6.50    7     6.14   5     7.60                      2      7.00          4   5.75      4      7.50      7      7.43      8       5.88      2      6.00       1      7.00   12       5.42
Poverty reduction                     1      3.00    7     6.43   6     7.17     1      6.00      3      5.33          3   7.67      2      5.00      8      7.88      11      6.09      4      6.25       1      7.00   18       4.89
Domestic private sector
                                      1      3.00    7     7.14   6     6.83                      2      6.50          3   7.67      2      4.50      8      7.25      9       6.00      3      6.67       2      9.00   19       5.00
development
Foreign direct investment             1      8.00    7     5.29   6     6.83                      2      6.50          4   6.25      2      5.50      8      7.63      8       5.88      2      6.00                     19       5.05
Local governance and institutions     1      7.00    7     6.71   6     7.17     1      6.00      3      5.67          4   6.25      2      6.50      7      7.86      10      5.90      1      4.00                     19       5.21
Water and sanitation                  1      7.00    5     6.40   4     7.75                      3      6.67          4   7.00      3      7.67      7      7.29      9       6.67      2      7.00       1      9.00   17       5.82
Trade and exports                     1      7.00    6     5.00   4     6.75                      2      7.50          3   7.33      2      6.00      7      7.00      9       5.56      1      4.00       1      4.00   16       5.75
Economic growth                       1      6.00    7     6.86   6     7.00                      2      7.00          4   6.75      3      5.33      8      8.00      10      6.20      2      6.50       1      4.00   23       5.30
Energy                                1      2.00    7     6.43   5     7.20                      2      6.50          4   7.00      3      7.00      7      7.43      8       6.38      3      6.67                     17       6.47
Disaster management                   3      6.00    6     4.83   4     5.50                      1      8.00          3   5.67      2      6.00      5      7.20      6       4.67                                      12       5.25
Public sector governance/ reform      2      5.00    7     6.86   5     6.20     1      7.00      3      5.33          5   7.00      2      6.00      8      8.00      11      5.82      1      8.00       1      9.00   21       5.81
Job creation/employment               2      4.50    7     5.57   6     6.33     1      5.00      2      5.50          4   7.50      2      5.00      6      7.33      10      5.70      3      7.00       1     10.00   17       4.35
Social cohesion                       1      2.00    6     5.17   4     6.00     1      6.00      2      4.50          3   6.67      2      6.00      6      7.67      11      5.82      5      5.80                     11       5.09
Financial markets                     1      6.00    7     5.00   6     6.33     1      6.00      2      8.50          4   8.25      2      6.00      6      7.83      10      5.80      1      7.00       2      6.50   16       6.00
Equality of opportunity                              7     6.14   4     5.50     1      8.00      2      5.00          3   6.67      2      5.50      6      8.00      10      5.60      2      6.50       1      7.00   15       5.60
Health                                1      6.00    7     5.71   5     7.00                      2      4.50          4   7.25      1      5.00      6      8.00      9       5.78      1      8.00                     18       5.44
Rural development                     3      9.00    7     6.00   5     6.60                      2      4.50          4   6.50      2      5.00      7      7.43      9       5.56      2      4.50       1      8.00   18       5.06
Education                             1      8.00    7     5.00   4     6.25                      2      5.00          3   7.33      2      6.50      6      8.33      9       5.11      2      4.00       1      6.00   17       4.71
Social protection                                    7     5.00   4     5.50                      2      5.00          3   6.67      2      6.00      4      7.50      10      6.00      5      5.80       1      8.00   14       5.57
Climate change                        2      5.00    6     3.50   4     6.25                      2      5.50          3   5.67      3      7.33      6      7.33      7       5.86                                      14       4.43
Agricultural development              3      6.33    6     5.17   5     7.00                      3      6.00          4   6.75      2      5.50      8      7.63      8       6.25      2      5.00       1      8.00   18       6.00
Natural resource management                          5     5.20   4     5.75                      1      7.00          3   5.67      2      6.00      6      6.83      7       5.71                                      14       6.14




                                                                                                                 139
The World Bank Group                       Bosnia and Herzegovina                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




In instances where more than 10% of respondents come from a specific sector, additional analyses are
conducted to further examine their perceptions as opposed to those from other sectors. In the case of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, there were 16% of respondents from the Public sector governance/public
financial management/anti-corruption sector.


Public Sector vs. Others
Public Sector Governance/Public Financial Management/Anti-Corruption Sector N=17
All Others N=88

A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Please identify which of the following you
consider the most important development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Public Sector                All Others
Social protection                                                       23.5%                       11.9%
Transport                                                               0.0%                         3.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                         47.1%                       33.3%
Domestic private sector development                                     23.5%                       23.8%
Foreign direct investment                                               17.6%                       19.0%
Water and sanitation                                                    0.0%                         0.0%
Energy                                                                  17.6%                       13.1%
Job creation/employment                                                 70.6%                       47.6%
Rural development                                                       5.9%                         4.8%
Financial markets                                                       0.0%                         2.4%
Urban development                                                       0.0%                         0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%                         1.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                 5.9%                         6.0%
Health                                                                  0.0%                         4.8%
Education                                                               23.5%                       15.5%
Poverty reduction                                                       0.0%                         6.0%
Social cohesion                                                         0.0%                         1.2%
Climate change                                                          0.0%                         0.0%
Agricultural development                                                11.8%                        9.5%
Trade and exports                                                       0.0%                         3.6%
Economic growth                                                         11.8%                       33.3%
Law and justice                                                         11.8%                       10.7%
Local governance and institutions                                       0.0%                         2.4%
Natural resource management                                             0.0%                         3.6%
Anti-corruption                                                         17.6%                       35.7%
Disaster management*                                                    11.8%                        0.0%
Information and communications technology                               0.0%                         0.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                               140
The World Bank Group                       Bosnia and Herzegovina                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Public Sector                All Others
Water and sanitation                                                    0.0%                         1.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                 5.9%                         9.3%
Economic growth                                                         52.9%                       50.0%
Climate change                                                          0.0%                         0.0%
Rural development                                                       0.0%                        11.6%
Urban development                                                       0.0%                         0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                       5.9%                         1.2%
Social protection*                                                      41.2%                       15.1%
Law and justice                                                         0.0%                        11.6%
Transport                                                               0.0%                         1.2%
Information and communications technology                               0.0%                         1.2%
Anti-corruption                                                         11.8%                       26.7%
Domestic private sector development                                     23.5%                       23.3%
Foreign direct investment                                               17.6%                       15.1%
Energy                                                                  5.9%                         2.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                         23.5%                       18.6%
Social cohesion                                                         0.0%                         4.7%
Education                                                               11.8%                       22.1%
Natural resource management                                             0.0%                         2.3%
Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%                         0.0%
Health                                                                  0.0%                         1.2%
Agricultural development                                                41.2%                       23.3%
Disaster management                                                     0.0%                         1.2%
Job creation/employment                                                 58.8%                       48.8%
Financial markets                                                       0.0%                         2.3%
Trade and exports                                                       0.0%                         2.3%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                               141
The World Bank Group                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Bosnia and Herzegovina (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Public Sector                All Others
Energy                                                                23.5%                       28.7%
Equality of opportunity                                               17.6%                        6.9%
Social protection                                                     5.9%                         2.3%
Climate change                                                        0.0%                         1.1%
Anti-corruption                                                       11.8%                       24.1%
Disaster management                                                   0.0%                         0.0%
Rural development                                                     11.8%                        8.0%
Foreign direct investment                                             58.8%                       46.0%
Urban development                                                     5.9%                         1.1%
Water and sanitation                                                  0.0%                         1.1%
Trade and exports                                                     5.9%                         8.0%
Information and communications technology                             5.9%                         2.3%
Social cohesion                                                       0.0%                         1.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                       29.4%                       29.9%
Domestic private sector development                                   47.1%                       36.8%
Job creation/employment                                               29.4%                       36.8%
Agricultural development                                              23.5%                       23.0%
Transport                                                             5.9%                         4.6%
Education                                                             0.0%                        11.5%
Natural resource management                                           5.9%                         3.4%
Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%                         3.4%
Health                                                                0.0%                         0.0%
Law and justice                                                       5.9%                         8.0%
Local governance and institutions                                     5.9%                         2.3%
Financial markets                                                     0.0%                         2.3%




                                                           142
The World Bank Group                       Bosnia and Herzegovina                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and
knowledge services) in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Public Sector                All Others
Social protection*                                                      29.4%                        5.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                         41.2%                       25.3%
Transport                                                               11.8%                        8.0%
Poverty reduction                                                       11.8%                       10.3%
Rural development                                                       17.6%                       17.2%
Domestic private sector development                                     23.5%                       29.9%
Foreign direct investment                                               29.4%                       19.5%
Water and sanitation                                                    5.9%                         5.7%
Energy                                                                  11.8%                       13.8%
Social cohesion                                                         5.9%                         1.1%
Job creation/employment                                                 35.3%                       37.9%
Financial markets                                                       0.0%                         1.1%
Urban development*                                                      5.9%                         0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%                         2.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                 5.9%                         6.9%
Health                                                                  5.9%                         2.3%
Education                                                               0.0%                        16.1%
Climate change                                                          0.0%                         1.1%
Agricultural development                                                17.6%                       13.8%
Trade and exports                                                       0.0%                         5.7%
Economic growth*                                                        11.8%                       37.9%
Law and justice                                                         5.9%                         8.0%
Local governance and institutions                                       0.0%                         3.4%
Natural resource management                                             0.0%                         5.7%
Information and communications technology                               0.0%                         0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                         17.6%                       14.9%
Disaster management*                                                    5.9%                         0.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                               143
The World Bank Group                               Bosnia and Herzegovina          Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                             Public Sector Gov./
                                                                               Public Financial
                                                                                Mgmt./Anti-
                                                                              Corruption Sector         All Others
                                                                               N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                               15    8.67   1.72    78     8.21   2.18
Information and communications technology                                     15    7.40   2.17    76     7.20   2.42
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                              15    7.93   2.09    81     7.70   1.99
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                       16    7.50   2.56    79     7.61   2.35
Urban development                                                             13    7.46   2.60    75     7.37   2.12
Environmental sustainability                                                  12    6.92   3.00    75     7.83   2.02
Poverty reduction                                                             15    8.60   2.06    81     8.77   1.74
Domestic private sector development                                           15    8.80   1.21    81     9.04   1.42
Foreign direct investment                                                     13    8.54   2.03    80     8.80   1.89
Local governance and institutions                                             14    7.93   1.94    76     7.66   2.15
Water and sanitation                                                          14    7.50   2.21    76     7.57   2.16
Trade and exports                                                             13    7.15   2.19    77     7.40   2.05
Economic growth                                                               16    8.19   2.34    81     8.98   1.53
Energy                                                                        12    7.50   2.68    79     7.68   2.27
Disaster management                                                           12    6.00   2.70    75     6.69   2.56
Public sector governance/ reform                                              14    8.64   1.50    78     8.04   2.05
Job creation/employment                                                       15    8.53   2.45    82     9.09   1.49
Social cohesion                                                               15    7.40   2.87    78     7.28   2.26
Financial markets                                                             13    7.46   1.85    76     7.70   2.10
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                        13    7.23   2.80    76     7.36   2.56
Health                                                                        13    7.46   2.96    73     7.49   2.26
Rural development                                                             14    7.57   2.56    81     8.04   2.12
Education                                                                     12    8.17   2.41    77     8.09   2.21
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                13    7.00   2.89    78     7.24   2.55
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                 12    6.67   2.35    73     6.78   2.65
Agricultural development                                                      13    8.31   1.70    78     8.58   1.59
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                          13    7.15   2.82    78     7.18   2.50




                                                                       144
The World Bank Group                            Bosnia and Herzegovina             Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                             Public Sector Gov./
                                                                               Public Financial
                                                                                Mgmt./Anti-
                                                                              Corruption Sector         All Others
                                                                               N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Information and communications technology                                      4    6.25   1.26    32     6.38   2.41
Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)                               8    6.38   1.60    42     6.00   2.21
Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                                        7    5.86   1.07    38     6.03   2.19
Urban development                                                              7    5.43   1.81    41     6.05   2.21
Environmental sustainability                                                   8    5.88   2.48    46     6.46   2.01
Poverty reduction                                                             11    6.09   1.97    54     6.09   2.41
Domestic private sector development                                            9    6.00   1.50    53     6.23   2.33
Foreign direct investment                                                      8    5.88   1.64    51     5.96   2.47
Local governance and institutions                                             10    5.90   1.79    51     6.20   2.15
Water and sanitation                                                           9    6.67   2.00    47     6.68   2.10
Trade and exports                                                              9    5.56   1.42    43     6.09   2.07
Economic growth                                                               10    6.20   1.55    57     6.25   2.38
Energy                                                                         8    6.38   1.60    49     6.67   2.26
Disaster management                                                            6    4.67   2.07    36     5.69   2.10
Public sector governance/ reform                                              11    5.82   1.66    56     6.46   2.22
Job creation/employment                                                       10    5.70   1.57    51     5.71   2.52
Social cohesion                                                               11    5.82   1.89    41     5.73   2.29
Financial markets                                                             10    5.80   1.55    48     6.46   2.28
Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                                        10    5.60   1.78    43     6.19   2.32
Health                                                                         9    5.78   1.48    45     6.18   2.37
Rural development                                                              9    5.56   2.07    51     6.02   2.28
Education                                                                      9    5.11   2.21    45     5.71   2.71
Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social assistance)                10    6.00   1.83    42     5.81   2.49
Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                                  7    5.86   1.77    40     5.30   2.47
Agricultural development                                                       8    6.25   1.67    52     6.31   2.29
Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)                           7    5.71   1.80    35     6.06   2.21




                                                                    145
The World Bank Group                                                                                         Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG
                                                               Currently, do you
                                                                                                Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in BH? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                          professionally collaborate/
                                                             work with the WBG?                 Observer            Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate         Use WBG website

Indicator Question                                          No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean     Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                              4.87          6.37         5.72              6.00       5.72        5.78       5.68           5.88       5.56         6.00     5.95           5.37
Bank Group’s effectiveness in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
To what extent do you believe the WBG’s staff is
well prepared to help Bosnia-Herzegovina solve its            5.42          6.42         6.01              6.14       5.88        6.30       5.76           6.58       5.90         6.18     6.16           5.75
most complicated development challenges?
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                              5.35          6.68         6.06              5.89       5.92        6.23       5.90           6.42       5.89         6.31     6.33           5.58
relevant role in development in Bosnia-Herzegovina
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                              4.85          6.00         5.49              5.75       5.60        5.40       5.41           5.73       5.42         5.69     5.62           5.31
development priorities for Bosnia-Herzegovina
Responsiveness                                                4.83          6.55         5.78              5.43       6.02        5.36       5.55           6.20       5.44         6.26     5.95           5.35
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
                                                              4.77          6.34         5.66              5.50       5.87        5.31       5.55           5.87       5.45         5.97     5.76           5.41
services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                              4.39          5.71         5.16              5.00       5.40        4.81       4.83           5.95       5.27         4.93     5.18           5.08
circumstances)
Being inclusive                                               5.37          6.55         6.19              5.00       6.10        6.13       5.80           6.78       6.02         6.24     6.50           5.33
Openness (sharing data and other information)                 6.29          7.34         7.03              5.67       6.80        7.09       6.79           7.21       6.86         7.04     6.82           7.11
Staff accessibility                                           6.48          7.96         7.32              7.43       7.10        7.67       7.17           7.71       7.20         7.53     7.45           7.07
Straightforwardness and honesty                               5.94          7.31         6.83              6.83       6.65        7.10       6.65           7.22       6.73         6.97     6.82           6.84
Collaboration with civil society                              5.03          6.29         5.87              4.43       5.75        5.63       5.40           6.39       5.76         5.61     5.55           6.00
Collaboration with the Government                             6.72          7.70         7.34              6.38       7.28        7.18       7.06           7.63       7.20         7.30     7.14           7.46
Collaboration with EC and other development
                                                              6.97          7.73         7.37              6.67       7.41        7.13       7.20           7.56       7.23         7.41     6.94           7.86
partners
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
                                                              4.47          5.72         5.25              4.57       5.43        4.82       5.04           5.52       4.74         5.89     5.31           4.91
the ground
To what extent does the WBG’s work help to achieve
                                                              5.30          6.73         6.09              6.43       6.43        5.69       6.08           6.20       5.69         6.79     6.25           5.90
development results in Bosnia-Herzegovina?
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet
                                                              4.38          5.87         5.33              4.38       5.26        5.20       5.12           5.52       4.98         5.65     5.42           4.90
the needs of Bosnia-Herzegovina
The World Bank Group meets Bosnia-Herzegovina’s
                                                              4.97          6.43         5.93              5.29       5.95        5.75       5.60           6.48       5.69         6.13     6.06           5.52
needs for knowledge services
Are adaptable to Bosnia-Herzegovina’s specific
                                                              5.59          6.77         6.33              7.25       6.22        6.60       6.12           6.95       6.51         6.18     6.67           5.97
development challenges and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank Group’s knowledge work
                                                              5.27          6.76         6.17              6.50       6.42        5.91       5.98           6.77       6.02         6.48     6.40           5.90
and activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of
the World Bank Group's knowledge work and                     6.56          7.25         7.01              7.43       7.02        7.10       6.78           7.76       7.02         7.10     7.28           6.69
activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                              7.30          6.57         6.89              7.25       7.00        6.75       6.82           7.11       7.30         6.48     6.73           7.25
Bank Group makes appropriate use of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.
                                                                                                                      146
The World Bank Group                                                                                     Bosnia and Herzegovina                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group
                                                                                                                                       Private Sector/
                                                         Office of the     Employee of a                                              Financial Sector/                                            Academia/
                                                      President/Minister     Ministry             PMU           Local Government        Private Bank           NGO               Media          Research Institute        Other
                                                       N    Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N   Mean   SD      N     Mean    SD     N    Mean     SD    N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                       5     6.20   1.79   21   5.57   1.72   7   7.14   0.90    10     4.70   2.26   10    5.20   1.99   8    6.13   2.17   9   6.67    1.80    7     6.57   2.15   16   4.88    2.39
WBG’s effectiveness in BH.
To what extent do you believe the WBG’s staff is
well prepared to help BH solve its most                5     5.40   2.19   18   5.83   2.31   7   7.14   1.68    11     5.91   2.43    7    5.86   2.91   7    7.71   1.80   4   6.75    1.50    7     7.00   2.24   15   4.53    2.26
complicated development challenges?
Overall the WBG currently plays a relevant role
                                                       5     4.80   1.79   22   6.05   1.81   7   8.00   1.83    9      5.67   2.40    9    5.33   2.60   10   6.00   2.31   9   7.11    2.57    7     6.86   2.97   18   5.50    2.55
in development in Bosnia-Herzegovina
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I consider
                                                       5     4.60   1.95   21   5.29   2.15   6   6.67   1.51    8      5.13   2.75   10    5.50   2.72   10   6.10   1.73   8   5.88    2.53    6     7.00   2.00   17   4.29    2.09
the development priorities for BH
Responsiveness                                         5     5.20   2.17   19   5.68   2.26   5   8.20   1.10    9      6.44   2.92    9    5.00   2.83   10   5.20   1.93   9   6.00    1.80    7     5.57   1.40   16   5.31    2.33
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products
                                                       5     5.40   2.19   19   5.79   2.35   5   7.40   0.89    7      5.71   2.36    8    4.50   2.62   10   4.60   1.43   9   5.67    2.00    7     5.86   1.77   15   5.67    2.19
and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                       5     4.00   2.24   17   5.12   2.55   5   6.00   2.00    7      4.57   2.88    7    4.57   2.30   10   4.80   1.87   9   5.89    2.15    6     6.50   2.26   16   4.56    2.16
circumstances)
Being inclusive                                        5     4.60   2.61   21   6.10   1.76   5   8.40   1.67    7      5.86   2.85    6    6.50   2.74   9    5.33   2.29   8   6.00    1.31    7     6.29   1.89   12   5.25    2.26
Openness (sharing data and other information)          5     5.60   1.95   19   6.47   2.09   6   7.50   2.17    7      5.71   2.69    9    7.33   2.65   8    7.75   1.75   9   6.89    2.67    6     8.17   1.84   15   6.27    3.08
Staff accessibility                                    5     7.40   1.52   20   6.70   2.11   6   8.50   1.23    8      7.38   2.13   10    7.70   2.06   8    6.75   2.92   9   7.89    2.15    7     7.29   2.63   17   7.18    2.58
Straightforwardness and honesty                        5     7.00   1.41   17   6.00   2.42   5   6.80   2.78    9      5.67   3.20    9    7.22   3.03   7    7.43   1.81   9   7.56    2.13    7     7.57   1.99   15   6.13    2.85
Collaboration with civil society                       3     6.00   0.00   16   5.88   1.71   1   4.00    .      6      4.50   2.59    3    6.00   2.00   9    5.33   2.74   8   5.88    2.30    7     7.29   1.60   15   5.07    2.19
Collaboration with the Government                      5     7.60   0.89   21   7.00   1.73   4   8.75   1.26    9      7.00   2.24    7    7.00   1.83   8    7.13   2.30   9   7.56    1.24    7     8.71   1.25   14   6.36    2.21
Collaboration with EC and other development
                                                       5     7.20   0.45   13   7.23   1.64   2   9.50   0.71    6      7.50   2.07    4    6.75   3.20   7    6.57   2.57   7   8.43    0.98    7     9.29   0.76   13   5.77    2.62
partners*
The speed in which it gets things accomplished
                                                       5     5.40   0.89   15   4.87   1.85   4   7.25   2.22    7      5.43   2.70    9    4.89   2.62   7    5.14   1.35   8   5.25    1.49    7     5.86   1.22   15   4.07    2.28
on the ground
To what extent does the WBG’s work help to
                                                       5     6.60   1.52   20   5.75   1.68   7   7.57   1.27    8      6.63   2.72    9    6.11   2.57   10   6.20   2.10   9   6.56    1.88    7     6.29   2.29   17   4.76    2.22
achieve development results in BH?
The WBG’s financial instruments meet the
                                                       5     3.40   2.61   19   5.95   1.96   7   6.43   2.07    7      5.00   2.52   10    5.10   2.64   10   5.30   2.58   8   5.50    1.93    7     4.29   2.06   17   4.29    2.37
needs of BH
The WBG meets BH’s needs for knowledge
                                                       5     3.80   1.79   16   5.63   1.63   7   6.57   2.82    7      5.00   2.52    8    5.88   2.75   11   5.45   3.11   7   5.43    2.30    7     7.71   2.75   16   5.44    2.42
services
Are adaptable to BH’s specific development
                                                       5     6.00   1.41   18   6.22   1.77   5   5.60   1.67    6      7.00   2.19    8    6.38   2.88   7    7.00   2.24   7   6.86    1.46    6     5.83   1.60   16   6.00    2.28
challenges and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the WBG’s knowledge work & activities          5     6.20   1.10   20   6.20   1.20   7   7.00   1.73    7      5.43   2.64    9    5.89   2.57   9    6.33   1.94   8   6.38    1.06    5     6.80   2.95   15   5.40    2.35
make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and                5     6.40   0.89   22   6.73   1.49   7   7.57   1.40    7      5.57   2.23    7    7.43   1.72   8    7.25   2.32   8   7.25    1.49    4     8.75   1.26   16   6.75    1.98
activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                       5     6.20   2.39   14   5.64   2.31   5   7.80   1.64    5      5.80   2.05    4    8.75   0.96   7    7.57   2.15   5   7.80    1.10    6     8.17   1.33   10   6.20    1.81
Bank Group makes appropriate use of them*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                      147
The World Bank Group                          Bosnia and Herzegovina                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix I: Bosnia and Herzegovina FY 2014 Questionnaire




                   World Bank Group Country Survey FY14 – Bosnia and Herzegovina


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH) or who observe activities related to social and economic
development. The following survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses
to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop more effective strategies that support development in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

 A1. In general would you say that Bosnia and Herzegovina is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                       148
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in BH?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                             15    Education
       assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)         16    Poverty reduction
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public       17    Social cohesion
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4    Domestic private sector development                      18    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  5    Foreign direct investment                                19    Agricultural development
  6    Water and sanitation                                     20    Trade and exports
  7    Energy                                                   21    Economic growth
  8    Job creation/employment                                  22    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
  9    Rural development                                        23    Local governance and institutions
 10    Financial markets                                        24    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 11    Urban development                                        25    Anti corruption
 12    Environmental sustainability                             26    Disaster management
 13    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
                                                                27    Information and communications technology
 14    Health


 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1   Water and sanitation                                      14    Foreign direct investment
  2   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                    15    Energy
                                                                      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3   Economic growth                                           16    effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)             17    Social cohesion
  5   Rural development                                         18    Education
  6   Urban development                                         19    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
  7   Local governance and institutions                         20    Environmental sustainability
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  8                                                             21    Health
      assistance)
  9   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                   22    Agricultural development
 10   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)          23    Disaster management
 11   Information and communications technology                 24    Job creation/employment
 12   Anti corruption                                           25    Financial markets
 13   Domestic private sector development                       26    Trade and exports




                                                               149
The World Bank Group                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                    Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  1    Energy                                                14     effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                    expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                15     Domestic private sector development
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  3                                                          16     Job creation/employment
       assistance)
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)         17     Agricultural development
  5    Anti corruption                                       18     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
  6    Disaster management                                   19     Education
  7    Rural development                                     20     Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
  8    Foreign direct investment                             21     Environmental sustainability
  9    Urban development                                     22     Health
 10    Water and sanitation                                  23     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11    Trade and exports                                     24     Local governance and institutions
 12    Information and communications technology
                                                             25     Financial markets
 13    Social cohesion


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity?* in your country, which of the following
 TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in BH? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Better employment opportunities for young people
  2    Better employment opportunities for women
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  6    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  7    A growing middle class
  8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
  9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 10    Consistent economic growth
 11    More reliable social safety net
 12    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14    Better quality public services
 15    Other (please specify):_____________________________________
* The World Bank Group aims to promote income growth of the bottom 40 percent of the population in each country. This
involves achieving economic growth which is inclusive of all sections of the society. Inclusion demands equity so that it
becomes the focus point.




                                                                  150
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
          1                2          3       4               5            6            7         8           9                  10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                                     Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in BH.
          1              2       3        4       5       6       7        8            9               10                       

 Not effective at all                                                                                 Very effective        Don't know



 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help BH solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1              2       3        4       5       6       7        8            9             10                         
                                                                                              To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                        Don't know
                                                                                                           degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in BH, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources
 (financial and knowledge services) in BH? (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                                   15       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
       assistance)
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  2    effectiveness, public financial management, public             16       Health
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)               17       Education
  4    Poverty reduction                                              18       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  5    Rural development                                              19       Agricultural development
  6    Domestic private sector development                            20       Trade and exports
  7    Foreign direct investment                                      21       Economic growth
  8    Water and sanitation                                           22       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
  9    Energy                                                         23       Local governance and institutions
 10    Social cohesion                                                24       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 11    Job creation/employment                                        25       Information and communications technology
 12    Financial markets                                              26       Anti corruption
 13    Urban development
                                                                      27       Disaster management
 14    Environmental sustainability




                                                                  151
The World Bank Group                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                                          Greatest Value            Second Greatest Value
                                                                   (Choose only ONE)                (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                                  
 2     Data                                                                                                    
 3     Policy advice, knowledge                                                                                
 4     Financial resources                                                                                     
       Capacity development (e.g., institutional
 5     development, training for staff at state and entity                                                     
       institutions)
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                    
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                              
 8     Coordination of development partners                                                                    
 9     Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                                            
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________                                                        


 How effectively do the World Bank Group’s activities below support BH’s efforts to achieve
 development results?
                                                                   Not effective                                     Very    Don't
                                                                   at all                                        effective   know
  B6    Convening/facilitating                                        1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      

  B7    Data                                                          1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  B8    Policy advice, knowledge                                      1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  B9    Financial resources                                           1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B10    Technical assistance                                          1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B11    Mobilizing third party financial resources                    1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B12    Coordination of development partners                          1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B13    Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                  1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      



 The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in BH. To which
 degree would BH benefit, if capacity building were to support...?
                                                                   To no                                      To a very
                                                                                                                             Don't
                                                                   degree                                    significant
                                                                                                                             know
                                                                   at all                                       degree
        Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
 B14    media) to help them more effectively engage and               1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        participate in development efforts
        The public sector, related to implementation of
 B15                                                                  1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        specific development projects on the ground
        The public sector, related to changing institutions
 B16                                                                  1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        (organizations or sociopolitical conditions)
        The private sector, related to institutional and
 B17                                                                  1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        policy change




                                                                152
The World Bank Group                                    Bosnia and Herzegovina                                Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
 each of the following areas in BH? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
 below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                      Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                      at all                                       effective   know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B18                                                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B19                                                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B20                                                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)

 When thinking about how to improve capacity building in BH to help ensure better development
 results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
 please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                      Not important                                Very        Don't
                                                                      at all                                   important       know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B21                                                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B22                                                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B23                                                                   1     2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)

 B24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in BH? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Not exploring alternative policy options
 2     Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in BH
 3     Staff too inaccessible
 4     Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5     Arrogant in its approach
 6     Not aligned with country priorities
 7     The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8     World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 9     Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 10    Too influenced by developed countries
 11    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 12    World Bank Group’s processes too slow
 13    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 14    Not aligned with other development partners’ work
 15    Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 16    Not client focused
 17    Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
 18    Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries
 19    Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members located in the country
 20    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 21    Don’t know



                                                                 153
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                            Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B25. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Capacity development (e.g., institutional development, training for staff at state and entity institutions)
  2    Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
  3    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
  4    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
  5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
  6    Trust Fund management
  7    Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other development partners)
  8    Sector-wide approaches
  9    Emergency Recovery lending
 10    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 11    Don’t know


 B26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which
 TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 2     Community of development partners
 3     Media
 4     NGOs
 5     Local Government
 6     Private sector
 7     Parliament
 8     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 9     Beneficiaries
 10    Foundations
 11    Emerging donors
 12    UN agencies
 13    Other (please specify): __________________________
 14    Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in BH?
                                                                  Strongly                                   Strongly   Don't
                                                                  disagree                                      agree   know
        Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B27                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9       10      
        relevant role in development in BH
        The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B28                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9       10      
        consider the development priorities for BH
        The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B29                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9       10      
        strategies that are realistic for BH
        The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B30                                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7    8    9       10      
        stakeholders in BH with respect




                                                               154
The World Bank Group                                    Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
 in terms of each of the following?
                                                                     To no                                     To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't
                                                                     degree at                                significant
                                                                                                                            know
                                                                     all                                         degree
 B31     Responsiveness                                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B32                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B33                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         circumstances)
 B34     Being inclusive                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B35     Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B36     Staff accessibility                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B37     Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B38     Group who are making decisions important to my                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         work
 B39     Collaboration with civil society                                1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
 B40     Collaboration with the Government                               1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Collaboration with EC and other development
 B41                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         partners
 B42     Collaboration with the private sector                           1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B43                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         the ground
 B44     Being a long-term partner                                       1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       



 B45. To be a more effective development partner in BH, do you believe that the World Bank Group
 should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                       Less local presence       Don't know
                                           presence is adequate


 B46. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which THREE of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 3     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 4     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 5     Poor coordination with development partners
 6     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7     The Government works inefficiently
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Inadequate funding
 11    Other (please specify): ________________________________________



                                                                   155
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Bosnia and Herzegovina?
                                                                  Not important                             Very     Don't
                                                                  at all                                important    know
  1    Anti corruption                                               1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  2    Information and communications technology                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)              1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  4    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                       1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  5    Urban development                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  6    Environmental sustainability                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  7    Poverty reduction                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  8    Domestic private sector development                           1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  9    Foreign direct investment                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 10    Local governance and institutions                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 11    Water and sanitation                                          1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 12    Trade and exports                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 13    Economic growth                                               1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 14    Energy                                                        1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 15    Disaster management                                           1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 16    effectiveness, public financial management, public            1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 17    Job creation/employment                                       1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 18    Social cohesion                                               1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 19    Financial markets                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 20    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                        1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 21    Health                                                        1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 22    Rural development                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 23    Education                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 24                                                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       assistance)
 25    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 26    Agricultural development                                      1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 27    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)          1   2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       




                                                               156
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                              Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in BH? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the sectors
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                  Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                  at all                                       effective   know
  1    Information and communications technology                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  3    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  4    Urban development                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  5    Environmental sustainability                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  6    Poverty reduction                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  7    Domestic private sector development                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  8    Foreign direct investment                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  9    Local governance and institutions                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 10    Water and sanitation                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 11    Trade and exports                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 12    Economic growth                                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 13    Energy                                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 14    Disaster management                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 15    effectiveness, public financial management, public            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 16    Job creation/employment                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 17    Social cohesion                                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 18    Financial markets                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 19    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 20    Health                                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 21    Rural development                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 22    Education                                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 23                                                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       assistance)
 24    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 25    Agricultural development                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 26    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      




                                                               157
The World Bank Group                                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in BH?
 (Select only ONE response)
  1    At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
  2    In the country
  3    Don’t know



 C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in BH?
        1               2       3       4       5       6            7         8       9                   10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                            To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't know
 all                                                                                               significant degree


 C5. To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing country systems
 (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) in BH?
         1              2       3       4       5       6            7         8       9                   10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                            To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't know
 all                                                                                               significant degree


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Bosnia
 and Herzegovina?
                                                                 Strongly                                                    Strongly    Don't
                                                                 disagree                                                       agree    know
       The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
 C6    (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy             1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of BH
       The World Bank Group meets BH’s needs for
 C7    knowledge services (e.g., research, analysis,             1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       data, technical assistance)


 C8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
 in BH?
             1              2       3       4       5        6           7         8       9                    10                      
                                                                                                     To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                             Don't know
                                                                                                                  degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                         158
The World Bank Group                                    Bosnia and Herzegovina                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
 you do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never


 In Bosnia and Herzegovina, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge
 work and activities:
                                                            To no                                                  To a very
                                                                                                                                Don't
                                                            degree at                                             significant
                                                                                                                                know
                                                            all                                                      degree
  D2     Are timely                                          1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D3                                                         1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         involvement during preparation
  D4     Are relevant to BH's development priorities         1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
  D5     Lead to practical solutions                         1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D6                                                         1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D7                                                         1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         good practices
  D8     Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     

  D9     Are adequately disseminated                         1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
 D10     Are translated enough into local language           1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         Are adaptable to BH’s specific development
 D11                                                         1         2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         challenges and country circumstances


 D12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3   4     5       6            7         8       9                 10                    
 Not significant at all                                                                        Very significant        Don't know



 D13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities?
          1               2       3    4        5       6        7         8       9              10                       
 Very low                                                                                  Very high technical
                                                                                                                       Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                     quality




                                                                     159
The World Bank Group                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/
 advisory work contribute to solving BH’s development challenges?
                                                           To no                                      To a very
                                                                                                                    Don't
                                                           degree at                                 significant
                                                                                                                    know
                                                           all                                          degree
       Conceptualization (understanding and framing
 E1                                                         1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       the problem)
 E2    Design (appraising and planning the solutions)       1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       Implementation (Executing, carrying out,
 E3    monitoring and making appropriate                    1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
       adjustments)
 E4    Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      



 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                           Strongly                                      Strongly   Don't
                                                           disagree                                         agree   know
        The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E5                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        promptly
        The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E6    and evaluates the projects and programs it          1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E7                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        reviews are done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
  E8                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
  E9                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        lending are reasonable
        The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
 E10                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        in BH
        Working with the World Bank Group
 E11                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        increases BH’s institutional capacity
        The World Bank Group ensures consistency
 E12                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        and continuity through staff changes
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
 E13                                                        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
        of them
        The World Bank Group provides effective
 E14    implementation support (i.e., supervision of        1      2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        projects)




                                                                160
The World Bank Group                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 E15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Bosnia and
 Herzegovina? (Select only one response)
 1    The World Bank Group takes too much risk in BH
 2    The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in BH
 3    The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
 4    Don’t know
 5    Prefer not to answer


 E16. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in BH?
         1             2     3    4       5      6         7         8        9           10                       
 To no degree at                                                                  To a very significant
                                                                                                              Don't know
 all                                                                                           degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               161
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                            Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in BH?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on BH’s economy
 2    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., state, entity, cantonal, municipal)
 3    Offer more innovative financial products
 4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
 5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
 6    Improve the quality of its experts as related to BH’s specific challenges
 7    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 8    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 9    Increase the level of capacity development in the country
 10   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 11   Work faster
 12   Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in BH’s office
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in BH, and taking
 into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank
 Group should offer more of in BH? (Select only ONE response)
 1    Financial services
 2    Knowledge products
 3    Convening services
 4    None of the above
 5    The combination is appropriate for BH
 6    Don’t know


 F3. Please answer the following questions:             (Choose no more than THREE for each column)
                                                         A. Which THREE areas below
                                                                                              B. Which THREE areas
                                                         would benefit most from the
                                                                                           below would benefit most
                                                          World Bank Group playing a
                                                                                            from other development
                                                              leading role among
                                                                                                 partners in BH?
                                                         international partners in BH?
 1    Social safety nets                                                                               
 2    Public financial management                                                                      
 3    Access to justice systems                                                                        
 4    Access to basic services                                                                         
 5    Capacity of state institutions                                                                   
 6    Jobs                                                                                             
 7    Improving livelihoods                                                                            
 8    Social cohesion                                                                                  




                                                               162
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Blogs
 2    Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials
 7    Mobile phones
 8    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 9    World Bank Group’s website
 10   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 G3                                                                                                     Yes         No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G4                                                                                                     Yes         No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                        Yes         No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                              Yes         No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                           Yes         No




                                                                163
The World Bank Group                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use? (Select only ONE response)
 1     The World Bank Group’s country website (www.worldbank.org/bosniaandherzegovina)
 2     The World Bank Group’s main website (www.worldbank.org)


 G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 1     High speed
 2     Dial-up


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                     Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                                     disagree                                   agree   know
         I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than
 G10                                                                  1       2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         I did a few years ago
         I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G11     navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank         1       2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Group website)
         I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 G12     websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World       1       2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Bank Group website)
         The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G13     Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) are valuable sources     1       2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         of information about the institution
         When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G14     know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach      1       2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         them, etc.)
         The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                  1       2   3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                              164
The World Bank Group                                   Bosnia and Herzegovina                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?               (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported project/program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
                                                                Natural resource management / environmental
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security      11
                                                                sustainability
                                                                Private sector development / foreign direct
 2    Climate change / disaster management                12
                                                                investment
                                                                Public sector governance / public financial
 3    Education                                           13
                                                                management / anti corruption
 4    Energy                                              14    Social protection
 5    Financial markets / banking                         15    Transport
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity             16    Urban development
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                        17    Water and sanitation
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology           18    Generalist
 9    Job creation/employment
                                                          19    Other (please specify): _________________________
 10   Law and justice / regulatory framework




                                                                165
The World Bank Group                                  Bosnia and Herzegovina            Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION
 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group (IBRD, IDA, IFC,
 or MIGA) in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you primarily engage with in
 Bosnia and Herzegovina? (Select only ONE response)
 1    The World Bank (IBRD/IDA) 
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    Other (please specify): _________________________


 H5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
 (If YES please go to Question H6; If NO please go to H7)
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H6. If yes, what was your view on the two institutions working together in BH?   (Select only
 ONE response)
 1    Working well together
 2    Collaborating but needs improvement
 3    In conflict
 4    Other
 5    Don’t know


 H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in BH?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H8. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
 2    Republika Srpska
 3    Brcko District
 4    Other



                                Thank you for completing the survey!



                                                               166
