                              96113




         Ghana
  The World Bank Group
Country Opinion Survey FY14
      Report of Findings
        August 2014
The World Bank Group                        Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



Acknowledgements
The Ghana Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of the
World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group (PORG)
team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica Cameron,
Svetlana Markova, and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data support. The
report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP).
PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Ghana country team and the local
fielding agency Alayie Consult and Investments. In particular, PORG is grateful to Kafu Kofi
Tsikata (Senior Communications Officer) and Kennedy Fosu (Communications Officer) for their
ongoing support throughout the Country Opinion Survey process.




                                              1
The World Bank Group                                   Ghana                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5

         IV. General Issues Facing Ghana .....................................................12

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................17

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ......................................26

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................33

       VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................39

         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana .................46

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................51

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................59




                                                          2
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
    Assist the World Bank Group in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
       Ghana perceive the World Bank Group;
    Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Ghana regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Ghana;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank Group in Ghana;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and results,
              project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
              communication and information sharing in Ghana; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank Group’s future role in Ghana.
    Use data to help inform Ghana country team’s strategy.


II. Methodology
From March to April 2014, 1,000 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Ghana were invited
to provide their opinions on the WBG’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime
Minister; the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry,
ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World
Bank Group-supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of a project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral
agencies; private sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks;
NGOs; community-based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government
institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; and the
judiciary branch. A total of 830 stakeholders participated in the survey (83% response rate).
Respondents completed questionnaires with a representative from the fielding agency.
Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Ghana; their overall attitudes toward the
WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities; working
with the WBG; the WBG’s future role in Ghana; and the WBG’s communication and
information sharing in Ghana. In addition, every country that engages in the Country Survey
must include specific indicator questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual
Corporate Scorecard. These questions are identified throughout the survey report.
In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 685 respondents (86% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY ’11. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were
possible. Comparisons to the 306 respondents (22% response rate) who completed the country
survey in FY ’06 are presented in the Appendix (see page 139). To reduce sampling bias in
these year comparisons, the respondent base from each fiscal year is weighted to be comparable
across surveys. The geographic location distribution across years is also presented in the
Appendix (see page 139).




                                                 3
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
A. General Issues Facing Ghana: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Ghana is headed
   in the right direction, what they thought were the most important development priorities,
   which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty, which areas would contribute most
   to generating economic growth, and what would achieve “shared prosperity?.
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their
   familiarity with the WBG, its effectiveness in Ghana, WBG staff preparedness, the
   effectiveness of its activities, to what extent it should provide capacity building support to
   certain groups, the importance and effectiveness of the WBG’s current capacity building
   work, their agreement with various statements regarding the WBG’s work, and the extent to
   which it is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the
   sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the WBG to focus its resources, the
   WBG’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses, its most effective instruments, with which
   stakeholder groups the WBG should collaborate more, if the WBG should have more or less
   of a local presence in Ghana, and to what they attributed slowed or failed reform efforts.
C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to
   which the WBG’s work helps achieve development results in Ghana, the extent to which the
   WBG meets Ghana’s needs for knowledge services and financial instruments, the extent to
   which the WBG measures and corrects its work in real time, and the importance of the
   WBG’s involvement and the WBG’s level of effectiveness across thirty-one development
   areas. Respondents were also asked to indicate if WBG decisions regarding its Ghana
   program were made primarily in country or at Headquarters.
D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult WBG knowledge work and to rate the quality of the
   WBG’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant of a contribution it makes
   to development results and its technical quality.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which various
   aspects of the WBG’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Ghana’s
   development challenges and their agreement with a series of statements regarding working
   with the WBG. Respondents were asked to indicate if the WBG operates with too much risk.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana: Respondents were asked to indicate
   what the WBG should do to make itself of greater value in Ghana and which of its services
   the WBG should offer more of in Ghana.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the WBG, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   WBG’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the WBG’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the WBG, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank Group as a result of the WBG’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked to evaluate the WBG’s information accessibility and
   responsiveness to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they currently collaborate with the WBG, with which WBG agencies
   they work, their exposure to the WBG in Ghana, and their geographic location. Respondents
   were also asked if their projects involved both the World Bank and the IFC, and if so, to
   indicate their view of the two institutions working together.


                                                4
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
       For further analyses, the few respondents from the office of Minister were combined with
        the respondents from the office of the President, the few consultants on WBG-supported
        projects were combined with respondents from PMUs, respondents from multilateral
        agencies were combined with those from bilateral agencies, respondents from the
        financial sector/private banks were combined with those from the private sector,
        respondents from CBOs and private foundations were combined with those from NGOs,
        and the few respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, faith-based groups, and the
        judiciary were included in the “Other? category.




                                                5
The World Bank Group                         Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Key comparisons across respondents’ specializations can be found in the Appendix (see
        page 144).




                                               6
The World Bank Group                            Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       A plurality of respondents were from the Northern Sector. Only significant geographic
        location differences in ratings of indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this
        report. All geographic locations comparisons can be found in the Appendix (see page
        105).




                                                  7
The World Bank Group                         Ghana                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the World Bank Group

       Differences in responding, based on collaboration with the World Bank Group in Ghana,
        can be found in the Appendix (see page 122).




                                               8
The World Bank Group           Ghana          Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

The World Bank and IFC




                                 9
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Exposure to the World Bank Group

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on exposure to the World Bank
        Group in Ghana, can be found in the Appendix (see page 164). Please note that where
        these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall views of the
        WBG, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                               10
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of familiarity
        with the World Bank Group in Ghana compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country
        survey (6.3).
       Respondents from independent government institutions and consultants on WBG-
        supported projects/PMUs had the highest levels of familiarity with the World Bank
        Group in Ghana whereas respondents from the media had the lowest levels of familiarity,
        but this did not reach statistical significance.
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group were significantly,
        strongly correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Ghana,
        and significantly, moderately correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s work
        achieving development results and the WBG’s relevance to development in Ghana.




                                                11
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Ghana

Ghana Heading in the Right Direction

       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG in Ghana were significantly more likely to
        indicate that Ghana is headed in the right direction compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                               12
The World Bank Group                         Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)
Development Priority
       Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey indicated that youth unemployment (24%),
        economic growth (18%), and increasing access to education (16%) were the most
        important development priorities for Ghana.
       Respondents from the media were significantly more likely to indicate transport and
        respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        indicate economic growth as one of the most important development priorities facing
        Ghana compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        health, education, and food security compared to respondents who do not collaborate with
        the WBG who were significantly more likely to indicate transport, public sector
        governance/reform, gender equity, poverty reduction, and natural resource management
        as some of the most important development priorities facing Ghana.




                                               13
The World Bank Group                         Ghana                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction

       Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey indicated that agriculture development
        (49%) and education (31%) would contribute most to poverty reduction in Ghana.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        economic growth, energy, and agriculture development compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG who were significantly more likely to indicate rural
        development, anti-corruption, and health as factors contributing to reducing poverty.




                                              14
The World Bank Group                         Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)
Factors Contributing to Economic Growth
       Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey indicated that increasing agricultural
        productivity (50%) would contribute most to generating faster economic growth.
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and trade unions were significantly
        more likely to indicate food security as a factor contributing to economic growth
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        food security compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG who were
        significantly more likely to indicate regulatory framework as a factor contributing to
        economic growth.




                                               15
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity?
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        better employment opportunities for women compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG who were significantly more likely to indicate better
        employment opportunities for young people, greater access to health and nutrition for
        citizens, and better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas as ways to achieve
        “shared prosperity? in Ghana.




                                                 16
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.

Focusing World Bank Group Resources
   Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that it would be most productive for the
    Bank to focus most of its resources on youth unemployment (29%), economic growth (26%),
    and increasing access to education (23%).
   Respondents from trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate social protection,
    respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more likely to indicate
    food security, and respondents from independent government institutions were significantly
    more likely to indicate domestic private sector development as areas in which the WBG
    should focus its resources compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
   Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate health
    compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG who were significantly more
    likely to indicate public sector governance/reform, poverty reduction, rural development, and
    natural resource management as areas in which the WBG should focus its resources.




                                               17
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness in Ghana compared to respondents from the FY ‘11 country
        survey (6.7).
       Respondents from the Northern Sector gave significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness in Ghana compared to respondents from other geographic locations.
        Respondents from the Northern Sector also gave the highest ratings for the extent to
        which the WBG’s work achieves development results in Ghana whereas respondents
        from the Southern and Eastern Sectors gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness in Ghana and for the extent to which the WBG’s work achieves
        development results in Ghana compared to respondents who do not collaborate with
        the WBG.
       Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the extent
        to which the WBG’s work achieves development results in Ghana and for the WBG’s
        effectiveness in Ghana.




                                                 18
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the Northern Sector gave significantly higher ratings for the extent to
        which the WBG’s staff is well prepared to help Ghana solve its most complicated
        development challenges compared to respondents from other geographic locations.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        extent to which the WBG’s staff is well prepared to help Ghana solve its most
        complicated development challenges compared to respondents who do not collaborate
        with the WBG.
       Respondents across all stakeholder groups gave statistically similar ratings for the extent
        to which the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Ghana solve its most
        complicated development challenges.




                                                 19
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions

       Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings across all
        of the country survey indicator questions whereas respondents from the office of the
        President/Minister gave significantly lower ratings. Responses for individual indicator
        questions by stakeholder groups can be found in the Appendix (see page 165).




                                               20
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value

       Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the WBG’s technical advice
        (44%), policy and economic advice (34%), and financial resources (27%) were its
        greatest values to Ghana.
       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister, bilateral/multilateral agencies, and
        trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate that capacity development was the
        greatest value of the WBG compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                21
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
WBG Activities: Effectiveness
       Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s policy advice/studies/analyses whereas respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries
        and respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for
        the effectiveness of the WBG’s financial resources whereas respondents from trade
        unions gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from independent government
        institutions gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s technical
        assistance whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister and academia
        gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from other organizations gave the highest
        ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s mobilizing third party financial resources
        whereas respondents from trade unions gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of
        ministries and consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs gave the highest ratings for
        the effectiveness of the WBG’s donor coordination whereas respondents from the office
        of the President/Minister gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s convening/facilitating, data, policy advice/studies/analyses,
        financial resources, technical assistance, mobilizing third party financial resources, and
        donor coordination compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 22
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Capacity Building
       Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness at project implementation whereas respondents from the media
        gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from independent government institutions
        and employees of ministries gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at
        citizen engagement whereas respondents from the media gave significantly lower ratings.
        Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness at policy design whereas respondents from the office of the
        President/Minister and bilateral/multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for the
        importance of the WBG being involved in project implementation whereas respondents
        from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from
        independent government institutions, employees of ministries, and consultants on WBG-
        supported projects/PMUs gave the highest ratings for the importance of the WBG being
        involved in citizen engagement whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies
        gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries and respondents from
        independent government institutions and other organizations gave the highest ratings for
        the importance of the WBG being involved in policy design whereas respondents from
        the office of the President/Minister and trade unions gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness at project implementation, policy design, and citizen engagement
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               23
The World Bank Group                            Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents in the FY ’11 survey indicated that the WBG’s greatest weaknesses were
        imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities (32%) and being too
        bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures (31%).
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG’s greatest weaknessess are that its staff is too inaccessible, the credibility
        of its knowledge/data, and not being willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
        efforts in the country compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
        who were significantly more likely to indicate that its greatest weakness is not enough
        public disclosure of its work.




                                                 24
The World Bank Group                            Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts
       Respondents in the FY ’11 survey indicated that they attributed failed or slow reform
        efforts to political pressures and obstacles (41%).
       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        indicate that they attributed failed or slow reform efforts to poor donor coordination and
        the WBG working too slowly; respondents from the office of the President/Minister, the
        media, and academia were significantly less likely to indicate that they attributed failed or
        slow reform efforts to a lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government; and
        respondents from the office of the President/Minister, bilateral/multilateral agencies, and
        trade unions were significantly less likely to indicate that they attributed failed or slow
        reform efforts to reforms not being well thought out in light of Ghana’s challenges
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they attribute failed or slow reform efforts to a lack of/inadequate levels of capacity
        in Government compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG who were
        significantly more likely to indicate reforms not being well thought out in light of
        Ghana’s challenges.




                                                 25
The World Bank Group           Ghana        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                26
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but six of
        these thirty-one areas of development. For the most part, respondents from independent
        government institutions and trade unions tended to give the highest ratings of importance
        across these areas whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and the office
        of the President/Minister tended to give significantly lower ratings of importance. Those
        areas that did not have significant stakeholder group differences were:
               “Crime and violence?;
               “Law and justice?;
               “Regulatory framework?;
               “Gender equity?;
               “Foreign direct investment?;
               “Public sector governance/reform?; and
               “Climate change?.

       Respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings
        of importance for “Poverty reduction? compared to respondents who collaborate with
        the WBG.




                                                27
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings of importance
        across all areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.




                                                28
The World Bank Group              Ghana            Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas




                                   29
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Please note the complete breakdown of respondents’ effectiveness ratings for the WBG’s
        work in these development areas can be found in the Appendix. In addition to the
        aggregate mean ratings for each area, respondents who indicated that they “Don’t Know?
        are reported in Appendix A (see page 62), suggesting that primarily informed
        stakeholders responded to these questions. A complete breakdown by stakeholder groups
        can be found in Appendix B (see page 80), by geographic locations in Appendix C (see
        page 105), by WBG-collaborators in Appendix D (see page 122), and by respondents’
        specializations/sectors in Appendix F (see page 144).

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among just four of these
        thirty-one areas of development. Those areas with statistically similar stakeholder group
        ratings were:
             Employees of ministries gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at
                “Communicable/non-communicable diseases? whereas respondents from the office
                of the President/Minister gave significantly lower effectiveness ratings;
             Employees of ministries and respondents from local government gave the highest
                ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at “Water and sanitation? whereas respondents
                from the office of the President/Minister gave significantly lower effectiveness
                ratings;
             Employees of ministries and respondents from local government gave the highest
                ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at “Health? whereas respondents from trade
                unions gave significantly lower effectiveness ratings; and
             Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Minister,
                local government, and bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the
                WBG’s effectiveness at “Climate change? whereas consultants on WBG-supported
                projects/PMUs and respondents from the media gave significantly lower
                effectiveness ratings.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness across all but four of these thirty-one areas of development areas
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG. Those areas that did not
        have significant differences were:
            “Anti-corruption?;
            “Transport?;
            “Law and justice?; and
            “Financial markets?.




                                                 30
The World Bank Group                         Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave higher ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness across most areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’11
        country survey. Those differences that reached statistical significance are noted in
        the graph.




                                               31
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Ghana, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-one specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results increase.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Ghana. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The WBG’s effectiveness at health; and
             The WBG’s effectiveness at communicable/non-communicable diseases.

       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Ghana, suggesting that ratings of
        effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
        help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
        analyses were:
             The WBG’s effectiveness at communicable/non-communicable diseases;
             The WBG’s effectiveness at health; and
             The WBG’s effectiveness at economic growth.




                                                 32
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Ghana

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that the WBG is aligned with their development priorities for Ghana compared to
        respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (6.1).
       Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest levels of
        agreement that the WBG plays a relevant role in development in Ghana whereas
        respondents from the office of the President/Minister had significantly lower levels of
        agreement. Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from
        independent government institutions and trade unions had the highest levels of agreement
        that the WBG supports realistic programs and strategies for Ghana whereas respondents
        from the office of the President/Minister had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from the Northern Sector gave significantly higher ratings for all three of
        these aspects of the WBG’s work in Ghana compared to respondents from other
        geographic locations.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for all three
        of these aspects of the WBG’s work in Ghana compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                33
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
   Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement that
    working with the WBG increases institutional capacity and that the WBG treats clients and
    stakeholders with respect, but significantly lower levels of agreement that the WBG’s
    conditions on its lending are reasonable compared to respondents from the FY ’11 survey
    (5.7, 6.0, and 5.6, respectively).
   There were significant stakeholder group differnces in their levels of agreement regarding all
    but two of these aspects of how the WBG operates in Ghana. For the most part, respondents
    from trade unions and independent government institutions tended to have the highest levels
    of agreement whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister and bilateral/
    multilateral agencies tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement. Those areas that
    did not have significant stakeholder group differences were working with the WBG increases
    institutional capacity and the WBG ensures consistency through staff changes.
   Respondents from the Northern Sector gave significantly higher ratings for all of these
    aspects of how the WBG in Ghana operates compared to respondents from other locations.
   Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
    across all of these aspects of how the WBG operates in Ghana compared to respondents who
    do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                34
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner
       Respondents from this year’s country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s “Straightforwardness and honesty? compared to respondents from the FY ’11
        country survey (5.9).
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but one of
        these aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner (only “The speed in
        which it gets things accomplished on the ground? had statistically similar ratings). For the
        most part, respondents from independent government institutions and employees of
        ministries tended to have the highest ratings across these aspects whereas respondents
        from the office of the President/Minister, the media, and other organizations tended to
        have significantly lower ratings.
       There were significant location differences among all of these aspects as well. For the
        most part, respondents from the Northern Sector gave significantly higher ratings than
        respondents from other locations.




                                                 35
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       Respondents who indicated that they collaborated with the WBG gave significantly
        higher ratings across all aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner
        compared to respondents who indicated that they did not collaborate.




                                               36
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Risk-Taking

       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were the most likely to indicate that the
        WBG takes too much risk in Ghana. Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs
        were the most likely to indicate that the WBG does not take enough risk in Ghana.
        Respondents from local government were the most likely to indicate that the WBG’s
        approach is appropriate. Respondents from the media, academia, and other organizations
        were the most likely to indicate that that they didn’t know.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG were significantly more
        likely to indicate that the WBG’s approach is appropriate or that the WBG does not take
        enough risk in Ghana whereas respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG were
        more likely to indicate that they didn’t know.




                                                37
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Where Decisions are Made

       Employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs, and
        respondents from the office of the President/Minister, bilateral/multilateral agencies,
        NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, independent government institutions, and trade unions
        indicated that the WBG’s decisions are made at Headquarters. Respondents from local
        government, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, and other organizations
        were split between the WBG’s decisions being made at Headquarters and not knowing.
        Respondents from the media and academia indicated that they didn’t know.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG were significantly more
        likely to indicate that decisions were made at Headquarters compared to respondents who
        do not collaborate with the WBG who were significantly more likely to indicate that they
        didn’t know.




                                               38
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities

       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from bilateral/
        multilateral agencies and independent government institutions reported the most frequent
        usage of WBG knowledge work and activities (approximately half indicating
        weekly/monthly usage) whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister,
        academia, and other organizations reported significantly less frequent usage (more than
        half indicated rarely or never using).
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG reported significantly
        more frequent usage of WBG knowledge work and activities (nearly half indicated
        weekly/monthly usage) compared to respondents who indicated that they did not
        collaborate (more than two-thirds indicated rarely or never using).




                                               39
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Ghana’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from independent
        government institutions had the highest levels of agreement that the WBG meets Ghana’s
        needs for knowledge services whereas respondents from the office of the President/
        Minister had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from the Northern Sector had significantly higher levels of agreement that
        the WBG meets Ghana’s needs for knowledge services compared to respondents from
        other locations.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
        levels of agreement that the WBG meets Ghana’s needs for knowledge services
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               40
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the extent
        to which the WBG’s knowledge work and activities are adaptable to Ghana’s specific
        challenges compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (6.0).
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among several of these
        qualities of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities. For the most part, respondents
        from independent government institutions tended to have the highest ratings whereas
        respondents from the media and bilateral/multilateral agencies tended to have
        significantly lower ratings. The statistically significant qualities were “Lead to practical
        solutions?, “Are accessible?, “Are source of relevant information on global good
        practices?, “Enhance your knowledge and/or skills?, and “Are adequately disseminated?.
       Respondents from the Northern Sector gave significantly higher ratings for the extent to
        which the WBG’s knowledge work and activities “Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific
        development challenges and country circumstances? compared to respondents from other
        locations (comparisons across all aspects can be found in the Appendix, see page 105).
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
        ratings across all of these aspects of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities compared
        to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 41
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
       Respondents from the Northern Sector had the highest ratings regarding the significance
        of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work whereas respondents from the
        Southern and Eastern sectors had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
        ratings regarding the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work
        compared to respondents who indicated that they do not collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings regarding the
        significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work.




Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)
       Respondents from the Northern Sector had the highest ratings regarding the technical
        quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities whereas respondents from the
        Southern sector had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher ratings regarding
        the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across stakeholder groups had statistically similar ratings regarding the
        technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities.




                                               42
The World Bank Group         Ghana              Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Most Effective Instruments




                              43
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Ghana’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that
        the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Ghana whereas
        respondents from the office of the President/Minister and academia had significantly
        lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from the Northern Sector had significantly higher levels of agreement that
        the WBG’s financial instruments meet the needs of Ghana compared to respondents from
        other locations.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher
        levels of agreement that the WBG’s financial instruments meet the needs of Ghana
        compared to respondents who indicated that they do not collaborate with the WBG.




Measuring and Correcting in Real Time
       Respondents from independent government institutions had the highest ratings that the
        WBG measures and corrects it work in real time in Ghana whereas respondents from
        other organizations had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher ratings that the
        WBG measures and corrects it work in real time in Ghana compared to respondents who
        do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               44
The World Bank Group                         Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Assistance/Advisory Work

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings that the
        WBG’s delivery work contributes to evaluation, design, implementation, and
        conceptualization compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               45
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana
Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
       Respondents from the FY ’11 survey indicated that the WBG should reduce the
        complexity of obtaining financing (42%) and improve the quality of its experts as related
        to Ghana’s specific challenges (40%) to make itself of greater value in Ghana.
       Respondents from the media and independent government institutions were significantly
        less likely to indicate that the WBG should reach out more to groups outside of
        Government compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG were significantly more
        likely to indicate that the WBG should provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/
        figures on Ghana’s economy, ensure greater selectivity in its work, and improve the
        competitiveness of its financing compared to markets compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG who were significantly more likely to indicate that the
        WBG should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG financing.




                                                46
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana (continued)

Capacity Building

       Respondents from independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for the
        extent to which Ghana would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the public
        sector, related to implementation of specific development projects, whereas respondents
        from academia gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from independent
        government institutions gave the highest ratings for the extent to which Ghana would
        benefit from WBG capacity building support to the public sector, related to changing
        institutions, whereas respondents from trade unions and academia gave significantly
        lower ratings.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher
        ratings for the extent to which Ghana would benefit from WBG capacity building support
        to the public sector, related to changing institutions, compared to respondents who
        indicated that they do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               47
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana (continued)

Local Presence in Ghana

       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly less likely to indicate
        that to be a more effective development partner to Ghana, the WBG should have more
        local presence compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborate with the WBG were significantly more
        likely to indicate that the WBG should have more local presence compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 48
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana (continued)

Focusing Services

       Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Minister,
        private sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs/ CBOs/private foundations, the
        media, trade unions, academia and other organizations indicated that the WBG should
        offer more financial services in Ghana. Respondents from bilateral/ multilateral agencies
        indicated that the WBG should offer more knowledge products in Ghana. Consultants on
        WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from local government and independent
        government institutions indicated that the combination of services is appropriate.




                                                49
The World Bank Group                        Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana (continued)
Collaborating with Stakeholders in Ghana
   Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the WBG should work more
    closely with local government (44%), private sector (39%), and NGOs (35%) to ensure better
    development results in Ghana.
   Compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups, respondents from the office of the
    President/Minister and academia were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG
    should collaborate more with academia; employees of ministries indicated that the WBG
    should collaborate more with donor communities; respondents from bilateral/multilateral
    agencies and the media indicated that the WBG should collaborate more with the media;
    consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
    foundations, independent government institutions, and trade unions indicated that the WBG
    should collaborate more with NGOs; respondents from local government indicated that the
    WBG should collaborate more with local government; and respondents from bilateral/
    multilateral agencies indicated that the WBG should collaborate more with foundations.
   Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that
    the WBG should collaborate more with donor communities compared to respondents who do
    not collaborate with the WBG.




                                              50
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness
Information Sources
       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that they got most of their
        information about economic and social development issues in Ghana from local
        newspapers (75%).
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly less likely to indicate
        that they got most of their information from local newspapers, but were significantly
        more likely to indicate that they got their information from international newspapers,
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they got most of their information from the Internet, blogs, and mobile phones
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were significantly
        more likely to utilize local newspapers, local radio, and local television.




                                                 51
The World Bank Group                        Ghana                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

       Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey were most likely to prefer the WBG’s
        website (68%).




                                              52
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Access to Information
       Respondents from this year’s country survey had statistically similar rates of awareness
        for the WBG’s Access to Information Policy compared to respondents from the FY ’11
        country survey (27%).
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from the office of the
        President/Minister, bilateral/multilateral agencies, and NGOs/CBOs/private foundations
        were significantly more likely to be aware of the WBG’s Access to Information Policy
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to be aware
        of the WBG’s Access to Information Policy compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




       Respondents from this year’s country survey had statistically similar rates of requesting
        information compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (29%).
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from bilateral/
        multilateral agencies and independent government institutions were significantly more
        likely to have requested information from the WBG in the past year compared to
        respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        requested information from the WBG in the past year compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                53
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Respondents from this year’s country survey had significantly higher rates of obtaining
        their requested information compared to respondents from the FY ’11 survey (63%).
       Respondents from the media were significantly less likely to have obtained their
        requested information compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        obtained their requested information compared to respondents who do not collaborate
        with the WBG.




       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that
        they consult the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago whereas
        respondents from academia and other organizations had significantly lower levels of
        agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they consult the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                54
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Respondents from this year’s country survey had significantly higher rates of Internet
        access compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (86%).
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        Internet access compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




Website Usage
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower rates of usage of the
        WBG’s website compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (65%).
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from independent
        government institutions were significantly more likely to have used the WBG’s website
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have used
        the WBG’s website compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                55
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey were significantly less likely to use the WBG’s
        country website compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (69%).




                                                56
The World Bank Group                          Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website/Social Media Evaluation

       Respondents from this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they find the information on the websites useful compared to respondents from the
        FY ’11 country survey (6.7).
       Respondents from independent government institutions had significantly higher levels of
        agreement that they find the WBG’s websites easy to navigate whereas respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents
        from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and trade unions had significantly
        higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s social media channels are valuable sources of
        information whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister and bilateral/
        multilateral agencies had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they find the WBG’s websites easy to navigate, that they find the information on the
        websites useful, and that the WBG’s social media channels are valuable sources of
        information compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                57
The World Bank Group                           Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it and that the
        WBG is responsive to their information requests compared to respondents from the
        FY ’11 country survey (6.5 and 6.4, respectively).
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from the private sector/
        financial sector/private banks and independent government institutions had significantly
        higher levels of agreement that when they need information from the WBG they know
        how to find it whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it and that the
        WBG is responsive to their information requests compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                58
The World Bank Group                                Ghana                            Country Opinion Survey 2014



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 60

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 78

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations........... 104

          D. Responses to All Questions among WBG Collaborators
             and Non-Collaborators ............................................................... 121

          E. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ................... 138

          F. Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’
             Specializations/Sectors ............................................................... 143

          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ....... 163

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 164

          I. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2014 Ghana Questionnaire ........................................................ 165


                                                  GHANA




                                                      59
The World Bank Group                                 Ghana                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=830)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Ghana

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Ghana is headed in...?                                     (N=811)
The right direction                                                                          42.9%
The wrong direction                                                                          28.1%
Not sure                                                                                     29.0%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana.
   Please identify which of the following you consider the most important         Percentage of Respondents
   development priorities in Ghana. (Choose no more than THREE)                   (Responses Combined; N=798)
Education                                                                                    50.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                      32.2%
Health                                                                                       30.5%
Agricultural development                                                                     20.7%
Energy                                                                                       19.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                                              15.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                              13.9%
Economic growth                                                                              13.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                         12.8%
Transport                                                                                    11.0%
Poverty reduction                                                                            9.1%
Rural development                                                                            8.0%
Food security                                                                                8.0%
Domestic private sector development                                                          7.5%
Natural resource management                                                                  7.0%
Trade and exports                                                                            5.0%
Social protection                                                                            4.4%
Law and justice                                                                              4.3%
Information and communications technology                                                    3.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                                    2.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                                 2.6%
Gender equity                                                                                1.9%
Crime and violence                                                                           1.9%
Urban development                                                                            1.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                                      1.4%
Global/regional integration                                                                  1.3%
Financial markets                                                                            1.3%
Climate change                                                                               1.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                         0.6%
Disaster management                                                                          0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                       0.3%




                                                          60
The World Bank Group                               Ghana                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Ghana?                         Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=820)
Education                                                                                42.0%
Job creation/employment                                                                  35.0%
Economic growth                                                                          34.6%
Agricultural development                                                                 34.5%
Rural development                                                                        26.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                          20.7%
Energy                                                                                   15.6%
Health                                                                                   12.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                     7.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                      7.6%
Natural resource management                                                              7.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                                  6.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          6.7%
Transport                                                                                5.9%
Food security                                                                            5.9%
Trade and exports                                                                        5.1%
Law and justice                                                                          3.0%
Urban development                                                                        2.9%
Gender equity                                                                            2.7%
Social protection                                                                        2.7%
Crime and violence                                                                       2.0%
Information and communications technology                                                1.6%
Climate change                                                                           1.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                                1.2%
Financial markets                                                                        1.2%
Environmental sustainability                                                             1.1%
Disaster management                                                                      0.7%
Global/regional integration                                                              0.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                     0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                   0.4%




                                                     61
The World Bank Group                              Ghana                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth   Percentage of Respondents
   in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)                                      (Responses Combined; N=822)
Agricultural development                                                                37.8%
Job creation/employment                                                                 34.4%
Education                                                                               32.7%
Energy                                                                                  31.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                         23.4%
Trade and exports                                                                       20.4%
Rural development                                                                       16.2%
Domestic private sector development                                                     15.1%
Natural resource management                                                             14.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                                         11.4%
Health                                                                                  10.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                               7.5%
Food security                                                                           6.8%
Transport                                                                               5.1%
Financial markets                                                                       4.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                    3.9%
Information and communications technology                                               3.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                                 3.4%
Law and justice                                                                         2.6%
Social protection                                                                       2.2%
Environmental sustainability                                                            1.7%
Gender equity                                                                           1.6%
Global/regional integration                                                             1.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                    1.2%
Disaster management                                                                     1.1%
Urban development                                                                       1.1%
Climate change                                                                          0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  0.2%
Crime and violence                                                                      0.2%




                                                    62
The World Bank Group                                           Ghana                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

5. When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country,
   which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved                   Percentage of Respondents
   in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                     (Responses Combined; N=751)
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                            42.1%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                     28.9%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                     25.8%
businesses)
Consistent economic growth                                                                           18.9%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                   14.5%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                         13.2%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                            11.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                              10.5%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                                  9.5%
Better quality public services                                                                       7.2%
More reliable social safety net                                                                      5.1%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                      4.5%
A growing middle class                                                                               3.6%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                              2.3%
Other                                                                                                0.8%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                          N         DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Ghana?
                                                                                     798        0       5.12     2.39
    (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


Overall Effectiveness                                                                N         DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                     692       107      5.89     2.28
   effectiveness in Ghana.* (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                   N         DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Ghana solve its most
                                                                                     642       151      6.44     2.41
    complicated development challenges?*
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                63
The World Bank Group                                Ghana                           Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
   on development results in Ghana, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
   World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and            Percentage of Respondents
   knowledge services) in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)                     (Responses Combined; N=817)
Education                                                                                  39.7%
Agricultural development                                                                   31.6%
Health                                                                                     28.6%
Job creation/employment                                                                    25.3%
Poverty reduction                                                                          23.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                                            17.4%
Rural development                                                                          16.8%
Economic growth                                                                            16.4%
Energy                                                                                     15.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                            11.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                        10.6%
Transport                                                                                  10.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                       8.7%
Trade and exports                                                                          7.5%
Natural resource management                                                                6.4%
Food security                                                                              5.1%
Social protection                                                                          2.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                                  2.6%
Law and justice                                                                            2.4%
Financial markets                                                                          1.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                               1.7%
Global/regional integration                                                                1.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                                    1.6%
Information and communications technology                                                  1.6%
Gender equity                                                                              1.5%
Urban development                                                                          1.5%
Crime and violence                                                                         1.2%
Regulatory framework                                                                       0.9%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                     0.7%
Disaster management                                                                        0.7%
Climate change                                                                             0.5%




                                                      64
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                Percentage of Respondents (N=708)
                                                                                       nd
   activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity     Greatest       2 Greatest
   is of second greatest value in Ghana?                                Value           Value            Combined
Financial resources                                                     34.2%           17.3%              51.5%
Capacity development                                                    19.5%           18.0%              37.5%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                        18.2%           14.9%              33.1%
Technical assistance                                                    10.9%           19.2%              30.0%
Donor coordination                                                      4.5%            12.0%              16.5%
Data                                                                    5.8%            6.6%               12.4%
Convening/Facilitating                                                  3.4%            3.3%               6.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                              1.6%            5.0%               6.6%
Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                                1.6%            3.3%               4.8%
Other                                                                   0.4%            0.4%               0.9%

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support                          Effectiveness
Ghana’s efforts to achieve development results?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                       N          DK      Mean       SD
6.   Convening/Facilitating                                                   583            131      6.07     2.28
7.   Data                                                                     614            87       6.79     2.33
8.   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                         657            54       6.86     2.34
9.   Financial resources                                                      674            51       7.07     2.24
10. Technical assistance                                                      660            59       6.94     2.24
11. Mobilizing third party financial resources                                576            118      5.89     2.27
12. Donor coordination                                                        601            100      6.53     2.24
13. Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                                  502            200      5.33     2.40

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number                         Degree
of ways in Ghana. To what degree would Ghana benefit, if capacity
building were to support…?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                          N          DK      Mean       SD
14. Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                              699            50       7.61     2.24
    more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
15. The public sector, related to implementation of specific development
                                                                              717            39       7.71     2.15
    projects on the ground
16. The public sector, related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                              693            39       7.42     2.27
    sociopolitical conditions)
17. The private sector, related to institutional and policy change            701            37       7.57     2.37




                                                            65
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the                     Effectiveness
capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Ghana? (If
you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below, please
respond “Don’t know?) (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)               N         DK     Mean       SD
18. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)              554      227      6.81     2.32
19. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)        522      251      6.22     2.59
20. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                536      237      6.74     2.45
    goals)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Ghana to help                     Importance
ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it
for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of
capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                     N         DK     Mean       SD
21. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)              612      164      7.79     2.20
22. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)        620      151      7.94     2.27
23. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                613      151      7.94     2.26
    goals)

24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest         Percentage of Respondents
    WEAKNESSES in its work in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)                        (Responses Combined; N=797)
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                        24.7%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                           20.8%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Ghana                                 19.1%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                    17.1%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                          14.9%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                             14.8%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                        14.3%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                     12.0%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                           11.9%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                        9.0%
Don't know                                                                                      6.5%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                  6.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                           4.9%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                           4.8%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                        2.9%
Not client focused                                                                              2.9%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                             2.8%
Other                                                                                           0.6%




                                                            66
The World Bank Group                                  Ghana                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

25. Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the               Percentage of Respondents
    MOST effective in reducing poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)           (Responses Combined; N=791)
Capacity development                                                                           46.6%
Technical assistance                                                                           42.5%
Investment lending                                                                             31.7%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                        29.6%
Knowledge products/services                                                                    18.7%
Trust Fund management                                                                          10.5%
Don't know                                                                                     7.1%
Other                                                                                          1.0%

26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development         Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                         (Responses Combined; N=274)
Local Government                                                                               36.9%
Private Sector                                                                                 36.5%
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                       29.7%
NGOs                                                                                           21.0%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                           19.9%
Donor Community                                                                                13.0%
Media                                                                                          11.5%
Beneficiaries                                                                                  11.5%
Parliament                                                                                     4.5%
Foundations                                                                                    3.8%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                      2.6%
Don't know                                                                                     2.3%
Other                                                                                          1.0%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the                  Level of Agreement
World Bank Group’s work in Ghana?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N        DK     Mean       SD
27. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                               729       58      6.67     2.43
    development in Ghana*
28. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                               702       71      5.87     2.52
    development priorities for Ghana*
29. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                               705       62      6.20     2.48
    realistic for Ghana
30. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Ghana with
                                                                               647      120      6.46     2.65
    respect




                                                       67
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana                             Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner                         Degree
in Ghana, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                             N        DK      Mean       SD
31. Responsiveness*                                                                 651       122     5.82      2.28
32. Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*              639       123      5.52     2.15
33. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       657       104      5.53     2.27
34. Being inclusive*                                                                636       109      5.86     2.31
35. Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                  675       77       6.34     2.51
36. Staff accessibility*                                                            626       128      5.32     2.42
37. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                663       107      6.25     2.52
38. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                    613       141      5.50     2.45
    decisions important to my work
39. Collaboration with civil society*                                               658       95       5.65     2.31
40. Collaboration with the Government*                                              687       57       7.34     2.15
41. Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                       640       115      6.75     2.21
42. Collaboration with the private sector                                           617       126      5.30     2.23
43. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                   635       116      5.79     2.26
44. Being a long-term partner                                                       672       92       7.27     2.27

45. To be a more effective development partner in Ghana, do you believe that              Percentage of Respondents
    the World Bank Group should have…?                                                              (N=774)
More local presence                                                                                 80.7%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                     9.9%
Less local presence                                                                                 3.6%
Don't know                                                                                          5.7%

46. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
    place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                            Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                             (Responses Combined; N=800)
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                40.5%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                    27.3%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                      22.9%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                     22.5%
ground
The Government works inefficiently                                                                   21.1%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                   18.6%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                  18.6%
Poor donor coordination                                                                              12.8%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                                7.9%
Other                                                                                                1.3%




                                                            68
The World Bank Group                                 Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results

1.    In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be          Importance
      involved in the following areas of development in Ghana?
      (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                            N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                       759    19      8.24      2.39
2.    Information and communications technology                             752    12      8.01      2.04
3.    Transport                                                             750     8      8.16      2.02
4.    Crime and violence                                                    729    13       7.24     2.54
5.    Law and justice                                                       732    16       7.09     2.49
6.    Urban development                                                     744     9       7.85     2.14
7.    Environmental sustainability                                          742    10       8.02     1.96
8.    Regulatory framework                                                  706    33       7.36     2.32
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                745    11       7.84     2.21
10.   Poverty reduction                                                     750     5       8.66     1.86
11.   Gender equity                                                         734    12       7.20     2.37
12.   Domestic private sector development                                   730    14       7.90     2.17
13.   Foreign direct investment                                             729    13       7.85     2.11
14.   Water and sanitation                                                  751     8       8.51     1.88
15.   Trade and exports                                                     742     8       7.75     2.22
16.   Economic growth                                                       752     8       8.43     1.99
17.   Energy                                                                748    11       8.51     1.97
18.   Disaster management                                                   735    15       7.68     2.27
19.   Public sector governance/reform                                       734    22       8.04     2.14
20.   Job creation/employment                                               749    11       8.27     2.18
21.   Financial markets                                                     716    22       7.65     2.17
22.   Equality of opportunity                                               701    29       7.50     2.23
23.   Health                                                                747     8       8.68     1.79
24.   Rural development                                                     729    14       8.56     1.87
25.   Global/regional integration                                           708    24       7.51     2.30
26.   Food security                                                         735    14       8.18     2.12
27.   Education                                                             747     9       8.68     1.90
28.   Social protection                                                     733    21       7.41     2.33
29.   Climate change                                                        717    30       7.47     2.36
30.   Agricultural development                                              757     9       8.75     1.81
31.   Natural resource management                                           746    17       7.91     2.32




                                                       69
The World Bank Group                                 Ghana                     Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2.    How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of         Effectiveness
      the work it does in the following areas of development in Ghana?
      (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                         N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                    551    215     4.62      2.67
2.    Information and communications technology                          565    178     5.58      2.20
3.    Transport                                                          594    146     5.86      2.32
4.    Crime and violence                                                 506    230      4.77     2.49
5.    Law and justice                                                    515    217      4.99     2.58
6.    Urban development                                                  616    126      6.07     2.35
7.    Environmental sustainability                                       593    140      5.94     2.34
8.    Regulatory framework                                               542    187      5.62     2.39
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                             585    142      6.26     2.27
10.   Poverty reduction                                                  649    101      6.14     2.51
11.   Gender equity                                                      562    161      5.53     2.43
12.   Domestic private sector development                                546    176      5.33     2.37
13.   Foreign direct investment                                          574    159      5.95     2.36
14.   Water and sanitation                                               638    102      6.43     2.35
15.   Trade and exports                                                  560    163      5.45     2.38
16.   Economic growth                                                    618    116      5.91     2.45
17.   Energy                                                             571    155      5.51     2.61
18.   Disaster management                                                554    170      5.32     2.47
19.   Public sector governance/reform                                    599    137      6.15     2.31
20.   Job creation/employment                                            604    135      5.10     2.51
21.   Financial markets                                                  554    162      5.62     2.42
22.   Equality of opportunity                                            526    195      5.26     2.40
23.   Health                                                             623    108      6.60     2.26
24.   Rural development                                                  629    109      5.83     2.43
25.   Global/regional integration                                        557    170      5.61     2.30
26.   Food security                                                      596    127      5.75     2.37
27.   Education                                                          640     98      6.46     2.26
28.   Social protection                                                  549    184      5.22     2.48
29.   Climate change                                                     536    190      5.46     2.49
30.   Agricultural development                                           631    109      6.20     2.27
31.   Natural resource management                                        566    176      5.36     2.70




                                                      70
The World Bank Group                                            Ghana                  Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

3.   Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support         Percentage of Respondents
     the program in Ghana?                                                                    (N=781)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                       43.0%
In the country                                                                                 20.4%
Don't know                                                                                     36.6%


Achieving Development Results                                                 N         DK      Mean       SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
    development results in Ghana?*                                            693       98       6.45     2.12
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Ghana? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)           N         DK      Mean       SD
5. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
                                                                              689       92       5.58     2.52
    Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of Ghana*
6. The World Bank Group meets Ghana’s needs for knowledge services
                                                                              677       101      6.06     2.51
    (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*


Internal Evaluation Mechanisms                                                N         DK      Mean       SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and
    corrects its work in real time in Ghana?                                  575       211      6.25     2.26
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work            Percentage of Respondents
    and activities in the work you do?                                                    (N=787)
Weekly                                                                                        9.0%
Monthly                                                                                      16.3%
A few times a year                                                                           22.0%
Rarely                                                                                       22.1%
Never                                                                                        30.6%




                                                                 71
The World Bank Group                                            Ghana                    Country Opinion Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Ghana, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s                         Degree
knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                            N     DK      Mean       SD
2.    Are timely                                                                   598    159     5.90      2.27
3.    Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                                   608    137      6.07     2.32
      preparation
4.    Are relevant to Ghana's development priorities                               661     87      6.36     2.29
5.    Lead to practical solutions                                                  626    108      6.14     2.28
6.    Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                         629    117      5.73     2.34
7.    Are source of relevant information on global good practices                  632    105      6.61     2.17
8.    Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                         647     96      6.44     2.11
9.    Are adequately disseminated                                                  626    113      5.46     2.23
10.   Are translated enough into local language                                    547    191      3.89     2.46
11.   Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                   648    96       5.68     2.49
      circumstances*


Overall Evaluations                                                                 N     DK      Mean       SD
12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results in           689    98       6.56     2.13
    your country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities?*                                        669    119      6.83     2.20
      (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank                         Degree
Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Ghana’s
development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N     DK      Mean       SD
1. Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                       615    144     6.21      2.27
2.    Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                               622    128      6.43     2.30
3.    Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making
                                                                                   639    111      6.57     2.20
      appropriate adjustments)
4.    Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                                637    117      6.83     2.21




                                                                  72
The World Bank Group                                 Ghana                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                                                  Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                     N       DK       Mean      SD
5.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                          658      114      5.60     2.35
6.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects
                                                                            698       70       6.55    2.20
     and programs it supports
7.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                            636      128       5.76    2.17
     fashion
8.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                            600      156       6.06    2.29
     reasonable
9.   The World Bank Group’s requirements on its lending are reasonable      650      104       5.24    2.46
10. The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Ghana                   622      139       5.45    2.36
11. Working with the World Bank Group increases Ghana’s institutional
                                                                            696       64       6.50    2.25
    capacity
12. The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                            561      196       5.98    2.30
    changes
13. Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                            622      139       6.44    2.32
    appropriate use of them*
14. The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support          686       80       6.65    2.27

15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group         Percentage of Respondents
    operates in Ghana?                                                                  (N=779)
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Ghana                                    31.3%
Don't know                                                                                 28.8%
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is appropriate                                     20.7%
Prefer not to answer                                                                       13.9%
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Ghana                                           5.4%



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana

1.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of       Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)                             (Responses Combined; N=787)
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Ghana’s economy                   30.9%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                               29.7%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                         24.8%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                    23.0%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                21.9%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                     17.3%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Ghana’s specific challenges                 13.6%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                     9.1%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                       8.0%
Work faster                                                                                  7.4%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                             6.7%
Other                                                                                        2.0%




                                                       73
The World Bank Group                                   Ghana                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana (continued)

2.  When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
    offers in Ghana, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which
    ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer            Percentage of Respondents
    more of in Ghana? (Select only ONE response)                                               (N=781)
Financial services                                                                              34.8%
The combination is appropriate for Ghana                                                        32.3%
Knowledge products                                                                              17.0%
Don't know                                                                                      5.8%
Convening services                                                                              5.5%
None of the above                                                                               4.6%



G. Communication and Information Sharing

1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social                Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=795)
Internet                                                                                        45.8%
Local newspapers                                                                                43.3%
Local radio                                                                                     30.1%
Local television                                                                                29.3%
Blogs                                                                                           9.2%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                         8.6%
International television                                                                        5.8%
Periodicals                                                                                     5.8%
International radio                                                                             5.7%
Mobile phones                                                                                   5.4%
International newspapers                                                                        4.0%
Instant messaging                                                                               2.0%
Other                                                                                           0.9%

2.    How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?         Percentage of Respondents
      (Choose no more than TWO)                                                      (Responses Combined; N=792)
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences                                               33.6%
World Bank Group's website                                                                      33.5%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                         29.0%
World Bank Group's publications and other written materials                                     25.8%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                            19.1%
Mobile phones                                                                                   18.2%
e-Newsletters                                                                                   14.9%
Blogs                                                                                           8.5%
Instant messaging                                                                               8.3%
Other                                                                                           1.4%

3.    Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy
      under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession       Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                                        (N=749)
Yes                                                                                            26.0%
No                                                                                             74.0%




                                                        74
The World Bank Group                                 Ghana                               Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

4.    Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities      Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                                         (N=728)
Yes                                                                                             30.4%
No                                                                                              69.6%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                    (N=218)
Yes                                                                                             89.9%
No                                                                                              10.1%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                          (N=735)
Yes                                                                                             91.7%
No                                                                                              8.3%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?                                           (N=748)
Yes                                                                                             51.7%
No                                                                                              48.3%

                                                                                      Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                                  (N=518)
The World Bank Group's country website (www.worldbank.org/ghana)                                56.4%
The World Bank Group's main website (www.worldbank.org)                                         43.6%

9.    Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank       Percentage of Respondents
      Group website?                                                                            (N=526)
High speed                                                                                      63.5%
Dial-up                                                                                         36.5%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                         Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                          N       DK      Mean       SD
10. I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few
                                                                              607         115      5.08     3.05
    years ago
11. I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.                  494         146      6.48     2.65
12. I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.         491         132      7.21     2.45
13. The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                              464         224      6.86     2.60
    information about the institution.
14. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                              551         142      6.57     2.90
    find it.
15. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                              485         199      6.56     2.96
    inquiries.




                                                       75
The World Bank Group                                  Ghana                        Country Opinion Survey 2014


H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
    (Select only ONE response)                                                            (N=788)
Employee of a Ministry                                                                     25.8%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                           25.6%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                     10.0%
Private Sector Organization                                                                6.6%
NGO                                                                                        6.1%
Other                                                                                      3.0%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                              2.8%
Media                                                                                      2.8%
Independent Government Institution                                                         2.4%
Project Management Unit (PMU)                                                              2.2%
Consultant on WBG-supported Project                                                        1.6%
Community-Based Organization                                                               1.6%
Private Foundation                                                                         1.5%
Trade Union                                                                                1.5%
Office of Minister                                                                         1.4%
Multilateral Agency                                                                        1.1%
Faith-Based Group                                                                          1.0%
Office of the President                                                                     .9%
Bilateral Agency                                                                            .8%
Judiciary Branch                                                                            .6%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                   .5%

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Select only ONE response)                                                            (N=787)
Education                                                                                  22.7%
Public sector governance / public financial management / anti-corruption                   19.9%
Agriculture/ rural development / food security                                             11.6%
Social protection                                                                          6.4%
Other                                                                                      5.1%
Financial markets / banking                                                                4.4%
Health / communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            4.4%
Urban development                                                                          4.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                       3.0%
Generalist                                                                                 2.7%
Natural resource management / environmental sustainability                                 2.4%
Information and communications technology                                                  2.2%
Energy                                                                                     2.0%
Job creation/employment                                                                    1.8%
Law and justice / regulatory framework                                                     1.5%
Private sector development / foreign direct investment                                     1.5%
Transport                                                                                  1.5%
Climate change / disaster management                                                       1.4%
Gender equity / equality of opportunity                                                    1.0%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group   Percentage of Respondents
   in your country?                                                                       (N=783)
Yes                                                                                        41.8%
No                                                                                         58.2%


                                                        76
The World Bank Group                                 Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


H. Background Information (continued)

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in   Percentage of Respondents
  Ghana? (Select all that apply)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=711)
None                                                                                       53.9%
The World Bank (IDA)                                                                       34.7%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                16.6%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                        10.8%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?                              (N=645)
Yes                                                                                        32.7%
No                                                                                         67.3%

6. If yes, what was your view on the two institutions working together in        Percentage of Respondents
   Ghana? (Select only ONE response)                                                      (N=206)
Collaborating but needs improvement                                                        46.6%
Working well together                                                                      33.5%
In conflict                                                                                13.1%
Don't know                                                                                 4.9%
Other                                                                                      1.9%

7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank      Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)                                      (Responses Combined; N=722)
Observer                                                                                   47.5%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                          29.8%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                             27.0%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                         25.5%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                              21.7%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
8. Which best represents your geographic location?                                        (N=787)
Northern Sector                                                                            32.4%
Eastern Sector                                                                             27.8%
Western Sector                                                                             21.2%
Southern Sector                                                                            18.6%




                                                       77
The World Bank Group                                                                    Ghana                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

Office of the President/Minister N=18  Employee of a Ministry N=203  Consultant on WBG-supported Project/PMU N=30
Local Government N=202  Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency N=15  Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=74
NGO/CBO/Private Foundation N=73  Media N=22  Independent Government Institution N=19  Trade Union N=12
Academia N=79  Other N=41

A. General Issues Facing Ghana

In general, how would you say that Ghana is headed in...?
                                        Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                          the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
                                       President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
Percentage of Respondents               Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
The right direction                      50.0%        51.3%       33.3%       41.9%     42.9%          35.6%        46.6%     54.5%      47.1%       41.7%    26.9%         37.5%
The wrong direction                      12.5%        25.6%       46.7%       25.8%     50.0%          32.9%        24.7%     22.7%      11.8%       33.3%    35.9%         27.5%
Not sure                                 37.5%        23.1%       20.0%       32.3%     7.1%           31.5%        28.8%     22.7%      41.2%       25.0%    37.2%         35.0%




                                                                                        78
The World Bank Group                                                                             Ghana                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Ghana. (Choose no more than THREE)
                                        Office of                     Consultant                                  Private/      NGO/
                                           the          Employee       on WBG-                   Bilateral/      Financial      CBO/               Independent
Percentage of Respondents              President/         of a        supported        Local    Multilateral      Sector/      Private             Government       Trade
(Responses Combined)                    Minister         Ministry    Project/PMU      Govt.        Agency      Private Bank    Found.     Media     Institution     Union      Academia     Other
Social protection                              5.9%     5.6%           0.0%         3.6%         15.4%          7.0%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         8.3%        6.8%         2.5%
Transport*                                     0.0%     10.6%          6.7%         13.8%        7.7%           15.5%         5.6%       31.8%        5.3%         16.7%       10.8%        2.5%
Public sector governance/reform                11.8%    19.2%          10.0%        16.9%        7.7%           14.1%         11.3%      9.1%         10.5%        8.3%        10.8%        15.0%
Global/regional integration*                   0.0%     0.5%           0.0%         1.0%         0.0%           1.4%          7.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Gender equity*                                 5.9%     2.5%           3.3%         0.0%         0.0%           7.0%          0.0%       0.0%         5.3%         0.0%        1.4%         0.0%
Domestic private sector development            11.8%    4.5%           13.3%        11.3%        0.0%           7.0%          5.6%       4.5%         21.1%        0.0%        4.1%         10.0%
Foreign direct investment                      5.9%     1.5%           0.0%         3.6%         7.7%           1.4%          5.6%       4.5%         0.0%         8.3%        0.0%         0.0%
Water and sanitation                           5.9%     9.6%           16.7%        19.5%        7.7%           8.5%          7.0%       13.6%        5.3%         16.7%       17.6%        10.0%
Anti-corruption                                23.5%    12.1%          16.7%        11.8%        15.4%          8.5%          15.5%      18.2%        21.1%        8.3%        18.9%        25.0%
Job creation/employment                        17.6%    37.9%          30.0%        28.2%        30.8%          38.0%         36.6%      27.3%        31.6%        25.0%       31.1%        25.0%
Rural development                              11.8%    8.6%           16.7%        9.2%         0.0%           2.8%          8.5%       13.6%        5.3%         8.3%        5.4%         5.0%
Financial markets                              0.0%     1.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           1.4%          1.4%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        4.1%         5.0%
Urban development                              5.9%     1.5%           3.3%         1.5%         7.7%           1.4%          0.0%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        4.1%         0.0%
Environmental sustainability                   5.9%     2.0%           3.3%         2.6%         0.0%           1.4%          4.2%       4.5%         0.0%         0.0%        4.1%         5.0%
Equality of opportunity                        0.0%     0.5%           0.0%         1.5%         0.0%           1.4%          4.2%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        1.4%         2.5%
Health*                                        17.6%    31.3%          13.3%        35.4%        38.5%          21.1%         40.8%      13.6%        21.1%        41.7%       29.7%        25.0%
Education                                      47.1%    59.1%          46.7%        50.3%        38.5%          38.0%         47.9%      45.5%        36.8%        41.7%       54.1%        42.5%
Poverty reduction                              5.9%     8.1%           23.3%        7.2%         15.4%          8.5%          5.6%       13.6%        5.3%         25.0%       12.2%        7.5%
Energy                                         17.6%    23.7%          10.0%        22.1%        7.7%           23.9%         19.7%      9.1%         26.3%        8.3%        12.2%        25.0%
Food security                                  5.9%     6.6%           10.0%        5.1%         23.1%          9.9%          14.1%      9.1%         10.5%        25.0%       4.1%         10.0%
Climate change                                 0.0%     1.5%           3.3%         0.0%         0.0%           1.4%          1.4%       4.5%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Agricultural development                       11.8%    18.7%          33.3%        20.5%        7.7%           28.2%         14.1%      31.8%        26.3%        25.0%       23.0%        17.5%
Trade and exports                              5.9%     5.1%           16.7%        3.6%         0.0%           4.2%          4.2%       0.0%         15.8%        8.3%        4.1%         2.5%
Crime and violence                             0.0%     1.5%           3.3%         1.5%         15.4%          0.0%          2.8%       4.5%         5.3%         0.0%        2.7%         0.0%
Economic growth*                               41.2%    11.1%          3.3%         12.3%        7.7%           18.3%         11.3%      9.1%         10.5%        8.3%        14.9%        20.0%
Law and justice                                17.6%    4.5%           6.7%         3.1%         7.7%           2.8%          2.8%       0.0%         5.3%         0.0%        4.1%         12.5%
Regulatory framework                           0.0%     0.5%           0.0%         0.5%         0.0%           0.0%          1.4%       0.0%         5.3%         0.0%        1.4%         0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable
                                                0.0%     0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%      0.0%         5.3%         0.0%        1.4%          0.0%
diseases*
Natural resource management*                    0.0%     5.1%           6.7%         3.6%         0.0%          15.5%         12.7%      13.6%        21.1%        25.0%       5.4%          5.0%
Disaster management*                            0.0%     0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         7.7%          1.4%          1.4%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Information and communications
                                                5.9%     0.5%           3.3%         1.5%        15.4%           5.6%          2.8%      4.5%         0.0%         0.0%        6.8%         10.0%
technology*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                 79
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
Water and sanitation                           16.7%       8.9%         0.0%        10.1%     0.0%           6.8%         6.8%      14.3%      0.0%        0.0%     2.6%          4.9%
Equality of opportunity                        11.1%       6.4%         0.0%        6.5%      23.1%          5.4%         1.4%      9.5%       0.0%        9.1%     7.8%          7.3%
Economic growth*                               38.9%       36.5%        46.7%       30.7%     38.5%          31.1%        50.7%     38.1%      57.9%       36.4%    22.1%         26.8%
Climate change                                 0.0%        1.0%         0.0%        1.0%      7.7%           0.0%         1.4%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     2.6%          0.0%
Global/regional integration*                   0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.5%      7.7%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       5.3%        0.0%     0.0%          0.0%
Gender equity*                                 11.1%       3.4%         3.3%        1.5%      23.1%          4.1%         1.4%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%          2.4%
Rural development                              16.7%       31.0%        33.3%       26.6%     0.0%           18.9%        26.0%     23.8%      5.3%        36.4%    24.7%         24.4%
Urban development                              11.1%       2.5%         0.0%        4.0%      7.7%           2.7%         2.7%      0.0%       5.3%        9.1%     0.0%          0.0%
Regulatory framework                           0.0%        0.0%         3.3%        0.5%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          0.0%
Social protection                              0.0%        4.9%         0.0%        4.5%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     2.6%          0.0%
Law and justice                                0.0%        3.0%         0.0%        4.5%      0.0%           2.7%         5.5%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          2.4%
Transport                                      11.1%       5.4%         6.7%        6.0%      0.0%           6.8%         8.2%      9.5%       10.5%       0.0%     5.2%          4.9%
Crime and violence*                            0.0%        1.0%         6.7%        1.0%      0.0%           1.4%         0.0%      0.0%       5.3%        0.0%     5.2%          7.3%
Communicable/non-communicable
                                                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%       0.5%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%     4.8%       0.0%        0.0%      1.3%          0.0%
diseases
Information and communications
                                                0.0%        1.0%         3.3%       2.0%       0.0%           0.0%         1.4%     0.0%       5.3%        0.0%      2.6%          0.0%
technology
Anti-corruption*                               16.7%       14.3%        23.3%       18.1%     23.1%          32.4%        19.2%     14.3%      26.3%       27.3%    36.4%         24.4%
Domestic private sector development            0.0%        7.9%         13.3%       9.0%      7.7%           8.1%         6.8%      9.5%       15.8%       0.0%     3.9%          4.9%
Foreign direct investment                      0.0%        2.0%         0.0%        1.0%      0.0%           1.4%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     2.6%          0.0%
Education                                      27.8%       48.8%        40.0%       41.7%     15.4%          36.5%        38.4%     47.6%      26.3%       36.4%    41.6%         46.3%
Energy                                         5.6%        23.6%        13.3%       12.1%     15.4%          12.2%        21.9%     4.8%       26.3%       9.1%     14.3%         12.2%
Public sector governance/reform                5.6%        5.9%         6.7%        8.5%      7.7%           8.1%         4.1%      0.0%       10.5%       9.1%     3.9%          2.4%
Natural resource management                    5.6%        7.9%         0.0%        6.0%      0.0%           13.5%        9.6%      0.0%       10.5%       0.0%     11.7%         4.9%
Environmental sustainability                   0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        2.0%      7.7%           2.7%         0.0%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          0.0%
Disaster management*                           0.0%        0.0%         10.0%       0.0%      0.0%           1.4%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          2.4%
Health*                                        33.3%       11.3%        10.0%       14.1%     30.8%          14.9%        4.1%      19.0%      0.0%        0.0%     9.1%          24.4%
Agricultural development*                      50.0%       25.6%        43.3%       33.2%     38.5%          44.6%        37.0%     38.1%      47.4%       54.5%    33.8%         48.8%
Job creation/employment                        27.8%       32.5%        23.3%       38.7%     30.8%          31.1%        38.4%     33.3%      31.6%       45.5%    40.3%         34.1%
Financial markets                              0.0%        1.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         4.1%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     3.9%          2.4%
Trade and exports                              5.6%        5.4%         13.3%       5.0%      0.0%           4.1%         6.8%      4.8%       5.3%        9.1%     2.6%          2.4%
Food security                                  5.6%        5.9%         0.0%        5.5%      0.0%           2.7%         4.1%      9.5%       5.3%        9.1%     11.7%         7.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              80
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
Energy                                         38.9%       32.0%        33.3%       32.5%     14.3%          23.0%        41.7%     33.3%      47.4%       0.0%     36.7%         22.0%
Gender equity                                  5.6%        3.4%         3.3%        0.0%      7.1%           4.1%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%          0.0%
Equality of opportunity                        11.1%       3.4%         3.3%        4.0%      14.3%          0.0%         2.8%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     3.8%          0.0%
Social protection                              0.0%        3.4%         3.3%        1.0%      7.1%           1.4%         4.2%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     3.8%          0.0%
Global/regional integration                    5.6%        0.5%         0.0%        1.5%      0.0%           0.0%         1.4%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     5.1%          0.0%
Climate change                                 0.0%        0.5%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%          0.0%
Anti-corruption                                22.2%       19.2%        33.3%       16.5%     28.6%          29.7%        27.8%     23.8%      42.1%       25.0%    31.6%         24.4%
Disaster management                            0.0%        0.5%         0.0%        1.5%      7.1%           0.0%         2.8%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%          4.9%
Rural development                              11.1%       14.8%        23.3%       21.0%     7.1%           13.5%        20.8%     9.5%       15.8%       0.0%     13.9%         9.8%
Foreign direct investment                      11.1%       6.9%         3.3%        6.0%      0.0%           6.8%         8.3%      4.8%       0.0%        25.0%    12.7%         14.6%
Urban development                              0.0%        0.0%         3.3%        3.0%      0.0%           1.4%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          0.0%
Water and sanitation                           5.6%        4.9%         3.3%        4.5%      0.0%           0.0%         2.8%      14.3%      10.5%       0.0%     1.3%          2.4%
Education                                      22.2%       34.0%        23.3%       32.0%     42.9%          36.5%        27.8%     19.0%      31.6%       25.0%    31.6%         41.5%
Information and communications
                                                0.0%        2.5%         6.7%       4.5%       7.1%           5.4%         4.2%     0.0%       0.0%        8.3%      1.3%          4.9%
technology
Regulatory framework*                           0.0%        0.5%         0.0%       3.5%       7.1%           0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        8.3%      0.0%          0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable
                                                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%       0.5%       7.1%           0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%
diseases*
Trade and exports                              11.1%       23.2%        13.3%       18.5%     7.1%           28.4%        15.3%     4.8%       26.3%       41.7%    26.6%         12.2%
Public sector governance/reform                5.6%        14.8%        0.0%        13.0%     7.1%           4.1%         4.2%      14.3%      5.3%        0.0%     13.9%         12.2%
Domestic private sector development            5.6%        17.2%        10.0%       15.0%     14.3%          18.9%        12.5%     33.3%      10.5%       8.3%     6.3%          22.0%
Job creation/employment                        33.3%       36.9%        33.3%       30.5%     42.9%          32.4%        43.1%     33.3%      36.8%       41.7%    31.6%         31.7%
Agricultural development                       38.9%       36.5%        63.3%       40.5%     7.1%           39.2%        30.6%     42.9%      31.6%       41.7%    38.0%         36.6%
Food security*                                 11.1%       4.4%         3.3%        4.5%      35.7%          9.5%         15.3%     9.5%       10.5%       25.0%    2.5%          7.3%
Transport                                      5.6%        5.4%         6.7%        3.5%      0.0%           5.4%         4.2%      9.5%       10.5%       0.0%     5.1%          7.3%
Natural resource management                    11.1%       15.3%        20.0%       15.5%     7.1%           13.5%        13.9%     14.3%      5.3%        16.7%    17.7%         14.6%
Environmental sustainability                   0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        3.0%      7.1%           4.1%         0.0%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          4.9%
Health                                         27.8%       12.8%        0.0%        13.0%     14.3%          10.8%        9.7%      0.0%       5.3%        16.7%    7.6%          12.2%
Law and justice                                11.1%       2.5%         6.7%        2.5%      0.0%           1.4%         1.4%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     2.5%          2.4%
Crime and violence*                            0.0%        0.0%         0.0%        0.5%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       5.3%        0.0%     0.0%          0.0%
Financial markets                              0.0%        3.0%         3.3%        4.5%      7.1%           6.8%         5.6%      4.8%       5.3%        16.7%    3.8%          9.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              81
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government      Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution    Union    Academia        Other
Better employment opportunities for
                                               33.3%       24.0%        20.7%       27.2%     41.7%          35.3%        25.7%     42.9%       5.6%        33.3%      35.6%        34.3%
young people
Better employment opportunities for
                                               33.3%       15.3%        20.7%       7.8%       8.3%           5.9%        14.3%     4.8%       16.7%        25.0%       9.6%         8.6%
women*
Greater access to micro-finance for
                                               26.7%        9.3%        13.8%       10.0%     33.3%          17.6%        20.0%     23.8%      22.2%        25.0%       8.2%        11.4%
the poor*
Greater voice and participation for
citizens to help ensure greater                 6.7%       13.7%         6.9%       16.7%      8.3%           8.8%        21.4%     14.3%      11.1%        8.3%       15.1%         8.6%
accountability
Greater access to health and
                                                6.7%       13.1%        10.3%       8.9%       0.0%          11.8%         5.7%     9.5%        0.0%        0.0%        9.6%        11.4%
nutrition for citizens
Better entrepreneurial opportunities
(i.e., to start small and medium sized         13.3%       22.4%        24.1%       28.3%     25.0%          23.5%        22.9%     28.6%      44.4%        33.3%      24.7%        31.4%
businesses)
A growing middle class*                        13.3%        2.7%         0.0%       3.9%      16.7%           0.0%         8.6%     0.0%        5.6%        0.0%        2.7%         2.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who
                                                0.0%       11.5%        10.3%       11.7%      0.0%          10.3%         7.1%     4.8%       11.1%        0.0%       13.7%         8.6%
live in rural areas
Better opportunity for the poor who
                                               13.3%        0.0%         3.4%       2.2%       8.3%           5.9%         0.0%     4.8%        5.6%        0.0%        2.7%         2.9%
live in urban areas*
Consistent economic growth                     13.3%       17.5%        10.3%       19.4%     25.0%          25.0%        18.6%     23.8%      27.8%        16.7%      19.2%        17.1%
More reliable social safety net                0.0%        6.0%         6.9%        5.6%      0.0%           2.9%         5.7%      4.8%       5.6%         0.0%       5.5%         5.7%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                6.7%        3.8%         13.8%       5.0%      0.0%           1.5%         5.7%      0.0%       0.0%         8.3%       8.2%         0.0%
Education and training that better
                                               20.0%       53.6%        48.3%       41.7%     16.7%          38.2%        32.9%     33.3%      33.3%        41.7%      35.6%        48.6%
ensure job opportunity*
Better quality public services                  6.7%        4.4%        10.3%       7.8%       8.3%          11.8%        11.4%     4.8%       11.1%        8.3%        8.2%         2.9%
Other                                           0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        1.1%       0.0%          0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%         0.0%        1.4%         5.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              82
The World Bank Group                                                                                          Ghana                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
                                     Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                      President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                       Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                      N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
How familiar are you with the work
of the World Bank Group in           17       5.35    198    5.09     29     6.17    193    5.16   14     5.00        71     5.03   71    5.52    21     4.43    19    6.21    12     5.75   78    4.86     38       4.79
Ghana?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

                                     Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                      President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                       Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia            Other
                                      N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N        Mean
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank         16       5.31    175    6.10     26     6.69    174    5.78   10     6.50        60     5.62   61    6.30    16     6.00    19    6.63    11     5.27   64    5.70     31       5.13
Group’s effectiveness in Ghana.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                     Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                      President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                       Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia            Other
                                      N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N        Mean
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Ghana solve its     14       5.93    160    6.42     28     6.82    164    6.02   11     7.18        60     7.00   58    6.88    14     6.64    18    7.56     8     7.25   57    6.49     28       6.29
most complicated development
challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                 83
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Ghana, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
Social protection*                             11.8%       3.0%         0.0%        1.0%      6.7%           6.8%         4.2%      0.0%       0.0%        25.0%    1.3%          0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                17.6%       23.0%        13.3%       18.7%     40.0%          16.2%        8.3%      22.7%      15.8%       8.3%     15.2%         7.5%
Transport                                      23.5%       12.0%        6.7%        8.6%      6.7%           12.2%        16.7%     22.7%      15.8%       8.3%     6.3%          2.5%
Poverty reduction                              11.8%       23.5%        30.0%       20.2%     13.3%          23.0%        19.4%     27.3%      5.3%        25.0%    30.4%         35.0%
Global/regional integration                    0.0%        0.5%         0.0%        1.5%      0.0%           1.4%         5.6%      9.1%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          0.0%
Gender equity                                  0.0%        3.0%         3.3%        0.5%      6.7%           1.4%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          2.5%
Crime and violence*                            5.9%        1.0%         0.0%        0.5%      13.3%          2.7%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          2.5%
Domestic private sector
                                               11.8%       11.5%        20.0%       9.6%      13.3%           9.5%         6.9%     4.5%       36.8%       0.0%      6.3%         10.0%
development*
Rural development*                             11.8%       18.0%        10.0%       23.2%     6.7%           8.1%         12.5%     9.1%       0.0%        0.0%     21.5%         17.5%
Foreign direct investment*                     0.0%        1.0%         0.0%        3.0%      13.3%          4.1%         4.2%      0.0%       0.0%        8.3%     0.0%          10.0%
Water and sanitation                           11.8%       10.0%        3.3%        12.1%     6.7%           4.1%         6.9%      13.6%      15.8%       8.3%     6.3%          2.5%
Energy                                         17.6%       18.0%        20.0%       16.2%     6.7%           12.2%        13.9%     13.6%      21.1%       8.3%     19.0%         5.0%
Job creation/employment                        23.5%       23.5%        40.0%       22.2%     13.3%          33.8%        26.4%     22.7%      36.8%       25.0%    19.0%         20.0%
Financial markets                              0.0%        1.0%         0.0%        1.5%      6.7%           1.4%         5.6%      4.5%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          2.5%
Urban development                              5.9%        2.0%         0.0%        2.5%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        8.3%     1.3%          0.0%
Environmental sustainability                   11.8%       2.0%         0.0%        1.5%      0.0%           1.4%         1.4%      4.5%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          2.5%
Equality of opportunity                        0.0%        1.5%         6.7%        2.0%      0.0%           4.1%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          0.0%
Health                                         35.3%       26.5%        26.7%       29.8%     20.0%          29.7%        29.2%     27.3%      15.8%       41.7%    29.1%         32.5%
Education                                      29.4%       39.5%        26.7%       46.0%     40.0%          27.0%        37.5%     27.3%      15.8%       41.7%    44.3%         47.5%
Food security*                                 0.0%        6.5%         6.7%        4.0%      26.7%          1.4%         6.9%      4.5%       0.0%        8.3%     6.3%          2.5%
Climate change                                 0.0%        0.5%         0.0%        0.5%      0.0%           0.0%         1.4%      4.5%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%          0.0%
Agricultural development                       35.3%       27.0%        40.0%       34.8%     13.3%          32.4%        27.8%     40.9%      42.1%       25.0%    35.4%         32.5%
Trade and exports                              5.9%        6.0%         10.0%       5.6%      6.7%           10.8%        12.5%     4.5%       15.8%       25.0%    7.6%          2.5%
Economic growth                                11.8%       18.5%        13.3%       13.6%     6.7%           16.2%        22.2%     13.6%      36.8%       8.3%     12.7%         15.0%
Law and justice                                11.8%       2.0%         0.0%        2.5%      0.0%           4.1%         1.4%      0.0%       5.3%        0.0%     2.5%          0.0%
Regulatory framework                           0.0%        1.0%         3.3%        0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         2.8%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          2.5%
Communicable/non-communicable
                                                0.0%        0.0%         3.3%       0.5%       6.7%           1.4%         1.4%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%
diseases
Natural resource management*                    5.9%        4.5%        3.3%        3.5%      13.3%          10.8%        6.9%      4.5%       10.5%       8.3%     6.3%          20.0%
Anti-corruption                                 0.0%        9.5%        13.3%       9.1%      6.7%           18.9%        15.3%     13.6%      10.5%       16.7%    13.9%         20.0%
Information and communications
                                                0.0%        2.0%         0.0%       0.0%       0.0%           2.7%         1.4%     4.5%       0.0%        0.0%      5.1%          0.0%
technology
Disaster management                             0.0%        0.5%         0.0%       1.0%       6.7%           1.4%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%          2.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                              84
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Ghana?
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Greatest Value                               President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government         Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution       Union   Academia        Other
Convening/Facilitating                         0.0%        4.9%         7.1%        2.3%      0.0%           3.3%         3.2%      11.8%       0.0%           0.0%     2.7%          0.0%
Data                                           7.1%        3.8%         10.7%       4.6%      12.5%          5.0%         4.8%      11.8%       6.3%           0.0%     8.2%          9.7%
Policy advice, studies, analyses               21.4%       20.8%        28.6%       19.1%     0.0%           13.3%        14.5%     17.6%       31.3%          25.0%    8.2%          16.1%
Financial resources                            21.4%       39.9%        25.0%       36.4%     25.0%          35.0%        32.3%     11.8%       18.8%          16.7%    41.1%         29.0%
Capacity development*                          42.9%       14.8%        17.9%       16.2%     50.0%          15.0%        27.4%     29.4%       12.5%          50.0%    20.5%         29.0%
Technical assistance                           0.0%        8.7%         0.0%        12.7%     0.0%           11.7%        12.9%     5.9%        25.0%          8.3%     13.7%         12.9%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                                0.0%        1.1%         3.6%       1.7%       0.0%           3.3%         1.6%     0.0%        0.0%           0.0%      1.4%          3.2%
resources
Donor coordination                              7.1%        4.9%         7.1%       5.8%       0.0%           8.3%         1.6%     5.9%        0.0%           0.0%      1.4%          0.0%
Linkage to South-South knowledge
                                                0.0%        0.5%         0.0%       0.0%      12.5%           5.0%         1.6%     5.9%        6.3%           0.0%      2.7%          0.0%
sharing*
Other                                           0.0%        0.5%         0.0%       1.2%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%     0.0%        0.0%           0.0%      0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
 nd                                             the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
2 Greatest Value                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government         Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution       Union   Academia        Other
Convening/Facilitating*                        7.1%        1.1%         7.1%        0.6%      14.3%          10.2%        3.2%      0.0%        6.3%           25.0%    2.8%          6.7%
Data                                           7.1%        7.7%         10.7%       6.4%      0.0%           5.1%         4.8%      11.8%       12.5%          0.0%     6.9%          3.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses               0.0%        16.0%        7.1%        15.1%     0.0%           13.6%        16.1%     11.8%       6.3%           8.3%     20.8%         16.7%
Financial resources                            21.4%       16.0%        17.9%       20.3%     0.0%           13.6%        14.5%     23.5%       12.5%          25.0%    19.4%         10.0%
Capacity development                           28.6%       19.3%        3.6%        20.9%     28.6%          10.2%        19.4%     11.8%       31.3%          0.0%     13.9%         16.7%
Technical assistance                           7.1%        19.9%        25.0%       22.1%     28.6%          20.3%        16.1%     17.6%       6.3%           25.0%    16.7%         20.0%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                                0.0%        4.4%        14.3%       2.9%       0.0%          10.2%         4.8%     11.8%       0.0%           0.0%      5.6%          6.7%
resources
Donor coordination                             21.4%       10.5%        14.3%       9.3%      28.6%          15.3%        14.5%     11.8%       12.5%          16.7%    13.9%         13.3%
Linkage to South-South knowledge
                                                7.1%        4.4%         0.0%       2.3%       0.0%           0.0%         6.5%     0.0%        12.5%          0.0%      0.0%          3.3%
sharing
Other                                           0.0%        0.6%         0.0%       0.0%       0.0%           1.7%         0.0%     0.0%        0.0%           0.0%      0.0%          3.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              85
The World Bank Group                                                                                            Ghana                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Ghana’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                       Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                        President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                         Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                        N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Convening/Facilitating                 14      5.29     139    6.26     24     6.83    138    5.86   12     5.58        58     6.16   58    6.07    14     5.79    17    7.71    11     5.82   51    5.80     31       5.77
Data                                   12      6.33     143    7.20     25     6.56    151    6.63   11     6.45        61     7.11   57    6.96    15     7.13    17    7.82    11     6.18   56    6.34     32       6.44
Policy advice, studies, analyses*      15      5.93     161    7.11     28     7.00    158    6.88   12     5.42        63     7.37   62    6.84    15     7.20    19    8.16    12     6.17   58    6.14     34       6.47
Financial resources*                   12      6.67     164    7.46     28     7.11    176    7.25   11     6.64        67     7.18   58    6.67    17     6.65    18    7.44    11     5.36   60    6.38     31       7.26
Technical assistance*                  13      5.54     164    7.24     26     7.04    165    7.18   11     6.00        67     7.18   61    6.97    15     6.00    18    8.11    11     6.55   56    5.79     33       6.67
Mobilizing third party financial
                                       13      4.23     142    6.09     24     6.04    143    6.06   12     4.92        62     5.69   51    6.04    12     5.33    17    6.06     9     3.44   52    5.75     24       6.75
resources*
Donor coordination*                    11      5.09     149    6.98     24     7.00    144    6.80   11     6.27        62     6.65   55    6.05    12     6.08    17    6.12    11     5.73   56    6.04     29       6.21
Linkage to South-South knowledge
                                       12      4.83     126    5.84     20     5.25    118    5.25   10     4.30        51     5.71   47    5.15    11     4.27    18    5.50     8     4.38   48    4.96     23       5.43
sharing
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Ghana. To what degree would Ghana benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                       Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                        President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                         Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia            Other
                                        N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N        Mean
Groups outside of government
(e.g., civil society, media) to help
                                       12      7.92     173    7.91     28     8.50    173    7.34   13     6.54        63     7.38   63    7.51    19     7.63    19    8.05    12     6.92   68    7.41     34       7.71
them more effectively engage and
participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to
implementation of specific
                                       14      7.71     178    8.15     27     7.93    180    7.63   12     7.83        65     7.94   63    7.46    19     7.26    18    8.56    12     7.17   69    6.87     37       7.24
development projects on the
ground*
The public sector , related to
changing institutions
                                       14      7.71     169    8.05     28     7.64    175    7.09   12     7.58        62     7.29   63    7.43    15     7.67    18    8.33    12     6.42   67    6.69     37       7.32
(organizations or sociopolitical
conditions)*
The private sector , related to
                                       14      7.64     170    8.01     28     7.32    173    7.42   13     7.46        66     7.27   64    7.64    18     7.61    18    8.17    12     6.83   70    7.40     34       7.32
institutional and policy change
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                   86
The World Bank Group                                                                                             Ghana                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Ghana?
                                        Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                         President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                          Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                         N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Project implementation (or other
                                        11      7.18     140    7.11     24     6.92    138    6.83   11     5.36        43     7.19   50    6.26    16     5.13    15    7.93     9     5.44   54    6.78     22      6.27
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        12      6.08     122    6.67     22     6.23    129    6.29   10     5.20        47     5.96   50    5.80    15     4.73    15    6.73     7     5.71   50    6.30     22      6.18
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       13      5.00     134    7.14     25     7.20    131    6.76   10     5.10        48     6.58   45    6.42    12     5.75    16    7.88     8     7.38   53    6.70     22      5.55
goals)*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Ghana to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in
the following aspects of capacity building?
                                        Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                         President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                          Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                         N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Project implementation (or other
                                        11      6.55     144    8.17     26     7.77    155    7.70    9     5.89        59     7.61   53    7.43    15     7.47    15    8.60     9     7.11   60    7.83     32      8.22
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        12      7.17     145    8.32     25     8.28    158    8.04   10     5.70        61     7.39   53    8.08    15     7.13    16    8.31     9     7.22   61    7.67     33      8.09
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       13      6.62     147    8.37     27     7.85    155    7.76    9     7.11        60     7.63   52    8.15    13     7.38    16    8.38     9     6.56   59    7.81     32      8.38
goals)*
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                    87
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
Staff too inaccessible*                         5.9%       19.4%         3.4%       11.2%      7.1%          20.8%        22.5%     22.7%      5.3%        16.7%     9.0%         12.8%
Not exploring alternative policy
                                               11.8%        8.2%        27.6%       6.6%       7.1%          11.1%        11.3%     4.5%       10.5%       0.0%     11.5%          5.1%
options
Not adequately sensitive to
                                               35.3%       21.9%        24.1%       16.3%     21.4%          13.9%        19.7%     4.5%       36.8%       41.7%    15.4%         20.5%
political/social realities in Ghana
Not enough public disclosure of its
                                               17.6%       24.0%         6.9%       26.0%     21.4%          29.2%        31.0%     45.5%      26.3%       33.3%    21.8%         10.3%
work
Arrogant in its approach                       0.0%        1.5%         3.4%        1.5%      14.3%          5.6%          5.6%     4.5%       0.0%        0.0%     1.3%          7.7%
Not aligned with country priorities            23.5%       15.3%        17.2%       11.7%     35.7%          19.4%         8.5%     4.5%       15.8%       8.3%     15.4%         10.3%
The credibility of its knowledge/data          11.8%       3.6%         13.8%       4.6%      14.3%          1.4%          7.0%     9.1%       5.3%        0.0%     1.3%          2.6%
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                                5.9%       11.7%        17.2%       21.9%      0.0%          15.3%        12.7%     13.6%      10.5%       8.3%     10.3%         10.3%
complex
Not willing to honestly criticize
policies and reform efforts in the              5.9%       21.9%        24.1%       16.8%      7.1%          13.9%        15.5%     18.2%      10.5%       25.0%    17.9%         10.3%
country
Too influenced by developed
                                                5.9%       21.9%        24.1%       20.4%      0.0%          12.5%        21.1%     18.2%      26.3%       25.0%    29.5%         25.6%
countries
Imposing technocratic solutions
                                               17.6%       13.3%         0.0%       11.7%     14.3%           6.9%        12.7%     18.2%      0.0%        0.0%     15.4%         17.9%
without regard to political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                                5.9%        1.5%         6.9%       5.1%      14.3%           8.3%         2.8%     9.1%       15.8%       8.3%      5.1%          7.7%
slow
Too bureaucratic in its operational
                                                0.0%       11.2%        10.3%       16.3%      7.1%          12.5%         4.2%     4.5%       21.1%       0.0%     12.8%         15.4%
policies and procedures
Not aligned with other donors’ work             5.9%        3.6%         3.4%       3.1%       7.1%           1.4%         2.8%     4.5%       0.0%        0.0%      1.3%          2.6%
Not collaborating enough with non-
                                                5.9%        4.6%         6.9%       5.6%       7.1%           9.7%         5.6%     4.5%       5.3%        0.0%      6.4%          7.7%
state actors
Not client focused                             5.9%         2.6%         6.9%       2.0%      14.3%           0.0%         4.2%     0.0%       10.5%       8.3%     2.6%          0.0%
Other                                          5.9%         1.0%         3.4%       0.0%      0.0%            0.0%         0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     0.0%          2.6%
Don't know                                     11.8%        5.1%         0.0%       7.7%      0.0%            5.6%         5.6%     4.5%       0.0%        8.3%     11.5%         12.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              88
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union     Academia        Other
Capacity development                           44.4%       45.4%        34.5%       54.1%     35.7%          43.7%        47.9%     47.6%      31.6%       50.0%      48.1%         36.8%
Policy based lending / budget
                                               27.8%       29.6%        20.7%       35.7%     50.0%          19.7%        31.0%     19.0%      47.4%       25.0%      26.0%         23.7%
support to the Government
Knowledge products/services*                   11.1%       15.8%        37.9%       14.8%     7.1%           25.4%        23.9%     23.8%      26.3%       25.0%      11.7%         26.3%
Investment lending                             44.4%       36.7%        27.6%       31.1%     35.7%          26.8%        31.0%     23.8%      21.1%       25.0%      36.4%         18.4%
Technical assistance                           33.3%       43.9%        62.1%       39.8%     42.9%          39.4%        42.3%     42.9%      57.9%       25.0%      42.9%         52.6%
Trust Fund management*                         11.1%       10.2%        13.8%       5.1%      21.4%          15.5%        14.1%     9.5%       15.8%       41.7%      5.2%          13.2%
Other                                          0.0%        0.5%         3.4%        0.0%      0.0%           1.4%         0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       5.2%          2.6%
Don't know                                     5.6%        7.1%         0.0%        7.7%      0.0%           9.9%         4.2%      9.5%       0.0%        0.0%       9.1%          7.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your
country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union     Academia        Other
Academia/Think Tanks/Research
                                               38.9%       31.8%        13.8%       26.8%     21.4%          30.0%        18.3%     19.0%      21.1%       25.0%      44.9%         29.3%
Institutes*
Donor Community*                               0.0%        21.2%        6.9%        12.6%     7.1%           12.9%        9.9%      14.3%      5.3%        8.3%       7.7%          9.8%
Media*                                         16.7%       7.6%         17.2%       11.1%     35.7%          12.9%        9.9%      28.6%      0.0%        8.3%       10.3%         14.6%
NGOs*                                          16.7%       14.6%        37.9%       14.6%     21.4%          27.1%        42.3%     19.0%      36.8%       50.0%      16.7%         26.8%
Local Government*                              22.2%       39.9%        37.9%       54.0%     14.3%          21.4%        26.8%     28.6%      42.1%       25.0%      24.4%         31.7%
Private Sector                                 27.8%       36.4%        44.8%       35.9%     21.4%          44.3%        36.6%     42.9%      36.8%       25.0%      35.9%         36.6%
Parliament                                     11.1%       3.5%         0.0%        2.5%      7.1%           5.7%         5.6%      9.5%       5.3%        8.3%       6.4%          2.4%
Community-Based Organizations
                                               16.7%       18.7%        24.1%       19.7%     21.4%          12.9%        25.4%     19.0%      42.1%        8.3%      23.1%         17.1%
(CBOs)
Beneficiaries                                  16.7%       13.6%         6.9%       12.1%     14.3%          12.9%         8.5%     4.8%       10.5%       8.3%       11.5%          9.8%
Foundations*                                   11.1%       1.5%          3.4%       1.0%      21.4%          8.6%          8.5%     4.8%       0.0%        16.7%      3.8%           0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations                      0.0%        3.5%          6.9%       1.0%      0.0%           4.3%          4.2%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       3.8%           2.4%
Other                                          0.0%        1.5%          0.0%       1.0%      7.1%           0.0%          0.0%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%       1.3%           2.4%
Don't know                                     5.6%        2.0%          0.0%       1.5%      0.0%           1.4%          0.0%     4.8%       0.0%        8.3%       2.6%           7.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              89
The World Bank Group                                                                                          Ghana                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Ghana? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                     Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                      President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                       Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                      N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in   16      5.19     182    6.90     27     6.85    183    6.84   12     6.17        64     6.67   68    6.75    19     6.21    19    7.79    12     6.42   69    6.28     35      5.86
development in Ghana*
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the     15      4.93     175    6.12     28     6.29    173    5.85   11     5.36        61     5.74   65    5.78    19     5.68    19    7.26    12     6.00   67    5.58     35      5.20
development priorities for Ghana
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are     13      4.54     178    6.40     29     6.83    172    6.13   10     6.00        63     6.56   66    6.41    19     5.00    19    6.79    12     6.75   66    5.73     34      5.74
realistic for Ghana*
The World Bank Group treats
clients and stakeholders in Ghana    15      4.80     160    6.76     26     6.77    159    6.50   12     5.75        62     6.23   60    6.85    18     5.44    19    8.05    12     6.75   59    5.75     27      5.85
with respect*




                                                                                                                 90
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Ghana                                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Ghana, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                      Office of the                        Consultant on                     Bilateral/          Private/     NGO/CBO/                       Independent
                                       President/      Employee of a            WBG            Local        Multilateral         Financial      Private                      Government
                                        Minister         Ministry           Project/PMU     Government        Agency           Sector/Bank    Foundation           Media      Institution      Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                       N      Mean       N    Mean           N      Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean         N     Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean     N     Mean       N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Responsiveness*                       16      4.19      160       6.04      26       6.73   163     5.79     12    5.00        59     5.92     58    6.03      17     5.18     19     6.95     11     6.00   60     5.48    29      5.55
Flexibility (in terms of the
institution’s products and            15      4.07      154       5.70      27       6.26   164     5.20     11    6.09        59     5.93     57    6.09      14     4.79     19     6.26     10     5.70   61     5.33    30      5.13
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                      16      5.19      157       5.75      25       5.72   170     5.17     13    5.00        57     5.56     56    6.07      18     6.00     19     7.00      9     5.56   66     5.12    31      5.03
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                      15      4.33      153       6.18      26       6.15   156     5.67     13    5.85        59     5.81     53    6.28      17     5.29     19     7.00     12     4.75   61     6.00    31      5.35
Openness (sharing data and other
                                      15      4.60      168       6.82      27       7.33   167     6.37     12    6.00        62     6.31     62    6.63      17     5.29     19     6.84     10     5.60   63     5.62    33      5.39
information)*
Staff accessibility*                  14      4.43      152       5.82      26       6.35   155     4.74     13    5.77        57     5.16     60    5.63      16     4.38     19     6.74     12     4.75   57     4.93    27      5.00
Straightforwardness and honesty*      15      5.47      166       6.65      27       6.48   165     6.23     13    6.54        63     5.98     57    6.67      17     5.29     18     7.11     12     6.33   62     5.56    29      5.45
Ease of access to the people at the
WBG who are making decisions          15      5.27      152       6.01      27       5.93   151     5.04     12    6.00        59     5.54     57    5.58      14     4.07     19     6.58     10     5.50   53     5.21    25      4.76
important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*     15      5.20      160       6.16      27       5.37   160     5.64     11    6.00        63     5.33     62    5.71      17     4.65     19     5.79     12     4.58   60     5.00    31      5.61
Collaboration with the
                                      14      5.57      170       7.85      26       7.58   174     7.38     13    6.08        63     7.63     61    6.75      17     6.41     19     8.11     11     7.91   64     6.89    32      6.88
Government*
Collaboration with other donors
                                      14      5.86      155       7.34      28       6.54   157     6.80     13    6.15        61     6.80     60    6.35      16     6.13     18     6.89     11     7.27   60     6.40    28      6.21
and development partners*
Collaboration with the private
                                      14      4.36      141       5.88      28       5.57   149     5.17     12    5.25        61     5.05     61    5.46      18     5.39     18     5.28     11     4.18   60     5.23    26      4.42
sector*
The speed in which it gets things
                                      13      4.92      155       6.11      26       6.15   158     5.77     13    6.15        58     5.48     57    6.07      16     5.94     18     6.22     12     5.92   60     5.37    30      4.60
accomplished on the ground
Being a long-term partner*            16      5.06      160       7.96      26       7.15   169     7.57     13    6.46        61     7.07     63    6.79      19     7.47     18     7.94     11     7.18   64     6.61    31      5.90
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To be a more effective development partner in Ghana, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…? *
                                                      Office of                          Consultant                                       Private/           NGO/
                                                        the              Employee         on WBG-                    Bilateral/           Financial          CBO/                   Independent
                                                     President/            of a          supported         Local    Multilateral           Sector/          Private                 Government       Trade
Percentage of Respondents                             Minister            Ministry      Project/PMU        Govt.      Agency            Private Bank        Found.     Media         Institution     Union    Academia        Other
More local presence                                   81.3%               82.3%             70.0%          85.9%          38.5%              80.6%          75.4%      81.0%           89.5%         83.3%        81.3%      69.4%
The current level of local presence is
                                                       6.3%               11.6%             13.3%          8.3%           38.5%              10.4%          14.5%      14.3%             -            8.3%        6.7%          2.8%
adequate
Less local presence                                     -                  3.5%             10.0%          3.1%           23.1%              3.0%            2.9%       4.8%           10.5%            -         1.3%       2.8%
Don't know                                            12.5%                2.5%             6.7%           2.6%             -                6.0%            7.2%         -              -            8.3%        10.7%      25.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                      Office of                          Consultant                                       Private/           NGO/
                                                        the              Employee         on WBG-                    Bilateral/           Financial          CBO/                   Independent
Percentage of Respondents                            President/            of a          supported         Local    Multilateral           Sector/          Private                 Government       Trade
(Responses Combined)                                  Minister            Ministry      Project/PMU        Govt.      Agency            Private Bank        Found.     Media         Institution     Union    Academia        Other
                                                                                                                          91
The World Bank Group                                                           Ghana                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

The World Bank Group does not do
                                               27.8%   15.1%   17.2%   15.5%   33.3%   20.8%   12.9%   19.0%   21.1%   33.3%    31.6%         20.0%
adequate follow through/follow-up
There is not an adequate level of
                                               38.9%   40.2%   41.4%   45.4%   20.0%   33.3%   41.4%   61.9%   36.8%   25.0%    35.4%         42.5%
citizen/civil society participation
The World Bank Group is not
sensitive enough to political/social           22.2%   23.6%   24.1%   23.7%   26.7%   26.4%   14.3%   19.0%   31.6%   16.7%    22.8%         12.5%
realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity
                                                5.6%   18.6%   27.6%   19.6%   26.7%   15.3%   27.1%   4.8%    15.8%   41.7%     7.6%         20.0%
in Government*
Poor donor coordination*                       44.4%   10.6%   20.7%   11.3%   13.3%   8.3%    15.7%   9.5%    10.5%   16.7%    12.7%         17.5%
The World Bank Group works too
                                               22.2%   6.5%    3.4%    4.1%    26.7%   18.1%   4.3%    4.8%    10.5%   16.7%     7.6%          7.5%
slowly*
The Government works inefficiently             11.1%   15.6%   20.7%   21.6%   40.0%   22.2%   37.1%   23.8%   15.8%   16.7%    24.1%         20.0%
Political pressures and obstacles              16.7%   31.2%   24.1%   29.9%   6.7%    26.4%   21.4%   33.3%   31.6%   25.0%    25.3%         15.0%
Reforms are not well thought out in
                                                5.6%   32.2%   20.7%   21.1%   0.0%    19.4%   18.6%   14.3%   26.3%   8.3%     22.8%         30.0%
light of country challenges*
Other                                           0.0%   1.0%    0.0%    1.0%    0.0%    1.4%    2.9%    0.0%    0.0%    0.0%      0.0%          5.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                               92
The World Bank Group                                                                                       Ghana                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                  Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                   President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                    Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                   N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Anti-corruption*                  15      6.93     192    8.49     28     7.79    193    8.06   13     6.23        69     8.75   65    7.89    20     8.35    18    9.00    12     7.75   74    8.62     37      8.30
Information and communications
                                  16      7.19     191    8.12     27     7.93    187    8.02   14     5.93        67     8.07   67    7.96    19     7.42    19    8.58    12     8.67   73    8.22     38      8.29
technology*
Transport*                        16      6.56     191    8.38     28     7.89    184    8.16   13     6.46        67     8.37   67    7.85    19     7.95    19    9.05    11     7.36   77    8.45     37      8.27
Crime and violence                16      6.25     186    7.41     28     7.29    181    6.91   13     5.92        67     7.48   62    7.52    19     6.68    17    8.18    10     7.80   71    7.58     35      7.40
Law and justice                   16      6.75     185    7.52     29     6.69    181    6.70   13     6.08        66     7.00   62    7.31    19     6.42    18    8.00    11     7.82   73    7.26     36      6.97
Urban development*                15      7.47     192    7.84     27     7.52    185    8.19   13     6.15        70     8.00   61    7.59    18     7.56    18    8.22    11     7.82   75    7.45     36      8.36
Environmental sustainability*     16      7.50     190    8.08     28     8.14    184    8.30   13     6.85        68     8.09   62    7.50    19     7.47    19    8.26    12     8.83   75    7.96     35      7.60
Regulatory framework              16      6.69     180    7.54     27     7.52    172    7.19   13     6.38        67     7.42   59    7.41    19     7.68    18    8.22    12     8.17   68    6.88     36      8.03
Communicable/non-communicable
                                  16      6.56     191    8.10     27     7.22    181    7.86   14     5.43        70     8.23   62    7.90    20     7.35    19    8.05    12     8.00   74    7.81     37      7.68
diseases*
Poverty reduction*                15      7.47     193    8.84     28     8.21    185    8.68   14     5.57        66     8.97   66    8.21    21     8.67    19    9.00    12     8.67   73    9.21     36      8.50
Gender equity                     15      7.53     185    7.43     28     7.29    183    6.81   13     6.77        69     7.13   62    7.42    19     7.32    19    8.21    10     7.90   75    7.32     36      7.03
Domestic private sector
                                  15      6.87     185    7.99     28     8.32    182    7.77   14     6.50        67     8.21   62    7.68    18     6.83    19    8.89    12     8.50   71    7.99     35      8.20
development*
Foreign direct investment         15      6.93     187    8.00     28     7.96    185    7.68   13     6.62        66     7.67   63    8.05    18     7.17    19    8.79     9     8.44   73    8.15     34      7.62
Water and sanitation*             16      7.38     191    8.83     29     8.00    186    8.51   13     6.77        68     8.59   64    8.39    20     8.35    19    9.21    12     8.75   76    8.62     37      8.14
Trade and exports*                15      7.00     188    8.14     29     7.24    184    7.40   13     6.92        67     7.58   64    7.81    20     7.55    19    8.95    12     8.83   74    7.88     36      7.78
Economic growth*                  15      7.47     190    8.83     29     8.21    190    8.17   14     6.86        69     8.83   63    8.08    20     8.05    19    9.58    12     8.83   72    8.72     38      7.76
Energy*                           16      7.50     191    8.73     27     8.33    188    8.44   13     6.38        70     8.67   62    8.34    19     7.79    19    9.42    12     8.75   75    8.75     35      8.49
Disaster management*              15      7.00     186    7.72     28     7.57    184    7.48   14     6.29        67     8.15   62    7.74    19     6.47    19    8.89    12     8.58   74    8.03     35      7.97
Public sector governance/reform   14      7.71     188    8.39     29     8.07    182    7.99   13     6.38        63     7.86   65    7.91    20     7.45    19    8.21    11     8.18   74    8.22     34      8.09
Job creation/employment*          15      7.07     188    8.46     29     7.52    190    8.26   14     5.86        68     8.74   63    8.21    18     6.78    19    9.11    12     9.00   77    8.47     36      8.61
Financial markets*                15      6.40     184    7.68     27     7.78    180    7.41   14     6.36        62     7.89   60    7.73    20     7.75    19    8.53    12     8.58   70    7.93     33      8.30
Equality of opportunity*          15      7.07     178    7.68     29     7.48    175    7.33   13     5.69        65     7.26   59    7.71    19     7.11    19    8.32    11     7.36   67    8.03     31      7.90
Health*                           15      7.60     191    8.88     28     8.64    185    8.68   14     6.71        68     8.63   63    8.70    19     8.37    18    9.06    12     9.83   76    8.86     38      8.34
Rural development*                15      7.13     194    8.74     29     8.07    173    8.74   14     6.50        66     8.97   62    8.02    20     8.25    19    9.11    12     8.42   71    8.66     35      8.66
Global/regional integration*      16      6.19     182    7.99     29     7.52    177    7.12   11     6.73        65     7.83   58    7.38    17     6.47    19    8.37    11     8.00   70    7.70     34      7.50
Food security*                    16      7.31     186    8.51     29     7.83    180    7.82   14     6.57        67     8.31   63    8.33    20     8.05    19    9.05    12     8.42   71    8.55     36      8.00
Education*                        15      7.47     188    8.82     28     8.64    187    8.82   13     7.00        67     8.60   64    8.67    20     8.40    19    9.42    10     9.70   77    8.84     37      8.00
Social protection*                14      6.36     188    7.68     29     6.72    185    7.30   13     6.08        66     7.17   60    7.65    19     6.84    19    8.53    11     8.09   72    7.82     36      7.00
Climate change                    15      6.47     184    7.85     28     7.36    178    7.44   13     7.23        67     6.94   58    7.59    19     6.63    18    8.56    12     8.08   70    7.37     34      7.29
Agricultural development*         16      7.38     194    8.97     29     8.38    188    8.66   12     7.08        66     8.95   64    8.58    19     8.47    19    9.00    12     9.08   77    9.06     37      8.62
Natural resource management*      16      7.31     191    8.45     27     8.30    189    7.40   12     7.58        68     7.35   60    8.33    19     7.16    19    8.16    12     8.50   73    8.44     37      7.54
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                              93
The World Bank Group                                                                                       Ghana                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                  Office of the                   Consultant on                  Bilateral/          Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                   President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local      Multilateral         Financial     Private                   Government
                                    Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government      Agency           Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                   N      Mean      N    Mean       N      Mean    N     Mean    N     Mean         N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Anti-corruption                   13      5.23     131    5.13     25     3.76    122    4.76   14     5.14        52     3.87   55    4.29    17     5.53    16    3.94    10     4.70   57    4.42     27      4.07
Information and communications
                                  16      5.19     137    6.20     25     5.08    131    5.51   15     4.93        49     5.49   55    5.35    17     5.41    16    5.94    10     5.00   57    5.26     25      5.52
technology
Transport                         14      6.14     152    6.28     26     4.96    138    5.95   13     5.62        50     5.46   57    5.79    19     6.32    18    5.78    10     5.40   58    5.74     26      4.96
Crime and violence                16      4.63     120    5.37     25     4.20    112    4.56   14     4.64        44     4.68   47    5.11    16     4.69    13    4.62    10     5.20   53    4.19     22      4.41
Law and justice                   15      4.93     122    5.25     25     4.08    108    4.80   14     5.50        50     5.14   47    5.28    16     5.25    16    4.56    10     5.10   55    4.76     24      4.88
Urban development                 15      5.93     152    6.30     26     4.88    153    6.44   15     5.40        51     6.20   52    5.54    19     6.11    17    5.94    11     5.36   61    5.77     29      5.79
Environmental sustainability      15      5.07     148    6.31     26     5.04    148    6.13   14     5.79        51     5.73   48    5.88    17     5.94    17    5.65    10     5.60   58    5.50     27      5.81
Regulatory framework              15      5.13     131    5.89     25     5.08    130    5.69   15     5.13        43     5.98   49    5.61    17     5.94    16    5.69     9     5.11   55    4.96     26      5.35
Communicable/non-communicable
                                  16      4.88     145    6.78     26     5.50    135    6.12   15     5.60        51     6.35   50    6.40    18     5.89    17    6.59    11     5.91   60    6.08     28      6.32
diseases*
Poverty reduction                 14      5.21     159    6.47     26     5.42    158    6.46   14     6.43        55     6.13   61    5.66    19     6.53    19    5.95    11     5.73   65    5.74     32      5.44
Gender equity                     14      5.71     138    6.03     25     4.56    135    5.47   13     6.54        51     5.00   51    5.71    16     5.44    18    4.83     9     5.67   54    5.09     25      5.32
Domestic private sector
                                  14      4.79     130    5.75     25     4.76    124    5.34   13     5.69        52     5.13   51    5.00    15     5.53    16    5.25    10     6.10   57    4.70     26      5.31
development
Foreign direct investment         14      5.50     143    6.39     26     5.15    131    6.01   14     6.07        50     5.56   53    5.43    16     6.88    18    5.94    10     6.40   60    5.48     26      6.08
Water and sanitation*             15      5.33     160    6.89     25     5.72    158    6.87   15     6.13        55     6.07   55    6.20    17     6.24    19    6.63    10     6.30   65    5.60     28      5.75
Trade and exports                 14      5.00     133    5.99     24     4.50    127    5.56   14     5.71        50     5.44   53    5.08    17     4.82    18    5.56    10     5.50   61    4.82     26      5.58
Economic growth                   16      5.19     154    6.32     25     4.96    141    6.01   15     5.60        54     5.83   57    5.84    18     6.28    18    6.22     9     5.67   64    5.31     31      5.71
Energy                            14      4.43     139    5.88     24     5.29    132    5.63   14     5.36        50     5.58   52    5.37    18     5.17    17    5.35    10     5.30   61    5.21     26      4.77
Disaster management               15      5.27     130    5.71     26     4.38    122    5.19   13     5.77        52     5.33   54    5.70    18     5.11    17    5.65    10     5.20   59    4.92     25      4.92
Public sector governance/reform   15      5.73     156    6.62     26     5.31    139    6.13   12     6.42        49     6.12   57    5.74    16     6.75    19    6.53     9     6.33   62    5.85     26      5.50
Job creation/employment           16      4.81     144    5.33     25     4.76    148    5.07   12     4.83        53     5.62   57    5.23    16     4.50    19    5.11    10     5.00   62    4.60     29      4.83
Financial markets                 15      5.93     129    5.88     25     4.44    129    5.41   13     5.31        47     5.87   53    5.75    18     5.44    17    5.41    10     5.80   58    5.43     26      6.23
Equality of opportunity           15      4.87     129    5.57     24     4.88    122    5.19   13     5.62        46     5.54   47    5.15    16     4.56    15    4.53     9     6.00   53    4.94     24      5.42
Health*                           15      5.67     158    7.00     25     6.32    150    6.99   13     6.08        52     6.52   58    6.36    18     6.17    19    6.79    11     5.27   63    5.98     27      5.93
Rural development                 16      5.13     158    6.10     27     5.30    153    6.24   13     6.15        54     5.50   57    5.49    18     5.83    18    5.56    11     5.73   61    5.34     28      5.29
Global/regional integration       15      6.40     138    6.04     26     4.65    126    5.60   13     5.46        51     5.43   49    5.29    16     5.63    18    5.50    10     6.00   58    5.28     23      5.09
Food security                     16      5.69     147    6.30     26     5.08    140    5.81   14     5.79        51     5.12   52    5.50    18     5.72    19    5.42    11     5.45   61    5.52     28      5.50
Education                         15      5.73     164    6.91     25     6.36    151    6.70   13     6.23        53     6.02   63    6.17    18     6.11    19    6.05    11     6.73   65    6.18     28      5.61
Social protection                 16      5.25     135    5.59     24     4.08    130    5.43   11     4.82        50     5.10   50    5.44    16     4.69    15    4.73    10     5.60   53    4.72     25      4.76
Climate change*                   16      5.81     135    5.99     22     4.59    125    5.66   12     5.83        47     4.87   47    5.17    13     4.54    16    4.88    10     5.40   55    4.82     24      5.29
Agricultural development          16      5.44     156    6.39     24     6.13    152    6.34   12     6.00        53     6.15   61    5.82    18     6.56    19    6.32    10     6.80   63    6.03     31      5.65
Natural resource management       16      4.81     134    5.81     25     4.32    130    5.25   13     6.31        49     5.16   56    5.09    18     5.72    17    5.59    10     5.70   55    5.16     29      4.86
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                              94
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Ghana                                                                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Ghana?*
                                                    Office of                          Consultant                                       Private/           NGO/
                                                      the              Employee         on WBG-                    Bilateral/           Financial          CBO/                   Independent
                                                   President/            of a          supported         Local    Multilateral           Sector/          Private                 Government       Trade
Percentage of Respondents                           Minister            Ministry      Project/PMU        Govt.      Agency            Private Bank        Found.     Media         Institution     Union    Academia              Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington
                                                    50.0%               47.4%             65.5%          35.4%          57.1%              40.3%          52.1%      38.1%           42.1%         50.0%         34.2%         43.2%
D.C.)
In the country                                      16.7%               17.9%             20.7%          28.1%          35.7%              19.4%          15.5%      14.3%           31.6%         25.0%         19.0%         10.8%
Don't know                                          33.3%               34.7%             13.8%          36.5%          7.1%               40.3%          32.4%      47.6%           26.3%         25.0%         46.8%         45.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                    Office of the                        Consultant on                     Bilateral/          Private/     NGO/CBO/                       Independent
                                     President/      Employee of a            WBG            Local        Multilateral         Financial      Private                      Government
                                      Minister         Ministry           Project/PMU     Government        Agency           Sector/Bank    Foundation           Media      Institution      Trade Union   Academia               Other
                                     N      Mean       N    Mean           N      Mean     N     Mean      N     Mean         N     Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean     N     Mean       N     Mean   N    Mean          N       Mean
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve   17      5.88      172       6.49      28       6.14   179     6.55    13     6.46        59     6.86     64    6.27      19     5.68     18     7.78     12     6.67   63        6.19     35       6.26
development results in Ghana?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Ghana? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                    Office of the                        Consultant on                     Bilateral/          Private/     NGO/CBO/                       Independent
                                     President/      Employee of a            WBG            Local        Multilateral         Financial      Private                      Government
                                      Minister         Ministry           Project/PMU     Government        Agency           Sector/Bank    Foundation           Media      Institution      Trade Union   Academia                Other
                                     N      Mean       N    Mean           N      Mean     N     Mean      N     Mean         N     Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean     N     Mean       N     Mean   N    Mean          N        Mean
The World Bank Group's financial
instruments meet the needs of       16      4.88      180       5.57      26       7.35   168     5.60     13    5.62        64     5.61     60    6.03      19     5.42     18     6.28     10     5.80   67        4.73     31       5.23
Ghana*
The World Bank Group meets
Ghana’s needs for knowledge         16      5.00      174       6.09      25       7.56   166     6.05     13    5.69        62     6.16     59    6.49      18     5.89     18     7.50     10     6.40   67        5.34     33       5.67
services*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                    Office of the                        Consultant on                     Bilateral/          Private/     NGO/CBO/                       Independent
                                     President/      Employee of a            WBG            Local        Multilateral         Financial      Private                      Government
                                      Minister         Ministry           Project/PMU     Government        Agency           Sector/Bank    Foundation           Media      Institution      Trade Union   Academia                Other
                                     N      Mean       N    Mean           N      Mean     N     Mean      N     Mean         N     Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean     N     Mean       N     Mean   N    Mean          N        Mean
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group measures and
                                    15      5.53      142       6.54      26       7.00   146     6.16    13     6.23        56     6.04     52    6.40      15     5.40     17     7.88      9     6.67   51        5.96     24       5.25
corrects its work in real time in
Ghana?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        95
The World Bank Group                                                                                                  Ghana                                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
                                                     Office of                          Consultant                                       Private/           NGO/
                                                       the              Employee         on WBG-                    Bilateral/           Financial          CBO/                   Independent
                                                    President/            of a          supported         Local    Multilateral           Sector/          Private                 Government       Trade
Percentage of Respondents                            Minister            Ministry      Project/PMU        Govt.      Agency            Private Bank        Found.     Media         Institution     Union    Academia        Other
Weekly                                                 -                 11.2%             20.7%          7.2%           6.7%               11.3%          5.6%       14.3%           31.6%           -          6.3%       5.1%
Monthly                                              25.0%               13.7%             31.0%          13.8%          46.7%              18.3%          29.2%      4.8%            15.8%         33.3%        11.4%      7.7%
A few times a year                                   12.5%               22.3%             37.9%          19.0%          33.3%              19.7%          20.8%      38.1%           26.3%         41.7%        15.2%      30.8%
Rarely                                               18.8%               17.3%             6.9%           29.7%            -                15.5%          25.0%      23.8%           10.5%         8.3%         29.1%      23.1%
Never                                                43.8%               35.5%             3.4%           30.3%          13.3%              35.2%          19.4%      19.0%           15.8%         16.7%        38.0%      33.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Ghana, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                     Office of the                        Consultant on                     Bilateral/          Private/     NGO/CBO/                       Independent
                                      President/      Employee of a            WBG            Local        Multilateral         Financial      Private                      Government
                                       Minister         Ministry           Project/PMU     Government        Agency           Sector/Bank    Foundation           Media      Institution      Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                      N      Mean       N    Mean           N      Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean         N     Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean     N     Mean       N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Are timely                           14      4.86      145       6.19      26       6.38   164     5.95     13    5.08        52     5.98     55    6.05      16     5.25     17     6.59     10     6.00   55     5.40    20      5.40
Include appropriate level of
stakeholder involvement during       14      5.64      147       6.31      28       6.18   161     6.03     13    5.77        56     5.96     59    6.14      17     5.76     17     7.00     11     5.27   52     5.96    23      6.00
preparation
Are relevant to Ghana’s
                                     12      6.58      164       6.49      27       6.74   173     6.33     13    5.69        59     6.49     63    6.51      18     6.61     18     7.22     11     6.45   63     6.03    28      5.86
development priorities
Lead to practical solutions*         12      5.92      156       6.41      26       7.15   160     5.99     12    6.08        57     6.07     59    6.73      17     5.12     18     7.11     11     6.45   60     5.48    26      5.81
Are accessible (well written and
                                     12      4.75      156       6.03      27       6.22   161     5.75     14    5.07        58     5.64     58    5.52      17     4.94     18     6.72     11     3.73   59     5.31    27      6.30
easy to understand)*
Are source of relevant information
                                     12      5.50      152       7.01      26       6.69   164     6.48     12    6.50        56     6.41     65    6.86      17     5.06     18     7.44     11     5.91   61     6.25    26      6.77
on global good practices*
Enhance your knowledge and/or
                                     13      5.54      157       6.62      26       6.88   166     6.37     14    5.21        58     6.86     63    6.97      18     5.39     18     6.89     11     6.82   61     6.11    31      5.94
skills*
Are adequately disseminated*         13      4.69      154       5.81      27       5.33   165     5.54     14    4.50        57     5.51     58    5.60      18     4.89     18     6.00     10     5.90   57     4.75    26      4.69
Are translated enough into local
                                     13      3.00      133       4.11      24       3.29   144     4.14     12    3.58        50     3.52     49    3.98      13     4.15     16     4.31      8     3.63   53     3.21    23      3.61
language
Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific
development challenges and           13      4.77      163       5.82      26       6.46   169     5.62     14    5.50        58     5.67     62    6.03      17     5.47     17     6.24     11     5.82   60     5.17    29      5.07
country circumstances
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                         96
The World Bank Group                                                                                               Ghana                                                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                   Office of the                    Consultant on                      Bilateral/             Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                    President/     Employee of a         WBG            Local         Multilateral            Financial     Private                   Government
                                     Minister        Ministry        Project/PMU     Government         Agency              Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                    N      Mean      N    Mean        N      Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean            N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
WBG's knowledge work and            15      6.07    177     6.69     27      6.70    174     6.50     15        6.73        61     6.39   67    6.81    16     6.00    18    7.17    11     7.36   63    6.14     33       6.64
activities make to development
results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the WBG's      14      6.21    168     7.15     28      7.07    168     6.74     15        6.47        63     6.54   64    7.27    17     6.82    18    7.33    10     7.80   62    6.35     30       6.23
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Ghana’s development challenges?
                                   Office of the                    Consultant on                      Bilateral/             Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                    President/     Employee of a         WBG            Local         Multilateral            Financial     Private                   Government
                                     Minister        Ministry        Project/PMU     Government         Agency              Sector/Bank   Foundation        Media      Institution   Trade Union   Academia            Other
                                    N      Mean      N    Mean        N      Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean            N     Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean      N        Mean
Conceptualization (understanding
                                    15      5.73    158     6.42     26      6.69    151     6.01     13        5.31        60     6.45   58    6.28    17     5.94    18    7.17     9     6.00   52    5.67     27       6.81
and framing the problem)
Design (appraising and planning
                                    15      5.27    159     6.66     26      6.92    156     6.24     14        5.64        59     6.49   58    6.48    16     6.25    17    7.53     9     6.89   56    5.93     26       6.88
the solutions)
Implementation (executing,
carrying out, monitoring, and       15      5.60    157     6.83     28      6.82    162     6.63     14        5.71        59     6.42   63    6.71    16     6.13    19    7.26     9     6.89   59    5.90     26       6.73
making appropriate adjustments)
Evaluation (assessing the impact
                                    15      6.27    161     6.94     27      6.89    158     6.99     14        5.71        59     6.47   63    7.08    17     6.53    19    7.21     9     7.56   57    6.39     26       6.88
and results)
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                       97
The World Bank Group                                                                                                  Ghana                                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                     Office of the                        Consultant on                     Bilateral/          Private/     NGO/CBO/                       Independent
                                      President/      Employee of a            WBG            Local        Multilateral         Financial      Private                      Government
                                       Minister         Ministry           Project/PMU     Government        Agency           Sector/Bank    Foundation           Media      Institution      Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                      N      Mean       N    Mean           N      Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean         N     Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean     N     Mean       N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
The World Bank Group disburses
                                     16      4.44      163       5.39      28       6.43   171     5.75     14    4.50        53     5.55     63    6.48      18     4.94     17     6.41     10     5.10   62     5.42    28      5.71
funds promptly*
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the           17      4.94      179       6.70      27       6.48   174     6.89     14    5.43        62     6.03     66    6.44      19     6.26     18     7.39     11     7.27   64     6.05    32      6.72
projects and programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals
and reviews are done in a timely     17      4.18      157       5.77      27       5.70   164     6.04     13    5.62        55     5.20     61    6.30      16     6.00     18     6.33     10     6.10   58     5.41    26      5.35
fashion*
The World Bank Group’s
“Safeguard Policy? requirements      17      4.59      154       6.08      25       5.92   152     6.29     12    5.33        52     6.04     52    6.83      15     6.27     17     6.65     10     6.60   54     5.31    26      5.46
are reasonable*
The World Bank Group’s conditions
                                     17      5.06      165       5.37      27       6.44   163     4.96     14    5.21        56     5.04     57    5.81      19     5.05     18     5.39     11     6.27   59     4.47    30      4.93
on its lending are reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes
                                     16      3.75      158       5.61      27       5.74   159     5.31     14    5.36        57     5.26     55    6.20      17     4.47     17     6.29     10     6.70   51     5.22    27      4.81
decisions quickly in Ghana*
Working with the World Bank
Group increases Ghana’s              17      5.94      175       6.57      28       7.14   175     6.65     14    5.71        62     6.24     65    6.85      19     6.37     18     7.22     11     7.09   63     6.00    35      6.00
institutional capacity
The World Bank Group ensures
consistency and continuity through   13      5.23      142       6.01      28       6.04   132     6.09     14    5.71        53     5.74     49    6.61      16     5.44     16     6.81      9     6.44   52     5.96    26      5.08
staff changes
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group       15      5.53      158       6.47      29       7.00   153     6.88     14    5.36        57     6.14     57    6.67      16     5.75     17     6.76     10     7.00   59     5.85    27      5.52
makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides
                                     17      5.29      175       6.86      29       7.14   172     6.96     13    5.38        58     6.03     62    7.19      19     6.26     18     7.06     11     7.45   66     5.88    33      5.88
effective implementation support*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Ghana?* *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                     Office of                          Consultant                                       Private/           NGO/
                                                       the              Employee         on WBG-                    Bilateral/           Financial          CBO/                   Independent
                                                    President/            of a          supported         Local    Multilateral           Sector/          Private                 Government       Trade
Percentage of Respondents                            Minister            Ministry      Project/PMU        Govt.      Agency            Private Bank        Found.     Media         Institution     Union    Academia        Other
The World Bank Group takes too
                                                     11.1%                4.5%             10.0%          3.6%           20.0%              2.8%            8.6%       9.5%           10.5%          8.3%        5.1%          2.6%
much risk in Ghana
The World Bank Group does not take
                                                     38.9%               33.8%             50.0%          25.0%          33.3%              32.4%          38.6%      14.3%           36.8%         16.7%        33.3%      25.6%
enough risk in Ghana
The World Bank Group's approach to
                                                      5.6%               22.7%             26.7%          28.6%          26.7%              23.9%           8.6%      14.3%           15.8%         25.0%        11.5%      15.4%
risk is appropriate
Don't know                                           33.3%               26.3%             13.3%          28.1%          6.7%               26.8%          31.4%      38.1%           21.1%         25.0%        35.9%      41.0%
Prefer not to answer                                 11.1%               12.6%               -            14.6%          13.3%              14.1%          12.9%      23.8%           15.8%         25.0%        14.1%      15.4%

                                                                                                                         98
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/              Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private            Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media     Institution   Union     Academia        Other
Provide more adequate data/
knowledge/statistics/figures on                41.2%       34.2%        30.0%       31.3%     20.0%          29.2%        25.4%     40.9%       26.3%       33.3%       25.3%        30.0%
Ghana’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with
                                               23.5%       28.1%        13.3%       28.6%     13.3%          23.6%        25.4%     31.8%       26.3%        0.0%       19.0%        15.0%
Government clients
Offer more innovative financial
                                               17.6%       15.1%        16.7%       13.0%     20.0%          20.8%        21.1%     18.2%       26.3%       33.3%       21.5%        22.5%
products
Improve the competitiveness of its
                                               11.8%        6.0%        16.7%       5.2%       6.7%          12.5%         7.0%     13.6%       0.0%         8.3%       3.8%          0.0%
financing compared to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                               29.4%       37.7%        26.7%       30.2%     20.0%          23.6%        28.2%     9.1%        10.5%       25.0%       38.0%        20.0%
Government*
Improve the quality of its experts as
                                               23.5%       10.6%        16.7%       12.5%     26.7%          13.9%        14.1%     27.3%       21.1%        0.0%       11.4%        20.0%
related to Ghana’s specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge
                                               11.8%        7.0%        16.7%       9.9%      20.0%           8.3%         8.5%     0.0%        5.3%        25.0%       11.4%        10.0%
services
Ensure greater selectivity in its work         17.6%        8.0%        13.3%       6.3%       6.7%           9.7%         5.6%     9.1%        26.3%        0.0%       6.3%          7.5%
Increase the level of capacity
                                                5.9%       21.1%        20.0%       26.6%     20.0%          13.9%        29.6%     22.7%       31.6%       33.3%       20.3%        30.0%
development in the country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining
                                               11.8%       25.1%        23.3%       24.0%      6.7%          20.8%        18.3%     13.6%       26.3%        8.3%       22.8%        12.5%
World Bank Group financing
Work faster*                                    5.9%        4.0%         6.7%       5.2%      20.0%           6.9%        12.7%     4.5%        0.0%        33.3%       10.1%        10.0%
Other*                                          0.0%        1.0%         0.0%       1.6%      0.0%            2.8%        0.0%      4.5%        0.0%        0.0%        3.8%         10.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Ghana, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
World Bank Group should offer more of in Ghana?*
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/              Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private            Government     Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media     Institution   Union     Academia        Other
Financial services                             47.1%       39.1%        20.0%       28.5%     13.3%          46.4%        34.7%     45.5%       11.1%       33.3%       38.2%        35.0%
Knowledge products                             23.5%       17.3%        23.3%       15.5%     40.0%          17.4%        18.1%     9.1%        22.2%       25.0%       14.5%        7.5%
Convening services                             5.9%        5.6%         3.3%        2.1%      26.7%          10.1%        4.2%      4.5%        11.1%       8.3%        3.9%         12.5%
None of the above                                          1.5%         10.0%       5.7%      13.3%            -          9.7%      9.1%          -         8.3%        6.6%         5.0%
The combination is appropriate for
                                               11.8%       33.0%        40.0%       41.5%      6.7%          18.8%        29.2%     22.7%       55.6%        8.3%       31.6%        30.0%
Ghana
Don't know                                     11.8%        3.6%         3.3%       6.7%           -          7.2%         4.2%     9.1%          -         16.7%       5.3%         10.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                              99
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
Local newspapers*                              50.0%       46.5%        16.7%       53.0%     0.0%           39.7%        24.7%     61.9%      21.1%       18.2%    39.2%         56.4%
International newspapers*                      5.6%        2.5%         3.3%        1.5%      20.0%          4.1%         4.1%      9.5%       10.5%       9.1%     8.9%          0.0%
Local radio                                    27.8%       29.7%        13.3%       35.9%     26.7%          34.2%        24.7%     33.3%      15.8%       18.2%    29.1%         33.3%
International radio                            5.6%        4.5%         13.3%       4.0%      13.3%          5.5%         6.8%      4.8%       10.5%       18.2%    3.8%          7.7%
Local television                               38.9%       29.7%        33.3%       30.8%     20.0%          26.0%        20.5%     33.3%      21.1%       9.1%     36.7%         30.8%
International television*                      0.0%        4.0%         13.3%       6.1%      20.0%          2.7%         9.6%      4.8%       0.0%        18.2%    8.9%          0.0%
Periodicals*                                   22.2%       5.0%         6.7%        3.0%      13.3%          6.8%         6.8%      14.3%      15.8%       9.1%     3.8%          2.6%
Internet                                       22.2%       46.0%        56.7%       42.4%     33.3%          45.2%        54.8%     33.3%      68.4%       45.5%    49.4%         43.6%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
                                                5.6%        7.9%        23.3%       6.1%      20.0%          13.7%         9.6%     0.0%       5.3%        27.3%     6.3%          5.1%
YouTube, Flickr)*
Blogs*                                         5.6%        15.8%        13.3%       6.6%      6.7%            8.2%        11.0%     0.0%       15.8%       9.1%      3.8%          2.6%
Mobile phones*                                 11.1%       1.5%         3.3%        4.0%      13.3%           6.8%        17.8%     4.8%       5.3%        9.1%      5.1%          5.1%
Instant messaging                              0.0%        1.5%         0.0%        2.5%      6.7%            1.4%        1.4%      0.0%       10.5%       9.1%      0.0%          5.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                    President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
(Responses Combined)                          Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
Blogs*                                         11.1%        7.0%        26.7%       3.5%      20.0%           8.3%        11.0%     9.5%       15.8%       16.7%     6.3%         15.4%
Direct contact with World Bank
                                               11.1%       13.5%        26.7%       21.2%     20.0%          16.7%        23.3%     23.8%      21.1%       25.0%    24.1%         23.1%
Group
e-Newsletters                                  27.8%       18.5%        10.0%       10.6%     26.7%          16.7%         8.2%     19.0%      21.1%       33.3%    12.7%         12.8%
Instant messaging                              11.1%       8.5%         20.0%       9.1%      20.0%          4.2%          8.2%     0.0%       0.0%        0.0%     7.6%          5.1%
World Bank Group's
                                               27.8%       38.0%        10.0%       45.5%     20.0%          20.8%        31.5%     42.9%      15.8%       8.3%     30.4%         28.2%
seminars/workshops/conferences*
World Bank Group's publications and
                                               33.3%       29.5%        26.7%       25.3%     20.0%          23.6%        19.2%     28.6%      15.8%       25.0%    26.6%         23.1%
other written materials
Mobile phones                                  16.7%       12.5%         3.3%       17.7%     26.7%          25.0%        23.3%     19.0%      10.5%       33.3%    21.8%         25.6%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
                                               22.2%       30.5%        26.7%       27.3%     26.7%          37.5%        34.2%     9.5%       42.1%       33.3%    21.5%         30.8%
YouTube, Flickr)
World Bank Group's website                     27.8%       33.5%        46.7%       30.8%     13.3%          36.1%        28.8%     42.9%      57.9%       16.7%    41.8%         23.1%
Other                                          0.0%        1.0%         0.0%        1.0%      0.0%           0.0%         2.7%      4.8%       0.0%        0.0%     3.8%          2.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              100
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/               Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private             Government      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.     Media     Institution    Union     Academia        Other
Yes                                            44.4%       16.9%        63.0%       23.6%     54.5%          25.0%         48.5%     21.1%       31.6%        16.7%          23.7%     15.4%
No                                             55.6%       83.1%        37.0%       76.4%     45.5%          75.0%         51.5%     78.9%       68.4%        83.3%          76.3%     84.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/               Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private             Government      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.     Media     Institution    Union     Academia        Other
Yes                                            35.7%       28.8%        80.8%       21.6%     72.7%          30.9%         42.2%     27.8%       61.1%        40.0%          22.4%     16.7%
No                                             64.3%       71.2%        19.2%       78.4%     27.3%          69.1%         57.8%     72.2%       38.9%        60.0%          77.6%     83.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/               Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private             Government      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.     Media     Institution    Union     Academia        Other
Yes                                            80.0%       92.5%        95.0%       90.0%     87.5%          95.2%         88.9%     20.0%       100.0%       75.0%          94.1%     83.3%
No                                             20.0%       7.5%         5.0%        10.0%     12.5%          4.8%          11.1%     80.0%          -         25.0%          5.9%      16.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/               Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private             Government      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.     Media     Institution    Union     Academia        Other
Yes                                            93.8%       94.3%        92.6%       91.8%     80.0%          86.6%         93.8%     78.9%       94.7%        100%           93.4%     86.8%
No                                             6.3%        5.7%         7.4%        8.2%      20.0%          13.4%         6.3%      21.1%       5.3%           -            6.6%      13.2%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                              Office of                Consultant                            Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/      Financial     CBO/               Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral      Sector/     Private             Government      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency       Private Bank   Found.     Media     Institution    Union     Academia        Other
Yes                                            43.8%       47.4%        80.8%       47.3%     66.7%          51.4%         63.6%     55.0%       77.8%        70.0%          52.6%     44.7%
No                                             56.3%       52.6%        19.20%      52.7%     33.3%          48.6%         36.4%     45.0%       22.2%        30.0%          47.4%     55.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                              101
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Ghana                                                                               Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?
                                                      Office of                          Consultant                                    Private/           NGO/
                                                        the              Employee         on WBG-                    Bilateral/        Financial          CBO/                   Independent
                                                     President/            of a          supported         Local    Multilateral        Sector/          Private                 Government       Trade
Percentage of Respondents                             Minister            Ministry      Project/PMU        Govt.      Agency         Private Bank        Found.     Media         Institution     Union    Academia        Other
The World Bank Group’s country
                                                      60.0%               54.8%             47.8%          54.5%          66.7%           56.5%          67.3%      61.1%           53.3%         63.6%        57.9%      45.5%
website
The World Bank Group’s main
                                                      40.0%               45.2%             52.2%          45.5%          33.3%           43.5%          32.7%      38.9%           46.7%         36.4%        42.1%      54.5%
website

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                                      Office of                          Consultant                                    Private/           NGO/
                                                        the              Employee         on WBG-                    Bilateral/        Financial          CBO/                   Independent
                                                     President/            of a          supported         Local    Multilateral        Sector/          Private                 Government       Trade
Percentage of Respondents                             Minister            Ministry      Project/PMU        Govt.      Agency         Private Bank        Found.     Media         Institution     Union    Academia        Other
High speed                                            92.9%               63.7%             73.9%          57.9%          42.9%           68.8%          69.0%      75.0%           56.3%         80.0%        62.9%      47.6%
Dial-up                                               7.1%                36.3%             26.1%          42.1%          57.1%           31.3%          31.0%      25.0%           43.8%         20.0%        37.1%      52.4%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                      Office of the                        Consultant on                     Bilateral/       Private/     NGO/CBO/                       Independent
                                       President/      Employee of a            WBG            Local        Multilateral      Financial      Private                      Government
                                        Minister         Ministry           Project/PMU     Government        Agency        Sector/Bank    Foundation           Media      Institution      Trade Union   Academia           Other
                                       N      Mean       N    Mean           N      Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean      N     Mean     N     Mean      N      Mean     N     Mean       N     Mean   N    Mean      N       Mean
I use/consult World Bank Group's
data more often than I did a few      12      6.58      148       5.32      25       7.20   152     4.58     14    5.43      53    5.87     59    5.20      17     4.53     18     6.56     11     6.18   64     4.06    27      3.93
years ago.*
I find the World Bank Group's
                                      15      5.87      113       6.35      24       7.63   108     6.36     14    5.36      49    7.12     51    6.45      13     6.00     18     8.06     10     6.70   53     6.15    21      5.95
websites easy to navigate.*
I find the information on the World
                                      14      6.07      115       7.17      24       8.17   106     7.12     14    6.36      48    7.79     49    7.33      14     6.64     18     8.00     10     7.80   55     6.91    21      6.57
Bank Group's websites useful.
The World Bank Group's social
media channels are valuable
                                      15      5.47      113       6.79      23       7.52    98     6.70     12    5.83      46    7.76     44    7.11      13     6.77     17     7.53      9     7.78   45     6.24    21      6.29
sources of information about the
institution.*
When I need information from the
World Bank Group I know how to        14      5.00      132       6.34      24       7.83   136     6.46     13    5.62      47    7.60     55    7.25      14     6.29     18     7.50     11     7.18   57     5.82    23      6.43
find it.*
The World Bank Group is
responsive to my information          15      5.13      115       6.62      24       7.58   108     6.21     14    6.21      46    7.39     50    7.06      14     5.64     18     7.33     10     6.50   48     6.21    16      5.81
requests and inquiries.
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                      102
The World Bank Group                                                                          Ghana                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Ghana? (Select all that apply)
                                              Office of                Consultant                              Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/        Financial     CBO/             Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral        Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency         Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
The World Bank (IDA)*                          53.3%       36.9%        72.4%       51.9%     26.7%            17.4%        23.0%     10.0%      31.3%       37.5%     8.6%         25.0%
The International Finance
                                               20.0%       14.5%        27.6%       15.3%     53.3%            15.9%        24.6%     20.0%      18.8%       25.0%     8.6%         12.5%
Corporation (IFC)*
The Multilateral Investment
                                               13.3%       11.2%        20.7%       8.7%      26.7%            11.6%        18.0%     10.0%      6.3%        12.5%     2.9%         12.5%
Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
None*                                          33.3%       53.6%        17.2%       41.5%     20.0%            71.0%        50.8%     70.0%      43.8%       62.5%    85.7%         65.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                              Office of                Consultant                              Private/      NGO/
                                                the       Employee      on WBG-              Bilateral/        Financial     CBO/             Independent
                                             President/     of a       supported    Local   Multilateral        Sector/     Private           Government     Trade
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister     Ministry   Project/PMU   Govt.     Agency         Private Bank   Found.    Media    Institution   Union   Academia        Other
Observer                                       44.4%       48.9%        34.5%       39.0%     33.3%            55.2%        47.0%     65.0%      44.4%       54.5%    53.7%         57.6%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*             55.6%       23.9%        41.4%       29.4%     60.0%            29.9%        34.8%     15.0%      16.7%       45.5%    26.9%         36.4%
Engage in World Bank Group
                                               27.8%       37.2%        37.9%       37.9%     40.0%             6.0%        21.2%     25.0%      11.1%       0.0%     11.9%          6.1%
related/sponsored events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my
                                               27.8%       22.3%        24.1%       27.7%     13.3%            14.9%        27.3%     15.0%      22.2%       18.2%    14.9%         12.1%
professional duties
Use World Bank Group website for
                                               22.2%       22.3%        20.7%       19.2%     26.7%            38.8%        21.2%     20.0%      33.3%       45.5%    35.8%         30.3%
information, data, research, etc.
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              103
The World Bank Group                                          Ghana                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations
Northern Sector N=255                Southern Sector N=146          Western Sector N=167           Eastern Sector N=219

A. General Issues Facing Ghana

In general, how would you say that Ghana is headed in...?*
Percentage of Respondents                               Northern             Southern           Western             Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                     Sector               Sector             Sector             Sector
The right direction                                       50.8%               36.4%              30.9%               46.0%
The wrong direction                                       23.8%               34.3%              27.3%               29.9%
Not sure                                                  25.4%               29.4%              41.8%               24.2%
*Significantly different between locations

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Ghana. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                  Northern          Southern           Western             Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                        Sector            Sector             Sector             Sector
Social protection*                                           2.8%              2.8%               9.6%               3.9%
Transport*                                                   4.0%             10.6%              16.4%               15.6%
Public sector governance/reform*                             8.3%             12.0%              19.5%               22.4%
Global/regional integration                                  1.2%              2.8%               0.6%               0.5%
Gender equity                                                0.4%              1.4%               1.9%               3.4%
Domestic private sector development                          7.5%             11.3%               8.2%               4.9%
Foreign direct investment*                                   0.4%              5.6%               2.5%               3.4%
Water and sanitation*                                        5.2%             10.6%              20.1%               17.1%
Anti-corruption                                             13.5%             13.4%              13.2%               15.6%
Job creation/employment*                                    43.7%             29.6%              25.8%               25.4%
Rural development                                           10.3%              7.7%               4.4%               8.3%
Financial markets                                            0.0%              1.4%               1.3%               2.4%
Urban development*                                           0.8%              0.7%               1.3%               3.9%
Environmental sustainability                                 1.2%              3.5%               3.8%               3.4%
Equality of opportunity                                      1.2%              0.7%               1.9%               1.5%
Health*                                                     40.5%             25.4%              25.8%               25.9%
Education                                                   54.0%             53.5%              48.4%               44.9%
Poverty reduction                                            7.1%             14.1%               6.3%               10.7%
Energy                                                      22.2%             22.5%              16.4%               19.0%
Food security*                                              14.7%              4.9%               3.1%               5.9%
Climate change                                               1.2%              0.0%               0.6%               1.0%
Agricultural development*                                   23.8%             28.2%              17.0%               15.1%
Trade and exports                                            7.1%              3.5%               2.5%               3.9%
Crime and violence                                           0.4%              2.8%               3.1%               2.0%
Economic growth                                             12.7%             12.7%              12.6%               16.1%
Law and justice                                              2.0%              5.6%               6.3%               4.9%
Regulatory framework                                         0.4%              0.7%               1.3%               0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       0.0%              0.0%               0.0%               1.0%
Natural resource management                                  9.5%              3.5%               7.5%               6.3%
Disaster management                                          0.4%              0.0%               0.0%               1.0%
Information and communications technology                    2.0%              2.8%               2.5%               4.4%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                               104
The World Bank Group                                     Ghana                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                             Northern          Southern          Western          Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                    Sector            Sector           Sector           Sector
Water and sanitation*                                    3.5%              4.1%            12.7%            11.3%
Equality of opportunity*                                 2.4%              6.2%             7.2%            10.8%
Economic growth*                                        51.4%             28.3%            30.7%            24.1%
Climate change                                           1.6%              0.7%             0.6%             1.4%
Global/regional integration                              0.4%              0.0%             0.6%             0.5%
Gender equity*                                           0.4%              3.4%             2.4%             5.2%
Rural development                                       22.7%             24.8%            30.7%            28.3%
Urban development                                        2.0%              3.4%             3.6%             3.8%
Regulatory framework                                     0.4%              0.7%             0.0%             0.5%
Social protection*                                       0.8%              3.4%             6.0%             1.9%
Law and justice*                                         0.4%              4.8%             5.4%             2.8%
Transport                                                3.1%              6.9%             6.0%             9.0%
Crime and violence                                       0.4%              2.8%             1.2%             3.3%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.4%              0.0%             0.0%             0.9%
Information and communications technology                0.4%              2.1%             1.2%             1.4%
Anti-corruption                                         23.5%             22.8%            19.9%            17.0%
Domestic private sector development                      8.6%             10.3%             8.4%             3.8%
Foreign direct investment                                0.0%              2.1%             1.8%             1.4%
Education                                               36.1%             40.7%            44.6%            46.2%
Energy*                                                 31.4%             11.0%             4.2%            10.4%
Public sector governance/reform*                         2.4%              7.6%             9.6%             9.4%
Natural resource management                              5.9%              4.8%            10.2%             9.9%
Environmental sustainability                             0.8%              0.7%             2.4%             0.9%
Disaster management                                      0.0%              0.0%             1.8%             1.4%
Health*                                                  3.5%              7.6%            19.3%            21.7%
Agricultural development*                               45.5%             40.7%            25.9%            25.5%
Job creation/employment                                 37.3%             41.4%            32.5%            29.7%
Financial markets*                                       0.4%              0.7%             0.0%             3.3%
Trade and exports*                                       7.8%              5.5%             2.4%             3.3%
Food security                                            5.1%              5.5%             3.6%             9.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          105
The World Bank Group                                     Ghana                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                              Northern        Southern         Western           Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                    Sector          Sector           Sector           Sector
Energy*                                                 34.9%            37.2%            24.1%            29.8%
Gender equity                                            1.6%            0.7%             0.6%             2.8%
Equality of opportunity                                  2.0%            3.4%             3.0%             4.2%
Social protection                                        3.1%            0.7%             2.4%             2.3%
Global/regional integration                              0.8%            1.4%             1.8%             1.9%
Climate change                                           0.4%            0.0%             0.6%             0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                        29.4%            21.4%            25.3%            16.3%
Disaster management*                                     0.4%            0.0%             1.2%             2.8%
Rural development                                       19.6%            13.1%            15.7%            15.8%
Foreign direct investment*                               3.1%            12.4%            5.4%             11.2%
Urban development                                        1.6%            0.7%             1.2%             0.9%
Water and sanitation                                     4.3%            2.1%             5.4%             3.7%
Education*                                              26.7%            29.0%            38.0%            35.8%
Information and communications technology*               2.0%            7.6%             3.0%             2.8%
Regulatory framework                                     0.4%            0.7%             2.4%             1.9%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.4%            0.7%             0.0%             0.0%
Trade and exports                                       23.1%            23.4%            13.9%            19.1%
Public sector governance/reform*                         6.3%            15.2%            12.7%            13.5%
Domestic private sector development                     13.3%            18.6%            15.7%            15.3%
Job creation/employment                                 40.0%            33.8%            35.5%            28.8%
Agricultural development                                41.6%            40.7%            30.7%            36.7%
Food security*                                          14.9%            2.8%             4.8%             2.8%
Transport*                                               3.1%            2.8%             3.0%             11.6%
Natural resource management*                            10.2%            12.4%            25.9%            12.6%
Environmental sustainability*                            0.4%            2.1%             4.2%             1.4%
Health                                                  11.0%            5.5%             12.0%            14.4%
Law and justice                                          2.0%            2.1%             4.2%             2.3%
Crime and violence                                       0.0%            0.0%             0.6%             0.5%
Financial markets                                        3.1%            6.2%             3.0%             6.5%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                         106
The World Bank Group                                                    Ghana                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                Northern         Southern           Western           Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                      Sector            Sector            Sector            Sector
Better employment opportunities for young
                                                          19.1%             35.3%             28.4%             36.5%
people*
Better employment opportunities for women*                26.6%              4.4%              2.0%              5.3%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor              16.6%             12.5%             12.2%             10.6%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help
                                                          11.2%             19.9%             16.9%             11.1%
ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens*       5.8%              7.4%             17.6%              9.0%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start
                                                          28.6%             27.9%             25.0%             21.7%
small and medium sized businesses)
A growing middle class*                                    1.2%              9.6%              4.1%              2.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural
                                                           9.1%              4.4%              8.8%             16.4%
areas*
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                           2.1%              1.5%              2.7%              3.2%
areas
Consistent economic growth                                19.1%             19.1%             14.9%             22.8%
More reliable social safety net*                           1.7%              8.1%              7.4%              5.8%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                            2.1%              4.4%              5.4%              7.4%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                          45.2%             37.5%             43.2%             40.2%
opportunity
Better quality public services                            10.4%              5.1%              6.8%              5.8%
Other                                                      0.8%              0.0%              1.4%              0.5%
*Significantly different between locations




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                         Northern Sector         Southern Sector       Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD       N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World
                                                        248    5.90    2.33     143      4.66   2.02   158   5.02   2.42     211     4.81    2.46
Bank Group in Ghana?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between locations


                                                         Northern Sector         Southern Sector       Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD       N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                        224    7.20    1.96     125      5.36   1.81   139   5.35   2.40     174     5.08    2.11
Bank Group’s effectiveness in Ghana.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations


                                                         Northern Sector         Southern Sector       Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD       N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank
 Group's staff is well prepared to help Ghana solve     218    7.93 1.94        110    5.72 1.96       123   5.80   2.36     165     5.61    2.32
 its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                         107
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Ghana, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                              Northern          Southern           Western          Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                    Sector             Sector            Sector           Sector
Social protection                                        2.4%               1.4%              3.6%             3.7%
Public sector governance/reform*                         7.6%              17.2%             24.7%            23.7%
Transport                                                8.0%              13.8%              9.6%            11.6%
Poverty reduction*                                      13.6%              29.7%             25.9%            27.0%
Global/regional integration                              0.4%               1.4%              2.4%             2.3%
Gender equity*                                           0.4%               0.0%              3.0%             2.8%
Crime and violence                                       1.2%               0.7%              0.0%             1.9%
Domestic private sector development                     10.4%              16.6%              9.0%             7.9%
Rural development                                       12.8%              20.0%             16.9%            18.1%
Foreign direct investment*                               0.0%               4.1%              4.2%             3.3%
Water and sanitation*                                    6.8%               8.3%             14.5%             7.9%
Energy                                                  19.2%              11.7%             13.3%            16.3%
Job creation/employment*                                30.8%              26.2%             16.9%            22.8%
Financial markets                                        2.4%               1.4%              1.2%             1.9%
Urban development                                        1.6%               2.8%              1.2%             0.9%
Environmental sustainability*                            0.4%               2.1%              4.8%             0.9%
Equality of opportunity                                  0.0%               2.1%              2.4%             2.3%
Health*                                                 36.8%              18.6%             23.5%            28.4%
Education                                               37.2%              40.7%             41.6%            39.1%
Food security                                            8.0%               2.1%              4.2%             5.1%
Climate change                                           0.8%               0.0%              1.2%             0.0%
Agricultural development                                33.2%              37.9%             27.1%            31.6%
Trade and exports*                                      15.6%               4.1%              2.4%             4.2%
Economic growth                                         18.0%              14.5%             13.9%            18.6%
Law and justice*                                         1.2%               4.1%              4.8%             0.5%
Regulatory framework                                     0.8%               0.7%              0.6%             1.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.4%               1.4%              0.0%             0.9%
Natural resource management                              8.8%               3.4%              7.8%             4.2%
Anti-corruption*                                        18.8%               4.8%             12.7%             8.8%
Information and communications technology                2.4%               2.1%              0.6%             0.9%
Disaster management                                      0.0%               1.4%              1.2%             0.9%
*Significantly different between locations

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE…
Greatest Value                                        Northern          Southern            Western             Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                                Sector            Sector            Sector             Sector
Convening/Facilitating*                                   3.1%              0.0%              6.3%               4.0%
Data                                                      3.1%              4.6%              8.3%               6.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                         21.0%             16.8%             16.7%               14.9%
Financial resources*                                     32.6%             45.8%             23.6%               38.9%
Capacity development                                     20.1%             21.4%             20.8%               17.7%
Technical assistance                                     10.3%              8.4%             13.2%               10.9%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                1.3%              0.8%              1.4%               2.9%
Donor coordination                                        4.9%              2.3%              7.6%               3.4%
Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                  3.1%              0.0%              1.4%               0.6%
Other                                                     0.4%              0.0%              0.7%               0.6%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            108
The World Bank Group                                                    Ghana                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

… and which activity is of second greatest value in Ghana?
 nd
2 Greatest Value                                         Northern                         Southern           Western               Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                                             Sector               Sector             Sector               Sector
Convening/Facilitating                                                 5.0%                 2.3%               0.7%                 4.7%
Data                                                                   7.2%                 6.9%               5.6%                 7.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                      12.7%                11.5%              17.5%                 16.9%
Financial resources                                                   14.5%                23.1%              14.7%                 18.0%
Capacity development*                                                 15.8%                31.5%              17.5%                 11.0%
Technical assistance*                                                 19.9%                14.6%              27.3%                 15.1%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                             6.3%                 0.8%               6.3%                 5.8%
Donor coordination*                                                   15.8%                 7.7%               7.0%                 15.1%
Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                               2.7%                 1.5%               2.8%                 5.2%
Other                                                                  0.0%                 0.0%               0.7%                 1.2%
*Significantly different between locations

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Ghana’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                                         Northern Sector         Southern Sector       Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD       N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Convening/Facilitating*                                 211    7.16    2.17     94       5.03   1.62   109   5.94   2.19     147     5.31    2.08
Data*                                                   218    7.89    2.07     104      6.11   2.05   117   6.56   2.38     146     6.05    2.13
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                       226    7.94    2.17     121      6.05   2.04   125   6.66   2.23     159     6.26    2.20
Financial resources*                                    219    7.67    2.22     126      6.85   1.94   132   7.11   2.34     168     6.54    2.10
Technical assistance*                                   219    7.79    2.22     125      6.40   2.02   130   7.09   2.09     157     6.14    2.09
Mobilizing third party financial resources*             203    6.33    2.35     100      5.27   2.08   113   5.97   2.46     139     5.66    1.95
Donor coordination*                                     213    6.97    2.27     103      5.94   1.99   118   6.71   2.25     140     6.33    2.17
Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing*               199    5.47    2.68     82       4.73   1.94   92    5.76   2.42     112     5.30    2.04
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Ghana. To what degree would Ghana
benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                                         Northern Sector         Southern Sector       Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD       N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
media) to help them more effectively engage and         228    8.39    1.84     125      7.19   2.20   140   7.69   2.21     178     6.82    2.42
participate in development efforts*
The public sector , related to implementation of
                                                        230    8.27    1.97     129      7.16   2.31   137   7.93   1.94     192     7.27    2.16
specific development projects on the ground*
The public sector , related to changing institutions
                                                        228    8.23    2.08     132      6.73   2.21   131   7.44   2.06     177     6.95    2.38
(organizations or sociopolitical conditions)*
 The private sector , related to institutional and
                                                        229    8.29 2.25        129    7.24 2.12       139   7.64   2.18     180     6.91    2.54
 policy change*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                         109
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Ghana?
                                                        Northern Sector         Southern Sector        Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                        N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD        N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational
                                                       193    7.44     2.43     105   6.33      2.08   92    6.97    2.11    139     6.22    2.15
strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
                                                       186    7.18     2.45     90    5.26      2.62   90    6.32    2.61    133     5.46    2.30
into development)*
 Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
                                                         184      7.69 2.44     102    5.89     2.29   94    6.55    2.42    134     6.22    2.16
 achieve development goals)*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Ghana to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
                                                        Northern Sector         Southern Sector        Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                        N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD        N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational
                                                       193    8.33     2.23     118   7.41      1.95   113   7.87    2.22    160     7.33    2.15
strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
                                                       197    8.61     2.23     117   7.48      2.19   118   8.02    2.15    162     7.41    2.23
into development)*
 Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
                                                      192      8.60 2.31      119    7.40       2.17   116   8.06    2.14    161     7.52    2.18
 achieve development goals)*
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between locations

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Ghana?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                            Northern           Southern             Western               Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                                  Sector             Sector               Sector               Sector
Staff too inaccessible*                                               20.5%               6.2%                12.6%                 14.9%
Not exploring alternative policy options*                             12.0%               4.1%                 6.3%                 11.5%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities
                                                                      17.7%               24.8%               18.9%                18.3%
in Ghana
Not enough public disclosure of its work*                             14.9%               26.9%               27.7%                33.2%
Arrogant in its approach                                              2.8%                0.7%                3.1%                 4.3%
Not aligned with country priorities                                   13.3%               17.2%               15.1%                12.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data*                                6.8%                2.1%                1.3%                 5.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                              14.5%               9.7%                16.4%                15.9%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                                      25.3%               13.1%               16.4%                11.5%
efforts in the country*
Too influenced by developed countries*                                15.3%               28.3%               19.5%                24.5%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                                      10.0%               17.9%               13.8%                 8.7%
political realities*
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                 7.6%                    1.4%            4.4%                  5.3%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                      12.0%               14.5%               13.2%                 9.1%
procedures
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                   4.4%                    2.8%            0.6%                  2.9%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors*                       10.4%                   8.3%            1.9%                  2.4%
Not client focused                                                    4.4%                    2.1%            2.5%                  2.4%
Other                                                                 0.0%                    0.0%            0.6%                  1.9%
Don't know                                                            4.4%                    8.3%            7.5%                  7.7%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                        110
The World Bank Group                                                 Ghana                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Ghana?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                                          Northern          Southern           Western               Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                                Sector            Sector             Sector               Sector
Capacity development                                                42.1%             50.0%              55.1%                 44.5%
Policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                                    25.5%              42.5%             24.4%                30.1%
Government*
Knowledge products/services*                                        27.5%              8.9%              12.2%                18.2%
Investment lending                                                  28.3%              34.9%             32.1%                32.5%
Technical assistance*                                               48.6%              34.9%             46.2%                38.8%
Trust Fund management                                               15.0%              7.5%              8.3%                 10.0%
Other                                                               0.8%               0.7%              0.6%                 1.9%
Don't know                                                          5.3%               8.2%              6.4%                 8.6%
*Significantly different between locations

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents                                          Northern          Southern           Western               Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                                Sector            Sector             Sector               Sector
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes*                           22.5%             34.2%              32.7%                 31.6%
Donor Community                                                     17.3%              9.6%              10.7%                 12.0%
Media                                                                6.8%             13.7%              12.6%                 13.4%
NGOs*                                                               34.5%             11.0%              19.5%                 14.4%
Local Government                                                    32.1%             43.8%              41.5%                 35.4%
Private Sector*                                                     40.2%             41.8%              27.7%                 35.4%
Parliament                                                           4.4%              2.7%               3.8%                 5.7%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                19.7%             17.8%              23.3%                 19.1%
Beneficiaries                                                       10.4%             15.1%              12.6%                 11.0%
Foundations*                                                         6.0%              0.7%               1.3%                 4.8%
Faith-Based Organizations*                                           2.4%              0.7%               1.3%                 5.3%
Other                                                                0.0%              1.4%               1.3%                 1.9%
Don't know                                                           0.8%              1.4%               3.1%                 3.8%
*Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Ghana?
                                                      Northern Sector         Southern Sector     Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                      N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD     N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                     235    7.61     2.28     128   6.24   2.07   145   6.38   2.65     194     5.99    2.33
relevant role in development in Ghana*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
                                                     233    7.10     2.49     123   4.99   2.24   132   5.58   2.48     189     5.15    2.15
consider the development priorities for Ghana*
The World Bank Group supports programs and
                                                     229    7.28     2.40     126   5.52   2.19   137   5.83   2.58     186     5.62    2.22
strategies that are realistic for Ghana*
 The World Bank Group treats clients and
                                                       227     7.83 2.46      100   5.44   2.31   124   5.85   2.68     173     5.64    2.25
 stakeholders in Ghana with respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                      111
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Ghana, in terms of each of the following?
                                                          Northern Sector       Southern Sector       Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                          N    Mean    SD       N    Mean    SD       N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness*                                           224   6.46   2.34    101    5.27    1.91    134   5.71   2.34     166     5.43    2.12
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
                                                          222   6.64   2.02    103    4.58    1.88    127   5.09   2.20     165     4.96    1.82
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                          223   6.60   2.07    109    4.84    2.05    135   5.05   2.35     167     4.89    2.03
circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                                          219   6.88   2.11    101    4.92    2.03    123   5.91   2.31     170     5.17    2.17
Openness (sharing data and other information)*            224   7.69   2.22    108    5.53    2.29    141   5.82   2.37     178     5.53    2.40
Staff accessibility*                                      218   6.19   2.39    102    4.22    2.01    124   5.17   2.28     161     4.90    2.44
Straightforwardness and honesty*                          226   7.21   2.39    108    5.46    2.65    140   5.83   2.60     168     5.82    2.17
Ease of access to the people at the WBG who are
                                                          219   6.69   2.27    101    4.29    2.15    121   4.88   2.30     149     5.01    2.24
making decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                         222   6.16   2.22    115    4.75    2.31    130   5.69   2.30     167     5.48    2.23
Collaboration with the Government*                        221   7.87   2.22    128    6.76    2.02    131   7.53   2.02     179     6.93    2.11
Collaboration with other donors and development
                                                          222   7.32   2.20    107    6.23    1.83    126   6.76   2.19     160     6.31    2.29
partners*
Collaboration with the private sector*                    220   5.55   2.33    107    4.67    2.02    117   5.55   2.05     150     5.27    2.27
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
                                                          221   6.40   2.18    102    5.37    1.99    132   5.55   2.51     157     5.37    2.13
the ground*
Being a long-term partner*                                225   7.84   2.10    117    6.88    2.26    137   7.29   2.35     169     6.78    2.21
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To be a more effective development partner in Ghana, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…? *
                                                       Northern          Southern        Western          Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                               Sector            Sector          Sector          Sector
More local presence                                     87.6%             84.2%           82.4%            71.4%
The current level of local presence is adequate          5.8%             10.8%            9.8%            14.3%
Less local presence                                      1.7%              1.4%            4.6%            6.7%
Don't know                                               5.0%              3.6%            3.3%            7.6%
*Significantly different between locations

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                               Northern          Southern           Western          Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                     Sector            Sector             Sector          Sector
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                         25.5%              9.0%              20.0%            17.6%
through/follow-up*
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                         35.5%             47.6%              41.3%            39.5%
participation
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                         19.5%             26.2%              23.1%            22.4%
political/social realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                         17.9%             24.1%              17.5%            16.7%
Government
Poor donor coordination*                                 16.7%             11.0%               7.5%            12.9%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                     9.2%              4.1%               6.3%            10.5%
The Government works inefficiently                       22.7%             24.1%              18.8%            20.0%
Political pressures and obstacles*                       31.1%             17.9%              33.1%            22.9%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                         19.1%             22.8%              22.5%            28.6%
challenges
Other                                                     0.4%              1.4%               0.6%            2.9%
*Significantly different between locations



                                                                        112
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                              Northern Sector     Southern Sector     Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                              N    Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD     N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Anti-corruption*                             241   8.86   1.84    140   8.05   2.24   155   8.06   2.57     196     7.77    2.69
Information and communications technology*   239   8.48   1.84    135   7.85   1.97   154   8.01   2.12     197     7.62    2.07
Transport*                                   243   8.55   1.79    136   8.05   1.91   149   7.94   2.14     197     8.04    2.04
Crime and violence*                          236   8.47   1.95    128   6.71   2.52   147   6.58   2.45     190     6.65    2.66
Law and justice*                             236   7.65   2.31    127   6.83   2.39   148   6.69   2.64     193     6.90    2.45
Urban development*                           235   8.11   2.27    135   7.84   1.97   152   8.06   1.96     194     7.52    2.06
Environmental sustainability*                240   8.44   1.81    130   7.72   1.96   152   8.16   1.84     193     7.66    1.99
Regulatory framework*                        230   8.26   1.99    125   6.62   2.44   146   7.10   2.30     184     6.97    2.27
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*      240   8.58   1.80    129   7.35   2.23   155   7.55   2.39     194     7.52    2.29
Poverty reduction*                           239   8.92   1.76    136   8.71   1.77   152   8.63   1.84     196     8.38    2.03
Gender equity*                               235   7.90   2.09    130   7.02   2.16   147   6.79   2.43     197     6.86    2.56
Domestic private sector development*         232   8.29   2.14    128   7.89   1.98   152   7.68   2.17     190     7.57    2.27
Foreign direct investment*                   235   8.33   2.07    133   7.96   1.73   146   7.58   2.10     190     7.38    2.31
Water and sanitation*                        244   9.08   1.65    134   8.10   1.89   152   8.47   1.82     196     8.19    1.99
Trade and exports*                           237   8.26   2.13    131   7.40   2.03   151   7.57   2.21     198     7.47    2.35
Economic growth*                             240   8.87   1.78    135   8.38   1.81   153   8.30   2.17     197     8.06    2.12
Energy*                                      238   9.00   1.66    136   8.11   2.11   154   8.43   2.01     194     8.20    2.06
Disaster management*                         237   8.61   1.96    130   7.41   2.12   150   7.15   2.25     192     7.13    2.43
Public sector governance/reform*             235   8.58   1.91    134   7.62   2.08   150   7.98   2.38     188     7.77    2.11
Job creation/employment*                     237   8.76   1.93    137   8.32   1.97   155   8.21   2.26     195     7.77    2.36
Financial markets*                           231   8.37   1.87    132   7.44   2.16   144   7.15   2.29     185     7.37    2.21
Equality of opportunity*                     230   8.14   1.88    120   7.22   2.21   146   7.12   2.38     181     7.19    2.43
Health*                                      239   9.31   1.29    133   8.34   1.78   154   8.57   1.79     196     8.28    2.05
Rural development*                           234   9.08   1.56    129   8.36   1.93   149   8.40   1.90     191     8.24    2.01
Global/regional integration*                 231   8.45   1.84    122   7.11   2.22   147   7.02   2.33     184     7.01    2.48
Food security*                               239   8.93   1.59    128   7.82   2.12   151   7.86   2.35     191     7.80    2.20
Education*                                   239   9.18   1.54    135   8.73   1.72   155   8.43   1.94     192     8.30    2.16
Social protection*                           234   8.02   2.02    126   7.17   2.16   153   7.16   2.50     194     7.06    2.43
Climate change*                              227   8.20   2.00    127   7.07   2.18   156   7.53   2.35     180     6.83    2.60
Agricultural development*                    240   9.18   1.48    138   8.72   1.82   154   8.75   1.63     197     8.34    2.09
Natural resource management*                 237   8.56   1.91    130   7.45   2.39   156   7.96   2.30     195     7.44    2.52
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           113
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                              Northern Sector      Southern Sector     Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                              N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD     N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Anti-corruption*                             207    4.36   2.72    87    4.21   2.62   90    5.16   2.74     149     4.84    2.46
Information and communications technology*   211    5.86   2.10    91    4.81   2.27   100   6.01   2.17     147     5.46    2.16
Transport*                                   207    5.48   2.32    105   6.09   2.14   106   6.41   2.24     158     5.88    2.39
Crime and violence*                          201    4.99   2.70    73    4.41   2.34   85    4.93   2.29     131     4.62    2.33
Law and justice                              199    5.06   2.87    74    4.50   2.53   91    4.99   2.12     135     5.21    2.38
Urban development                            217    5.92   2.35    100   5.90   2.44   119   6.59   2.33     162     5.97    2.19
Environmental sustainability                 211    5.71   2.47    99    5.75   2.27   111   6.34   2.39     157     6.10    2.14
Regulatory framework                         200    5.55   2.43    81    5.17   2.60   95    5.91   2.34     151     5.81    2.21
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*      210    6.72   2.10    91    5.88   2.37   106   6.36   2.30     161     5.81    2.29
Poverty reduction                            221    5.98   2.65    118   5.82   2.60   120   6.58   2.41     170     6.26    2.31
Gender equity*                               200    5.23   2.64    91    5.30   2.21   104   6.02   2.32     150     5.65    2.30
Domestic private sector development*         203    5.23   2.40    88    4.85   2.42   96    5.89   2.32     143     5.31    2.28
Foreign direct investment*                   213    6.05   2.43    97    5.73   2.21   100   6.47   2.29     146     5.57    2.29
Water and sanitation*                        217    6.59   2.12    107   6.19   2.41   124   6.91   2.45     171     6.04    2.39
Trade and exports*                           211    5.36   2.41    93    4.81   2.20   98    6.09   2.32     142     5.62    2.35
Economic growth                              216    5.99   2.50    105   5.51   2.33   112   6.08   2.54     165     6.01    2.36
Energy*                                      209    5.30   2.70    89    5.01   2.66   103   5.84   2.49     152     5.88    2.44
Disaster management*                         209    5.58   2.52    88    4.45   2.56   94    5.68   2.28     147     5.27    2.34
Public sector governance/reform*             207    6.61   2.21    107   5.65   2.28   104   6.24   2.24     162     5.91    2.32
Job creation/employment*                     217    5.54   2.47    108   4.35   2.56   107   5.34   2.57     157     4.85    2.38
Financial markets                            198    5.75   2.53    94    5.20   2.19   92    5.75   2.48     151     5.58    2.31
Equality of opportunity*                     195    5.39   2.45    85    4.67   2.28   87    5.64   2.44     143     5.24    2.36
Health*                                      211    6.91   2.01    111   6.21   2.22   118   6.91   2.31     166     6.34    2.35
Rural development*                           214    5.43   2.51    111   5.91   2.39   116   6.53   2.24     169     5.86    2.33
Global/regional integration*                 206    5.67   2.33    87    5.33   2.29   99    6.15   2.02     147     5.37    2.32
Food security                                212    5.79   2.53    99    5.40   2.38   108   6.04   2.34     160     5.74    2.11
Education*                                   218    6.71   2.11    113   6.15   2.29   118   6.81   2.32     173     6.16    2.25
Social protection                            204    5.26   2.59    81    4.75   2.39   104   5.57   2.58     142     5.24    2.26
Climate change*                              193    5.30   2.61    84    4.90   2.42   101   5.99   2.40     141     5.60    2.35
Agricultural development                     218    6.36   2.17    112   6.01   2.30   116   6.28   2.38     168     6.10    2.25
Natural resource management                  201    5.46   3.05    92    4.71   2.65   103   5.54   2.46     154     5.49    2.40
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            114
The World Bank Group                                                  Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Ghana?*
                                                     Northern           Southern        Western                                   Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                             Sector             Sector          Sector                                   Sector
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)              63.6%              31.2%           28.0%                                     36.9%
In the country                                        19.6%              27.0%           21.1%                                     18.0%
Don't know                                            16.8%              41.8%           50.9%                                     45.1%
*Significantly different between locations


                                                       Northern Sector         Southern Sector        Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                       N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD        N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work
                                                      228     7.36    1.99    128     5.63   1.88     137   6.48   2.20     180     5.90    1.92
help to achieve development results in Ghana?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Ghana?
                                                       Northern Sector         Southern Sector        Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                       N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD        N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
 The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet
                                                      230      7.04 2.39     111    4.69     2.18     145   4.92   2.36     183     4.85    2.18
 the needs of Ghana*
 The World Bank Group meets Ghana’s needs for
                                                      228      7.48 2.29     110    5.39     2.27     140   5.44   2.51     180     5.27    2.19
 knowledge services*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations


                                                       Northern Sector         Southern Sector        Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                       N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD        N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group
measures and corrects its work in real time in        216     7.39    2.01     87    5.38    1.78     110   5.85   2.32     148     5.45    2.14
Ghana?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
Percentage of Respondents                            Northern        Southern           Western                                   Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                  Sector          Sector              Sector                                  Sector
Weekly                                                24.2%             .7%                1.3%                                    2.4%
Monthly                                               39.3%             2.1%               3.8%                                    8.5%
A few times a year                                    11.9%            22.0%              28.3%                                    29.4%
Rarely                                                 6.3%            38.3%              29.6%                                    25.1%
Never                                                 18.3%            36.9%              37.1%                                    34.6%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                       115
The World Bank Group                                                     Ghana                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Ghana, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                         Northern Sector          Southern Sector         Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD          N    Mean    SD         N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Are timely*                                             223     6.71    2.25     97      5.36    2.08    115    5.90   2.34     149     5.17    1.93
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement
                                                        222     7.00    2.18     97      5.33    2.10    118    5.97   2.31     157     5.43    2.19
during preparation*
Are relevant to Ghana’s development priorities*         230     7.46    2.06     117     5.78    2.16    127    6.02   2.33     171     5.56    2.03
Lead to practical solutions*                            226     7.30    2.04     100     5.32    1.90    117    5.91   2.44     169     5.29    2.05
Are accessible (well written and easy to
                                                        228     6.03    2.35     99      5.10    2.12    120    5.98   2.52     168     5.51    2.25
understand)*
Are source of relevant information on global good
                                                        224     7.52    1.99     108     5.85    1.90    120    6.51   2.22     166     6.03    2.05
practices*
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills*                   224     7.19    1.97     114     5.76    2.09    121    6.31   2.39     175     6.03    1.79
Are adequately disseminated*                            222     6.08    2.04     104     4.64    2.01    119    5.78   2.42     165     4.90    2.14
Are translated enough into local language*              171     4.04    2.57     103     3.05    1.99    108    4.81   2.61     151     3.52    2.23
Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific development
                                                        224     7.00    2.30     116     4.48    2.14    125    5.78   2.49     168     4.73    2.06
challenges and country circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations


                                                         Northern Sector          Southern Sector         Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD          N    Mean    SD         N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the WBG's knowledge work and activities         221     7.90    1.73     123    5.60     1.88    141    6.50   1.97     187     5.70    2.00
make to development results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of
                                                        225     8.04    1.90     112    5.79     1.97    135    6.46   2.16     180     6.37    1.95
the WBG's knowledge work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between locations




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Ghana’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                         Northern Sector          Southern Sector         Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                         N    Mean    SD          N    Mean    SD         N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the
                                                        214     7.20    2.13     106     5.42    2.05    128    6.20   2.20     149     5.47    2.07
problem)*
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)*         213     7.60    2.02     113     5.34    2.04    127    6.39   2.28     152     5.70    2.13
Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring
                                                        211     7.48    1.98     118     6.02    1.94    133    6.56   2.26     159     5.83    2.14
and making appropriate adjustments)*
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)*          216     7.67    1.98     118     6.34    2.04    130    6.84   2.29     156     6.09    2.16
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                         116
The World Bank Group                                                Ghana                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                       Northern Sector      Southern Sector     Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                       N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD     N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*         218   6.23   2.15    126   5.55   2.28   136   5.42   2.64     158     5.03    2.10
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and
                                                       228   6.94   1.90    133   6.74   2.07   143   6.36   2.68     175     6.07    2.05
evaluates the projects and programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are
                                                       217   6.44   1.90    110   5.75   1.84   129   5.50   2.53     162     5.10    2.09
done in a timely fashion*
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
                                                       207   6.75   2.03    100   5.63   2.15   125   6.01   2.61     152     5.50    2.08
requirements are reasonable*
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are
                                                       221   6.30   2.22    118   4.46   2.17   129   4.88   2.66     165     4.64    2.27
reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in
                                                       218   6.45   2.02    97    4.81   2.17   127   5.15   2.60     163     4.64    2.15
Ghana*
Working with the World Bank Group increases
                                                       223   7.20   2.03    131   6.21   2.13   141   6.40   2.52     184     6.00    2.09
Ghana’s institutional capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and
                                                       213   6.87   2.06    82    5.35   2.12   108   5.76   2.40     142     5.25    2.22
continuity through staff changes*
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                       216   7.12   2.14    109   6.25   2.13   124   6.52   2.54     156     5.56    2.19
Bank Group makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides effective
                                                       224   7.22   2.00    129   6.64   2.20   137   6.50   2.58     179     6.01    2.18
implementation support*
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Ghana?*
                                                       Northern        Southern                       Western               Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                                Sector          Sector                        Sector               Sector
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Ghana         8.8%            4.2%                          3.2%                 4.3%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in
                                                         39.0%           27.1%                         25.5%                29.0%
Ghana
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is
                                                         25.7%           21.5%                         21.7%                14.3%
appropriate
Don't know                                               18.9%           32.6%                         31.2%                35.7%
Prefer not to answer                                      7.6%           14.6%                         18.5%                16.7%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                     117
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Ghana? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents                           Northern           Southern           Western          Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                  Sector             Sector            Sector           Sector
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                      40.2%              27.5%             23.3%            27.6%
statistics/figures on Ghana’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government
                                                      16.9%              28.2%             35.2%            25.7%
clients*
Offer more innovative financial products              17.7%              15.5%             16.4%            18.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                       9.8%               4.9%              5.7%             4.8%
compared to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government        32.3%              28.9%             30.2%            26.7%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                      14.2%              14.8%             11.3%            13.3%
Ghana’s specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services               9.4%              12.7%              6.3%             9.0%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                11.0%               4.9%              6.3%             8.1%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                      18.9%              26.8%             27.0%            21.9%
country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                      15.0%              30.3%             24.5%            22.4%
Group financing*
Work faster*                                           9.4%               2.8%              2.5%            11.9%
Other*                                                 1.2%               0.0%              2.5%             4.3%
*Significantly different between locations

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Ghana, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Ghana?
                                                         Northern         Southern         Western           Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                                  Sector          Sector           Sector           Sector
Financial services                                         36.2%           35.7%            27.0%             37.7%
Knowledge products                                         18.3%            7.7%            19.5%             18.4%
Convening services                                          6.5%            5.6%             5.7%             3.8%
None of the above                                           4.1%           11.2%             3.8%             1.9%
The combination is appropriate for Ghana                   29.3%           33.6%            39.0%             31.6%
Don't know                                                  5.7%            6.3%             5.0%             6.6%


G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Ghana? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents                            Northern          Southern         Western           Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                  Sector            Sector           Sector            Sector
Local newspapers*                                      16.3%            59.6%            55.6%             52.6%
International newspapers                               4.0%              2.7%             3.1%              5.6%
Local radio*                                           10.7%            47.3%            44.4%             30.0%
International radio                                    6.3%              3.4%             4.9%              6.6%
Local television*                                      16.3%            38.4%            37.7%             31.9%
International television                               4.4%              6.2%             5.6%              8.0%
Periodicals*                                           9.1%              2.1%             3.7%              6.6%
Internet*                                              69.8%            33.6%            27.2%             41.3%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
                                                       11.9%             3.4%            10.5%              6.6%
Flickr)*
Blogs*                                                 27.8%             0.0%             0.0%              0.9%
Mobile phones*                                         13.9%             0.0%             1.2%              2.8%
Instant messaging*                                     5.6%              0.0%             0.0%              0.9%
Other                                                  0.8%              0.7%             0.6%              1.4%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           118
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                             Northern        Southern           Western              Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                   Sector           Sector            Sector              Sector
Blogs*                                                 17.4%             3.4%              4.3%                4.3%
Direct contact with World Bank Group*                  11.9%            35.6%             17.4%                18.5%
e-Newsletters*                                          8.7%            13.7%             21.1%                17.5%
Instant messaging                                       6.3%             8.2%             10.6%                9.5%
World Bank Group's
                                                       31.2%            45.2%             29.2%                32.7%
seminars/workshops/conferences*
World Bank Group's publications and other written
                                                       17.8%            30.1%             29.2%                30.3%
materials*
Mobile phones                                          20.2%            11.0%             20.5%                19.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
                                                       36.8%            19.9%             32.3%                23.2%
Flickr)*
World Bank Group's website*                            45.5%            22.6%             24.8%                33.2%
Other                                                   1.6%             0.7%              0.6%                2.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                                       Northern         Southern           Western           Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                               Sector            Sector            Sector            Sector
Yes                                                      39.7%            30.0%              7.3%             21.5%
No                                                       60.3%            70.0%             92.7%             78.5%
*Significantly different between locations

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                     Northern           Southern           Western            Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                             Sector              Sector            Sector            Sector
Yes                                                   61.0%                6.0%             10.7%              28.4%
No                                                    39.0%               94.0%             89.3%              71.6%
*Significantly different between locations

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                                       Northern          Southern         Western             Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                               Sector            Sector           Sector             Sector
Yes                                                     96.4%             75.0%            53.3%               85.7%
No                                                       3.6%             25.0%            46.7%               14.3%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                       Northern          Southern         Western             Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                               Sector            Sector           Sector             Sector
Yes                                                     93.9%             92.4%            91.4%               90.1%
No                                                       6.1%              7.6%             8.6%               9.9%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                                       Northern          Southern         Western             Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                               Sector            Sector           Sector             Sector
Yes                                                     77.0%             42.4%            29.0%               49.0%
No                                                      23.0%             57.6%            71.0%               51.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           119
The World Bank Group                                               Ghana                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?*
                                                                 Northern          Southern           Western               Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                                         Sector            Sector             Sector               Sector
The World Bank Group’s country website                            58.9%             67.9%              43.4%                 54.0%
The World Bank Group’s main website                               41.1%             32.1%              56.6%                 46.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
                                                       Northern         Southern                      Western               Eastern
Percentage of Respondents                                Sector           Sector                       Sector               Sector
High speed                                               64.1%            73.8%                        53.9%                 61.7%
Dial-up                                                  35.9%            26.2%                        46.1%                 38.3%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                    Northern Sector         Southern Sector     Western Sector          Eastern Sector
                                                    N    Mean    SD         N    Mean    SD     N   Mean     SD        N    Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often
                                                    219   7.19     2.64     110   3.11   2.41   121   3.84   2.81     148     4.45    2.31
than I did a few years ago.*
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to
                                                    204   8.02     1.93     87    4.86   2.53   69    5.46   2.68     128     5.73    2.39
navigate.*
I find the information on the World Bank Group's
                                                    204   8.47     1.82     85    5.74   2.52   70    6.21   2.64     126     6.67    2.17
websites useful.*
The World Bank Group's social media channels are
valuable sources of information about the           204   8.23     1.86     60    5.22   2.85   84    5.95   2.65     109     5.84    2.33
institution.*
When I need information from the World Bank Group
                                                    206   8.23     2.19     103   4.95   2.84   100   5.76   2.84     134     5.88    2.69
I know how to find it.*
The World Bank Group is responsive to my
                                                    202   8.47     1.98     78    4.31   2.77   84    5.29   2.92     114     5.69    2.49
information requests and inquiries.*
*Significantly different between locations



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Ghana? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents                              Northern        Southern          Western                            Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                    Sector           Sector            Sector                           Sector
The World Bank (IDA)*                                   37.2%            41.5%             36.6%                             26.1%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)*            27.4%            11.5%             15.5%                             9.2%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
                                                        24.8%             4.6%              4.9%                             3.9%
(MIGA)*
None*                                                   40.7%            55.4%             53.5%                            67.6%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Ghana?              (Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents                               Northern        Southern                      Western               Eastern
(Responses Combined)                                     Sector           Sector                       Sector               Sector
Observer*                                                36.6%            56.7%                        45.1%                 55.2%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                       36.1%            33.6%                        26.4%                 21.9%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                         23.1%            34.3%                        31.3%                23.9%
events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties            25.2%            17.9%                        18.1%                22.9%
Use World Bank Group website for information,
                                                         27.7%            17.9%                        26.4%                27.9%
data, research, etc.
*Significantly different between locations



                                                                    120
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Collaborators
Collaborators N=327              Non-Collaborators N=456

A. General Issues Facing Ghana

In general, how would you say that Ghana is headed in...?*
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
The right direction                                                                50.9%                37.7%
The wrong direction                                                                24.2%                30.9%
Not sure                                                                           24.8%                31.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Ghana. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                                   2.8%                 5.3%
Transport*                                                                          7.8%                13.6%
Public sector governance/reform*                                                   10.7%                18.9%
Global/regional integration                                                         1.9%                 0.7%
Gender equity*                                                                      0.3%                 2.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                 7.8%                 7.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                           3.8%                 1.8%
Water and sanitation                                                               11.3%                13.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                    11.9%                15.0%
Job creation/employment                                                            33.9%                31.4%
Rural development                                                                   8.8%                 7.6%
Financial markets                                                                   0.6%                 1.6%
Urban development                                                                   0.9%                 2.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                        3.8%                 2.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                             1.3%                 1.4%
Health*                                                                            37.6%                24.9%
Education*                                                                         56.4%                45.7%
Poverty reduction*                                                                  6.6%                11.1%
Energy                                                                             19.7%                20.3%
Food security*                                                                     13.2%                 4.4%
Climate change                                                                      0.9%                 0.9%
Agricultural development                                                           20.7%                21.2%
Trade and exports                                                                   5.0%                 4.6%
Crime and violence                                                                  2.5%                 1.4%
Economic growth                                                                    13.5%                13.2%
Law and justice                                                                     3.1%                 4.8%
Regulatory framework                                                                0.6%                 0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              0.0%                 0.5%
Natural resource management*                                                        4.7%                 9.2%
Disaster management                                                                 0.3%                 0.5%
Information and communications technology                                           2.2%                 3.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       121
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators     Non-Collaborators
Water and sanitation                                                                7.1%               7.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                             5.0%               7.3%
Economic growth*                                                                   47.4%              26.4%
Climate change                                                                      0.9%               1.3%
Global/regional integration                                                         0.3%               0.4%
Gender equity                                                                       3.1%               2.4%
Rural development*                                                                 19.8%              30.4%
Urban development                                                                   2.5%               3.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                0.6%               0.2%
Social protection                                                                   1.9%               3.3%
Law and justice                                                                     2.2%               3.8%
Transport                                                                           5.9%               6.2%
Crime and violence                                                                  1.5%               2.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              0.0%               0.7%
Information and communications technology                                           1.2%               1.3%
Anti-corruption*                                                                   17.6%              23.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                 7.4%               7.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                           0.9%               1.3%
Education                                                                          44.0%              40.4%
Energy*                                                                            21.1%              12.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                                     5.9%               7.5%
Natural resource management                                                         5.3%               8.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                        0.6%               1.3%
Disaster management                                                                 0.6%               0.9%
Health*                                                                             9.6%              14.9%
Agricultural development*                                                          39.0%              31.9%
Job creation/employment                                                            33.7%              35.9%
Financial markets                                                                   0.6%               1.6%
Trade and exports                                                                   6.5%               4.0%
Food security                                                                       4.6%               6.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       122
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Energy                                                                             31.3%             32.0%
Gender equity                                                                       2.2%              1.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                             2.5%              4.0%
Social protection                                                                   3.4%              1.6%
Global/regional integration                                                         1.8%              1.1%
Climate change                                                                      0.3%              0.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                    21.8%             24.7%
Disaster management                                                                 0.9%              1.3%
Rural development                                                                  18.1%             15.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                           6.8%              8.2%
Urban development                                                                   1.8%              0.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                3.1%              4.4%
Education                                                                          31.0%             32.0%
Information and communications technology                                           4.3%              2.9%
Regulatory framework*                                                               0.3%              2.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              0.3%              0.2%
Trade and exports                                                                  17.2%             22.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                                     9.2%             12.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                16.0%             14.7%
Job creation/employment                                                            37.7%             32.4%
Agricultural development                                                           38.7%             38.0%
Food security*                                                                     13.2%              2.7%
Transport                                                                           4.0%              6.0%
Natural resource management                                                        11.7%             16.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                        1.2%              2.0%
Health                                                                             12.9%             10.2%
Law and justice                                                                     2.8%              2.7%
Crime and violence                                                                  0.0%              0.4%
Financial markets                                                                   4.0%              4.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       123
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                     Collaborators                  Non-Collaborators
Better employment opportunities for young people*                                            20.7%                           34.2%
Better employment opportunities for women*                                                   21.3%                            4.2%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                 16.1%                           11.2%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater
                                                                                             15.1%                               12.9%
accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens*                                          6.2%                               11.7%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium
                                                                                             22.6%                               28.5%
sized businesses)
A growing middle class                                                                       3.6%                                3.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas*                                     5.6%                                13.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                      2.3%                                2.5%
Consistent economic growth                                                                   21.0%                               18.1%
More reliable social safety net                                                              5.2%                                5.2%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                              4.3%                                5.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                    44.3%                               40.4%
Better quality public services                                                               8.9%                                6.5%
Other                                                                                        0.7%                                0.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean      SD      N    Mean      SD

How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Ghana?*              317    5.99    2.08    439    4.59     2.40

(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean     SD      N     Mean      SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                     306 6.65 2.06 351 5.31              2.22
 effectiveness in Ghana.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean     SD      N     Mean      SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared
                                                                                     297 7.07 2.19 315 5.94 2.43
 to help Ghana solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       124
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Ghana, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators        Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                                   3.4%                  2.4%
Public sector governance/reform*                                                   13.6%                 20.9%
Transport                                                                          10.5%                 11.1%
Poverty reduction*                                                                 14.9%                 28.3%
Global/regional integration                                                         0.9%                  2.0%
Gender equity                                                                       1.2%                  1.8%
Crime and violence                                                                  0.9%                  1.3%
Domestic private sector development                                                11.8%                  9.6%
Rural development*                                                                 13.3%                 19.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                           1.5%                  3.3%
Water and sanitation                                                               10.8%                  7.1%
Energy                                                                             17.0%                 14.9%
Job creation/employment                                                            27.2%                 23.2%
Financial markets                                                                   2.2%                  1.6%
Urban development                                                                   1.5%                  1.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                        2.2%                  1.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                             0.9%                  2.0%
Health*                                                                            34.7%                 23.8%
Education                                                                          42.1%                 37.2%
Food security                                                                       6.8%                  4.2%
Climate change                                                                      0.6%                  0.4%
Agricultural development                                                           32.5%                 32.3%
Trade and exports                                                                   9.3%                  6.2%
Economic growth                                                                    16.4%                 15.8%
Law and justice                                                                     3.1%                  1.6%
Regulatory framework                                                                0.9%                  0.9%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              0.6%                  0.7%
Natural resource management*                                                        3.7%                  7.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                    11.5%                 12.5%
Information and communications technology                                           1.2%                  1.8%
Disaster management                                                                 0.3%                  1.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE…
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators        Non-Collaborators
Convening/Facilitating                                                              3.5%                  3.4%
Data                                                                                3.9%                  6.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                  21.8%                 15.1%
Financial resources*                                                               29.2%                 39.1%
Capacity development                                                               22.2%                 18.0%
Technical assistance                                                                8.5%                 12.2%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                          2.1%                  1.3%
Donor coordination                                                                  6.0%                  3.4%
Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                                            2.1%                  1.0%
Other                                                                               0.7%                  0.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       125
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

… and which activity is of second greatest value in Ghana?
 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Collaborators                Non-Collaborators
Convening/Facilitating                                                                         3.9%                          2.9%
Data                                                                                           5.0%                          7.9%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                              9.6%                         18.0%
Financial resources                                                                           18.8%                         15.6%
Capacity development                                                                          19.1%                         16.9%
Technical assistance                                                                          20.9%                         18.3%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                     5.3%                          5.3%
Donor coordination                                                                            13.5%                         11.6%
Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                                                       3.5%                          2.9%
Other                                                                                          0.4%                          0.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Ghana’s efforts to achieve development results?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N     Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD
Convening/Facilitating*                                                           272    6.34    2.14    287    5.83   2.33
Data*                                                                             283    7.07    2.22    303    6.60   2.37
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                 292    7.25    2.20    339    6.55   2.39
Financial resources*                                                              291    7.47    1.94    353    6.78   2.38
Technical assistance*                                                             289    7.42    2.03    344    6.54   2.33
Mobilizing third party financial resources*                                       267    6.14    2.21    288    5.67   2.29
Donor coordination*                                                               277    6.81    2.12    299    6.32   2.32
Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                                          253    5.45    2.36    233    5.24   2.42
 (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Ghana. To what degree
would Ghana benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N     Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                                  300     7.62   2.20    370    7.60   2.28
more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                  304     7.77   2.05    383    7.63   2.24
projects on the ground
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                                  302     7.67   2.15    365    7.22   2.37
sociopolitical conditions)*
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                   299     7.66   2.35    376    7.50   2.39
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         126
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                               Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Ghana?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                    269    7.12    2.20    261      6.46    2.40
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)*              249    6.78    2.36    251      5.66    2.70
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                   256    7.14    2.30    259      6.31    2.55
goals)*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Ghana to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                     267    7.77    2.18    319      7.81    2.21
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               262    7.98    2.11    334      7.92    2.40
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                   264    7.92    2.28    326      7.95    2.27
goals)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Ghana?
(Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                      Collaborators                   Non-Collaborators
Staff too inaccessible*                                                                       19.9%                            11.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                      10.6%                             8.2%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Ghana                               19.3%                            19.4%
Not enough public disclosure of its work*                                                     18.1%                            30.1%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                       2.5%                             3.2%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                           13.7%                            14.6%
The credibility of its knowledge/data*                                                         7.5%                             2.5%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                      16.5%                            13.0%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the
                                                                                              20.9%                               14.8%
country*
Too influenced by developed countries                                                         17.8%                               23.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                         11.5%                               12.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                         6.2%                                4.1%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                   13.4%                               11.2%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                           3.4%                                2.5%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                7.8%                                4.8%
Not client focused                                                                            3.4%                                2.3%
Other                                                                                         0.3%                                0.9%
Don't know*                                                                                   2.8%                                8.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       127
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Ghana?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                   Collaborators                   Non-Collaborators
Capacity development                                                                       48.1%                            46.4%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                    29.8%                            29.6%
Knowledge products/services*                                                               21.4%                            15.7%
Investment lending                                                                         33.5%                            30.3%
Technical assistance                                                                       42.5%                            43.2%
Trust Fund management*                                                                     14.3%                             8.3%
Other                                                                                       0.6%                             1.4%
Don't know*                                                                                 3.4%                             9.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                   Collaborators                   Non-Collaborators
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                   27.7%                            30.3%
Donor Community*                                                                           17.8%                             9.6%
Media                                                                                       9.0%                            13.0%
NGOs                                                                                       24.9%                            19.1%
Local Government                                                                           39.3%                            35.3%
Private Sector                                                                             36.4%                            36.4%
Parliament                                                                                  5.0%                             3.9%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                       16.8%                            22.6%
Beneficiaries                                                                              10.3%                            13.4%
Foundations                                                                                 5.0%                             3.0%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                   3.4%                             2.1%
Other                                                                                       0.6%                             1.4%
Don't know*                                                                                 0.3%                             3.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Ghana?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                       Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                           N    Mean     SD      N    Mean        SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                314    7.08   2.09    387       6.31   2.64
in Ghana*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                309    6.43   2.27    367       5.41   2.63
development priorities for Ghana*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                                302    6.68   2.26    374       5.84   2.59
for Ghana*
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Ghana with
                                                                                296    7.09   2.39    325       5.86   2.72
respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       128
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Ghana, in terms of each of the following?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness*                                                                  303     6.08   2.15    321    5.60   2.35
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and services)*               299     5.94   1.95    317    5.13   2.24
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                        300     6.02   1.99    331    5.05   2.38
Being inclusive*                                                                 288     6.34   2.06    324    5.47   2.43
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                   297     6.98   2.17    351    5.83   2.66
Staff accessibility*                                                             293     5.87   2.20    309    4.77   2.50
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                 308     6.82   2.28    331    5.74   2.63
Ease of access to the people at the WBG who are making decisions
                                                                                 294     6.09   2.26    295    4.88   2.45
important to my work*
Collaboration with civil society*                                                297     6.10   2.15    337    5.23   2.36
Collaboration with the Government*                                               295     7.56   2.10    368    7.17   2.21
Collaboration with other donors and development partners*                        291     6.99   2.07    327    6.54   2.31
Collaboration with the private sector*                                           285     5.64   2.13    309    5.01   2.26
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                    291     6.22   2.07    319    5.40   2.33
Being a long-term partner*                                                       304     7.49   2.14    344    7.07   2.34
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To be a more effective development partner in Ghana, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?*
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                     Collaborators                Non-Collaborators
More local presence                                                                          83.1%                         79.3%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                              11.1%                          9.4%
Less local presence                                                                           3.2%                          4.2%
Don't know                                                                                    2.5%                          7.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                     Collaborators                Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/
                                                                                             17.5%                              19.8%
follow-up
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                        36.9%                              42.8%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                                             22.5%                              22.1%
realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government*                                         24.0%                              14.8%
Poor donor coordination                                                                      15.4%                              10.9%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                        8.6%                               7.3%
The Government works inefficiently                                                           24.0%                              19.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                            26.8%                              27.1%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges*                             19.1%                              26.0%
Other                                                                                        0.6%                               1.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       129
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
         Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                       Yes                 No
                the World Bank Group in your country?                          N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Anti-corruption                                                                310   8.08   2.36   418   8.35   2.38
Information and communications technology                                      301   7.93   1.90   420   8.09   2.10
Transport                                                                      308   8.04   1.91   415   8.29   2.05
Crime and violence                                                             295   7.33   2.40   403   7.18   2.64
Law and justice                                                                299   7.01   2.31   402   7.12   2.60
Urban development                                                              304   7.87   2.00   409   7.84   2.24
Environmental sustainability                                                   301   8.05   1.78   411   7.98   2.08
Regulatory framework                                                           293   7.51   2.15   389   7.22   2.46
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         300   7.67   2.19   416   7.95   2.25
Poverty reduction*                                                             302   8.50   1.92   418   8.80   1.79
Gender equity                                                                  298   7.35   2.08   409   7.08   2.56
Domestic private sector development                                            296   8.00   1.90   405   7.82   2.36
Foreign direct investment                                                      299   7.95   1.86   403   7.77   2.31
Water and sanitation                                                           308   8.49   1.89   415   8.55   1.86
Trade and exports                                                              304   7.80   2.10   411   7.68   2.33
Economic growth                                                                307   8.39   1.98   416   8.47   2.02
Energy                                                                         308   8.49   1.95   412   8.48   2.03
Disaster management                                                            300   7.70   2.19   407   7.66   2.34
Public sector governance/reform                                                302   8.09   2.03   403   8.02   2.25
Job creation/employment                                                        304   8.24   1.99   416   8.29   2.34
Financial markets                                                              297   7.71   1.94   392   7.62   2.37
Equality of opportunity                                                        296   7.52   2.06   379   7.48   2.39
Health                                                                         301   8.74   1.63   419   8.63   1.91
Rural development                                                              297   8.57   1.86   404   8.56   1.90
Global/regional integration                                                    293   7.63   2.01   389   7.42   2.51
Food security                                                                  299   8.08   2.13   406   8.26   2.11
Education                                                                      305   8.71   1.85   413   8.66   1.96
Social protection                                                              298   7.44   2.17   406   7.37   2.46
Climate change                                                                 293   7.65   1.97   394   7.35   2.60
Agricultural development                                                       308   8.71   1.75   418   8.79   1.88
Natural resource management                                                    301   8.00   2.06   414   7.83   2.52
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       130
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                      Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                         N     Mean   SD       N   Mean    SD
Anti-corruption                                                                261   4.78   2.59   273   4.45   2.71
Information and communications technology*                                     270   5.83   1.97   280   5.36   2.38
Transport                                                                      279   5.98   2.18   299   5.75   2.44
Crime and violence*                                                            244   5.21   2.44   247   4.36   2.50
Law and justice                                                                243   5.22   2.59   256   4.79   2.54
Urban development*                                                             286   6.29   2.26   314   5.87   2.40
Environmental sustainability*                                                  286   6.25   2.21   292   5.62   2.43
Regulatory framework*                                                          259   5.99   2.16   270   5.22   2.54
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                        271   6.48   2.12   296   6.05   2.39
Poverty reduction*                                                             300   6.43   2.42   329   5.85   2.55
Gender equity*                                                                 262   5.79   2.33   283   5.21   2.47
Domestic private sector development*                                           262   5.53   2.26   269   5.07   2.45
Foreign direct investment*                                                     278   6.22   2.22   279   5.67   2.46
Water and sanitation*                                                          294   6.89   2.09   323   6.04   2.46
Trade and exports*                                                             265   5.66   2.28   280   5.25   2.45
Economic growth*                                                               287   6.25   2.31   312   5.63   2.51
Energy*                                                                        271   5.87   2.53   281   5.15   2.62
Disaster management*                                                           259   5.62   2.44   277   5.06   2.46
Public sector governance/reform*                                               276   6.51   2.21   305   5.86   2.35
Job creation/employment*                                                       289   5.51   2.46   299   4.69   2.51
Financial markets                                                              260   5.73   2.43   277   5.46   2.38
Equality of opportunity*                                                       252   5.71   2.28   261   4.82   2.44
Health*                                                                        285   6.92   1.99   322   6.33   2.40
Rural development*                                                             289   6.15   2.36   321   5.51   2.45
Global/regional integration*                                                   269   5.80   2.16   272   5.39   2.42
Food security*                                                                 281   6.10   2.34   298   5.43   2.34
Education*                                                                     288   6.76   2.05   334   6.20   2.37
Social protection*                                                             264   5.68   2.39   266   4.78   2.48
Climate change*                                                                253   5.71   2.30   266   5.20   2.62
Agricultural development*                                                      288   6.46   2.03   325   5.98   2.44
Natural resource management*                                                   263   5.73   2.60   284   5.01   2.76
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Ghana?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                            Collaborators              Non-Collaborators
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                 58.6%                       32.1%
In the country                                                                           23.7%                       18.2%
Don't know                                                                               17.8%                       49.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       131
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean     SD       N     Mean     SD
 To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                    309 6.91 1.85 364 6.05 2.26
 development results in Ghana?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Ghana?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean     SD      N      Mean    SD

The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Ghana*            307     6.42   2.22    360     4.92    2.54

The World Bank Group meets Ghana’s needs for knowledge services*                 307     6.80   2.13    348     5.49    2.64
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean     SD      N      Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects
                                                                                 281    6.80    1.94    278     5.74    2.40
its work in real time in Ghana?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators                  Non-Collaborators
Weekly                                                                                      17.3%                            3.0%
Monthly                                                                                     29.4%                            7.5%
A few times a year                                                                          24.1%                           20.9%
Rarely                                                                                      16.7%                           25.7%
Never                                                                                       12.4%                           43.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       132
The World Bank Group                                                     Ghana                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Ghana, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                             Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                N     Mean     SD         N     Mean    SD
Are timely*                                                                          300    6.31    1.98    286       5.47    2.47
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*             294    6.52    2.05    302       5.67    2.47
Are relevant to Ghana’s development priorities*                                      307    6.89    1.98    339       5.87    2.43
Lead to practical solutions*                                                         295    6.79    1.89    316       5.53    2.45
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                302    5.96    2.09    314       5.49    2.52
Are source of relevant information on global good practices*                         299    7.01    1.92    319       6.25    2.30
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills*                                                309    6.91    1.83    325       5.98    2.24
Are adequately disseminated*                                                         303    5.91    1.92    309       4.98    2.40
Are translated enough into local language*                                           246    4.17    2.50    288       3.60    2.39
Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                     304    6.32    2.32    331       5.09    2.50
circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                             Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                 N    Mean      SD         N    Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the WBG's knowledge
                                                                                      312    7.08    1.93       358    6.09    2.19
work and activities make to development results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                      309    7.34    1.88       343    6.40    2.33
knowledge work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work
contribute to solving Ghana’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                             Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                 N    Mean      SD        N     Mean     SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)*                           293     6.44    2.11       306    6.00   2.39
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)*                                      294     6.80    2.08       312    6.07   2.45
Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making appropriate
                                                                                     296     6.99    1.84       326    6.20   2.41
adjustments)*
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)*                                       298     7.23    1.94       323    6.45   2.37
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         133
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                      Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                         N     Mean   SD       N   Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                 307   6.03   2.11   332   5.21   2.46
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                               315   6.80   1.87   363   6.37   2.37
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                               307   6.17   1.93   309   5.37   2.25
fashion*
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable*         282   6.46   2.02   300   5.70   2.38
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable*               301   5.89   2.28   331   4.63   2.44
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Ghana*                         299   5.95   2.13   305   4.94   2.44
Working with the World Bank Group increases Ghana’s institutional
                                                                               311   7.07   1.89   367   6.06   2.38
capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                               270   6.44   2.07   274   5.57   2.42
changes*
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                               294   6.84   2.08   314   6.06   2.46
appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                315   7.03   1.88   355   6.31   2.48
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Ghana?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                            Collaborators              Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Ghana                                         7.2%                        4.1%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Ghana                                  36.4%                       28.3%
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is appropriate                                   27.7%                       15.8%
Don't know                                                                               20.2%                       34.9%
Prefer not to answer                                                                      8.4%                       16.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Ghana? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                 Collaborators              Non-Collaborators
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                                        36.5%                          26.1%
Ghana’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                    23.8%                          25.2%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                14.6%                          18.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets*                       9.3%                           5.0%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                          33.4%                          27.2%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Ghana’s specific
                                                                                        12.4%                          14.1%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                9.3%                           9.5%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work*                                                 11.1%                          6.1%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                               20.4%                          25.2%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing*                          18.0%                          25.4%
Work faster                                                                             7.4%                           7.5%
Other*                                                                                  0.6%                           3.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       134
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Ghana (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Ghana, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Ghana?

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
Financial services                                                                 32.0%                36.9%
Knowledge products                                                                 20.3%                14.5%
Convening services                                                                  6.6%                 4.8%
None of the above                                                                   5.1%                 4.5%
The combination is appropriate for Ghana                                           31.6%                32.8%
Don't know                                                                          4.4%                 6.6%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Ghana? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
Local newspapers*                                                                  33.2%                50.1%
International newspapers                                                            5.0%                 3.3%
Local radio*                                                                       18.9%                38.1%
International radio                                                                 5.6%                 5.5%
Local television*                                                                  18.9%                35.9%
International television                                                            5.6%                 6.2%
Periodicals*                                                                        9.9%                 3.1%
Internet*                                                                          58.4%                37.3%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                             8.1%                 8.9%
Blogs*                                                                             20.2%                 1.6%
Mobile phones*                                                                      9.0%                 3.1%
Instant messaging                                                                   2.8%                 1.6%
Other                                                                               0.9%                 0.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
Blogs*                                                                             11.1%                 6.7%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                               17.6%                20.9%
e-Newsletters                                                                      13.0%                15.9%
Instant messaging                                                                   6.8%                 9.6%
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences*                                 38.6%                30.0%
World Bank Group's publications and other written materials                        26.2%                25.3%
Mobile phones*                                                                     14.5%                20.9%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                            29.9%                28.3%
World Bank Group's website                                                         34.6%                33.0%
Other                                                                               1.2%                 1.6%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                42.6%                14.8%
No                                                                                 57.4%                85.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       135
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                48.8%             18.4%
No                                                                                 51.2%             81.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Were you able to obtain this information?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                94.4%             81.3%
No                                                                                  5.6%             18.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                94.9%             89.6%
No                                                                                  5.1%             10.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                72.4%             38.4%
No                                                                                 27.6%             61.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group’s country website                                             56.2%             57.6%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                                43.8%             42.4%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
High speed                                                                         65.5%             61.8%
Dial-up                                                                            34.5%             38.2%




                                                                       136
The World Bank Group                                                   Ghana                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                      Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                         N     Mean   SD       N   Mean    SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few years
                                                                               296   5.94   2.84   301   4.26   3.03
ago.*
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.*                      262   6.80   2.35   223   6.15   2.90
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.*             260   7.60   2.21   223   6.77   2.62
The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                               241   7.19   2.42   213   6.50   2.72
information about the institution.*
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it.*      284   7.14   2.57   257   5.96   3.09
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                               254   7.20   2.60   220   5.90   3.16
inquiries.*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Ghana? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                 Collaborators              Non-Collaborators
The World Bank (IDA)*                                                                    68.0%                        7.7%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                                             30.7%                        5.1%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)*                                     22.3%                        1.5%
None*                                                                                    10.3%                       89.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                 Collaborators              Non-Collaborators
Observer*                                                                                23.4%                       66.8%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                                       35.0%                       25.8%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities*                          42.5%                       14.7%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                           36.3%                       10.4%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                       25.9%                       25.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       137
The World Bank Group                                                Ghana                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix E: Responses to Questions across Country Surveys
Comparing responses across country surveys reflect changes in attitudes over time, but also changes in
respondent samples and changes to the survey instrument itself. To reduce the influence of the latter
two factors, only those questions with similar response scales/options are analyzed and the
respondent base from each fiscal year is weighted to be comparable across surveys. Note that the
weighting of the FY14 stakeholders may result in slightly different ratings in this appendix than those
using the full, unweighted, respondent base in Appendix A and throughout this report.

FY06 N=288            FY11 N=642         FY14 N=741

Background Information

Which of the following best describes your current position? (Select only ONE response)
                                                        FY06               FY11                           FY14
Percentage of Respondents                             (N=288)            (N=642)                        (N=741)
Office of the President/Minister                        5.3%               5.2%                           5.4%
Government Institutions                                25.0%              26.1%                          26.7%
Local Government                                       15.9%              14.5%                          16.1%
Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                           5.2%               5.3%                           5.4%
Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank           10.6%              11.7%                          10.7%
Civil Society                                          15.9%              15.6%                          15.9%
Media                                                   5.3%               5.2%                           5.4%
Academia                                               11.5%              10.4%                          10.7%
Other                                                   5.3%               5.9%                           3.8%

Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                                FY06                 FY11                 FY14
Percentage of Respondents                                     (N=285)              (N=633)              (N=726)
Northern Sector                                                10.1%                38.3%                34.8%
Southern Sector                                                17.5%                21.1%                17.0%
Western Sector                                                  7.2%                14.8%                19.9%
Eastern Sector                                                 65.3%                25.8%                28.3%




Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                 FY06                   FY11                      FY14
                                                                            N    Mean     SD      N     Mean      SD        N    Mean       SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                           275   6.49    1.85    626     6.29    2.35     715     5.15     2.41
Ghana?* **
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys


                                                                                 FY06                   FY11                     FY14
                                                                            N    Mean     SD      N     Mean      SD        N    Mean       SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                           252   6.21    1.82    591     6.70    2.05     615     5.91     2.30
effectiveness in Ghana.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys




                                                                     138
The World Bank Group                                                Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Ghana?
                                                                                 FY06                   FY11                     FY14
                                                                            N    Mean     SD      N     Mean     SD        N    Mean       SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                           278   7.13    1.91    620     6.63    2.24    660     6.57     2.44
development in Ghana**
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                           272   6.10    2.22    608     6.11    2.27    636     5.80     2.53
development priorities for Ghana*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that
                                                                           268   5.49    2.01    608     5.92    2.38    633     6.13     2.49
are realistic for Ghana**
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Ghana
                                                                           259   6.12    2.21    598     6.01    2.41    594     6.33     2.70
with respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Ghana, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                 FY06                   FY11                     FY14
                                                                            N    Mean     SD      N     Mean     SD        N    Mean       SD
Staff accessibility**                                                      257   6.49    2.21    574     5.41    2.41    575     5.29     2.47
Straightforwardness and honesty* **                                        259   6.87    2.38    573     5.85    2.49    606     6.20     2.54
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys
Note the response scales for these questions in FY06 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY11 and FY14.




                                                                     139
The World Bank Group                                                Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                 FY06                  FY11                     FY14
                                                                            N    Mean    SD       N    Mean      SD        N    Mean       SD
Anti-corruption* **                                                        259   8.63   2.31     595    8.48    1.90     685     8.15     2.42
Law and justice* **                                                        253   8.01   2.41     587    8.12    2.35     664     7.07     2.50
Regulatory framework* **                                                   259   8.48   1.97     590    8.19    2.06     646     7.34     2.33
Poverty reduction* **                                                      278   9.12   1.81     619    8.83    1.73     682     8.50     2.03
Gender equity* **                                                          254   7.70   2.46     593    7.78    2.28     666     7.25     2.31
Domestic private sector development* **                                    265   8.83   1.95     605    8.59    1.96     662     7.80     2.24
Economic growth* **                                                        266   9.35   1.46     609    8.87    1.57     683     8.34     2.06
Financial markets* **                                                      276   9.00   1.78     592    8.88    1.67     652     7.62     2.20
Health* **                                                                 265   8.95   1.87     595    9.00    1.56     680     8.57     1.94
Education* **                                                              269   9.24   1.75     594    8.96    1.62     676     8.58     2.01
Social protection* **                                                      252   7.85   2.27     588    8.11    1.87     661     7.35     2.33
Climate change* **                                                                               599    8.37    1.86     650     7.41     2.38
Agricultural development* **                                               264   9.05   1.81     598    8.85    1.55     682     8.65     1.93
Natural resource management* **                                            264   8.53   1.96     600    8.50    1.78     671     7.91     2.33
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys
Note the response scales for these questions in FY06 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY11 and FY14.

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                 FY06                  FY11                     FY14
                                                                            N    Mean    SD       N    Mean      SD        N    Mean       SD
Anti-corruption* **                                                        251   5.43   2.52     594    5.03    2.88     525     4.64     2.70
Law and justice**                                                          227   5.50   2.18     572    4.92    2.63     495     5.05     2.59
Regulatory framework**                                                     245   6.37   2.25     572    5.28    2.61     515     5.55     2.34
Poverty reduction*                                                         268   6.21   2.13     607    5.76    2.55     602     6.06     2.51
Gender equity*                                                             236   5.79   2.18     581    5.02    2.76     525     5.55     2.45
Domestic private sector development**                                      251   5.85   2.36     596    5.30    2.67     515     5.28     2.36
Economic growth**                                                          258   6.73   2.04     595    5.92    2.48     581     5.84     2.49
Financial markets**                                                        264   6.80   2.15     583    5.69    2.62     524     5.63     2.44
Health                                                                     254   6.52   2.41     589    6.26    2.38     579     6.46     2.29
Education* **                                                              262   6.71   2.42     585    6.00    2.47     595     6.36     2.29
Social protection                                                          236   5.28   2.32     571    5.02    2.64     513     5.17     2.43
Climate change*                                                                                  590    5.06    2.80     501     5.39     2.43
Agricultural development*                                                  253   6.02   2.30     592    5.81    2.64     585     6.14     2.28
Natural resource management **                                             252   5.76   2.28     588    5.31    2.55     537     5.35     2.73
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys
Note the response scales for these questions in FY06 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY11 and FY14.

                                                                     140
The World Bank Group                                                Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Ghana, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                 FY06                   FY11                    FY14
                                                                            N    Mean     SD      N     Mean     SD        N    Mean       SD
Are source of relevant information on global good practices**              270   7.57    1.99    574     6.52    2.22    582     6.52     2.17
Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific development challenges and
                                                                           271   5.88    2.26    587     6.00    2.26    600     5.64     2.51
country circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys
Note the response scales for these questions in FY06 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY11 and FY14.




Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                 FY06                   FY11                    FY14
                                                                            N    Mean     SD      N     Mean     SD        N    Mean       SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                              169   5.36    2.24    387     5.60    2.19    607     5.55     2.38
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the
                                                                           180   7.07    2.13    401     6.35    2.25    646     6.39     2.24
projects and programs it supports**
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are
                                                                           261   5.62    2.39    601     5.63    2.88    604     5.22     2.47
reasonable* **
Working with the World Bank Group increases Ghana’s
                                                                           186   6.69    2.03    395     5.66    2.29    645     6.44     2.29
institutional capacity*
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys




                                                                     141
The World Bank Group                                                Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




Communication and Information Sharing

Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any
information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY06                  FY11                     FY14
Yes                                                                               -                   27.2%                    28.5%
No                                                                                -                   72.8%                    71.5%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY06                  FY11                     FY14
Yes                                                                               -                   28.7%                    32.8%
No                                                                                -                   71.3%                    67.2%

Were you able to obtain this information?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY06                  FY11                     FY14
Yes                                                                               -                   62.8%                    87.7%
No                                                                                -                   37.2%                    12.3%
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                       FY06                  FY11                     FY14
Yes                                                                               -                   85.7%                    91.1%
No                                                                                -                   14.3%                    8.9%
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY06                      FY11                     FY14
Yes                                                                         50.7%                     64.9%                    53.4%
No                                                                          49.3%                     35.1%                    46.6%
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys

Which do you primarily use?* **

Percentage of Respondents                                                   FY06                      FY11                     FY14
The World Bank Group’s country website                                      19.0%                     69.3%                    58.1%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                         81.0%                     30.7%                    41.9%
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY06 country surveys

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                  FY06                  FY11                    FY14
                                                                            N     Mean    SD      N     Mean     SD        N    Mean       SD
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.                                         382     6.53    2.10    482     6.39     2.65
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites
                                                                                                 397     6.74    2.18    481     7.11     2.47
useful.*
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how
                                                                                                 423     6.48    2.24    520     6.53     2.84
to find it.
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests
                                                                                                 325     6.39    2.63    471     6.51     2.92
and inquiries.
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys




                                                                     142
The World Bank Group                                                                                                                     Ghana                                                                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix F: Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’ Specializations/Sectors
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                                                                                                              Public sector
                                                                                                         Health /                                                  Natural                    governance /
                         Agriculture/   Climate                                                       communicable                                   Law and      resource     Private sector     public
                             rural     change /                              Financial Gender equity      /non-      Information                     justice /  management / development /      financial
                       development /    disaster                             markets /  / equality of communicable    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental foreign direct mgmt. / anti-        Social                   Urban     Water and
                        food security management    Education     Energy      banking   opportunity     diseases      technology   employment      framework    sustainability investment      corruption     protection   Transport development   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                          N     Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption         85    8.25    11    7.55    161   7.86   13   8.08   33   8.06    7    8.00    35    9.11    17    8.41     12     8.83    10    9.40     17    8.82    12     8.92    150    8.28    44   8.43    11   7.45   33   7.97   23   7.57    20   8.80    39     8.59
Information and
                        83    7.52    11    7.64    162   7.78   14   7.21   33   7.82    8    7.50    35    8.77    15    8.40     12     8.25    10    8.40     17    9.00    12     8.50    146    8.22    46   7.93    11   7.82   33   8.52   22   7.41    20   8.75    37     8.27
comm. technology*
Transport*              82    8.11    10    8.10    165   7.96   13   7.62   32   8.31    7    7.57    35    8.71    16    8.13     12     8.42    10    9.00     17    8.47    12     8.08    146    8.34    46   8.07    11   6.64   33   8.85   23   6.87    20   8.90    37     8.54
Crime and violence      80    6.79    11    6.82    158   7.19   14   6.79   32   7.78    7    7.57    35    8.09    14    6.71     12     7.17    10    6.50     16    8.75    10     8.30    139    7.32    44   7.30    10   7.00   32   7.31   22   6.18    20   7.85    37     7.00
Law and justice         77    6.62    11    7.36    158   7.05   14   7.00   33   7.45    6    6.83    35    7.91    14    7.21     12     7.58    9     6.56     17    7.88    12     7.42    144    7.23    43   6.98    11   6.00   31   6.87   22   6.14    20   7.25    38     7.11
Urban development*      83    7.47    11    7.55    161   7.35   13   7.54   33   8.18    6    7.83    34    8.15    17    8.41     12     7.92    9     7.44     17    9.00    12     8.00    146    8.27    45   7.51    11   7.09   32   8.66   20   7.35    19   9.05    38     7.74
Environmental
                        80    7.71    11    8.09    164   7.68   13   7.85   32   7.97    7    8.14    35    8.23    17    8.35     12     8.25    10    7.40     17    9.06    11     7.91    144    8.34    44   7.73    11   7.82   32   8.56   23   7.61    19   9.00    37     8.05
sustainability
Regulatory
                        77    7.01     9    7.00    155   6.88   14   7.00   32   7.66    6    8.17    32    7.19    16    7.63     11     8.09    10    7.80     17    8.59    12     8.08    138    7.70    39   7.46    11   7.55   31   7.13   22   7.41    19   8.16    37     7.19
framework
(Non)Communicable
                        81    7.19    10    7.40    165   7.60   14   6.50   33   7.73    7    8.29    35    8.20    17    7.76     12     7.67    10    9.00     17    8.94    12     8.67    141    8.12    45   8.16    9    6.89   33   8.12   22   7.50    20   8.45    38     8.00
diseases*
Poverty reduction*      81    8.60    11    8.73    166   8.47   14   7.50   32   8.97    8    7.50    35    9.29    16    8.50     11     8.36    10    9.50     17    9.41    12     8.75    145    8.83    46   8.24    11   8.09   32   9.13   21   7.81    20   8.95    38     8.95
Gender equity*          80    6.61    11    7.18    163   6.95   14   7.29   32   7.22    7    8.00    34    7.50    17    7.00     11     7.64     9    7.00     17    8.65    11     6.91    141    7.47    41   8.05    11   6.27   33   7.45   22   6.50    19   8.05    39     6.72
Domestic private
                        79    7.38    11    7.36    155   7.43   14   6.86   31   8.42    8    7.75    35    8.14    16    7.63     12     7.83    11    8.64     17    8.94    12     8.92    142    8.18    41   8.10    11   7.82   33   8.73   21   7.33    19   9.00    39     7.90
sector development*
Foreign direct
                        79    7.27    11    7.27    159   7.53   13   6.46   31   7.94    6    8.83    35    8.14    17    7.35     10     8.00    10    9.00     17    8.88    11     8.55    145    8.28    44   8.07    10   8.20   32   8.56   23   7.00    19   8.68    37     7.19
investment*
Water and sanitation    84    8.45    11    8.00    164   8.22   13   7.62   33   8.42    7    9.14    34    8.56    15    8.33     12     8.83    9     9.44     16    9.31    12     9.25    146    8.62    47   8.51    11   8.45   32   8.88   24   8.17    20   9.35    39     8.77
Trade and exports*      82    7.68    10    8.20    159   7.60   13   6.38   33   7.91    7    8.00    35    8.00    15    7.93     12     8.83     9    8.11     17    9.00    12     8.25    145    7.99    45   7.60    11   7.27   33   8.00   24   6.25    20   8.30    37     7.24
Economic growth*        86    8.57    11    8.45    162   8.17   14   7.07   33   8.85    7    8.86    35    8.91    15    9.07     12     8.58    10    9.00     17    9.24    12     8.67    145    8.67    45   8.29    11   7.64   32   8.75   23   6.65    20   8.95    38     8.03
Energy*                 81    8.69    11    8.00    164   8.17   13   7.62   32   8.84    7    7.71    35    8.80    17    8.41     12     8.58    9     8.78     17    9.00    12     8.58    149    8.72    47   8.60    11   7.45   33   8.79   20   7.35    19   9.37    36     8.44
Disaster
                        78    7.45    11    8.18    158   7.58   14   7.14   32   7.72    7    8.14    33    7.97    14    7.86     12     7.33    10    7.20     17    8.65    12     8.08    145    7.94    46   8.20    11   5.91   33   7.97   22   6.95    20   8.10    38     7.08
management
Public sector
                        81    8.01    10    7.70    157   7.78   14   7.29   31   6.81    8    7.75    33    8.70    15    7.73     12     7.33    11    8.36     17    9.18    11     8.82    146    8.34    43   8.19    9    7.67   33   8.15   22   8.27    20   8.85    38     7.89
governance/reform*
Job creation/
                        82    8.05    10    8.30    163   8.04   14   7.36   33   8.73    7    8.86    33    9.12    16    7.81     12     7.67    10    8.60     17    9.06    12     8.08    148    8.30    44   8.32    10   8.20   33   9.06   24   7.83    20   9.10    39     8.05
employment
Financial markets*      78    7.51    10    6.40    155   7.37   14   7.21   32   7.81    7    8.29    32    8.16    13    8.46     12     7.83    10    7.40     17    9.12    12     7.25    142    7.69    42   7.81    11   8.00   32   7.91   21   6.86    18   8.89    36     7.44
Equality of
                        75    7.56    10    7.00    154   7.32   14   6.79   31   7.74    7    8.00    28    7.68    16    7.25     11     7.00    10    6.90     17    8.82    10     7.20    135    7.75    42   7.71    10   7.80   32   7.84   22   6.41    17   7.94    38     7.08
opportunity
Health                  81    8.69    10    8.20    167   8.44   13   8.00   32   8.59    6    9.17    32    9.28    17    8.06     12     8.92    10    9.10     17    9.18    12     8.75    145    8.61    45   8.91    10   8.70   33   8.88   24   8.50    20   9.55    38     8.92
Rural development*      78    8.63    10    8.00    159   8.21   14   8.36   33   8.97    7    8.43    34    8.79    16    8.38     12     7.08    10    9.50     17    9.41    11     8.00    141    8.72    44   8.41    11   7.36   32   9.00   22   7.86    19   9.74    37     8.97
Global/regional
                        77    7.17    10    8.00    155   7.21   12   7.42   33   7.67    6    8.33    30    8.47    16    7.06     12     6.67    10    7.90     17    8.71    10     8.10    139    7.62    42   8.02    8    7.00   32   7.69   22   6.32    19   8.53    36     7.28
integration*
Food security           79    8.08    10    7.80    162   7.98   14   7.29   33   8.52    8    8.00    31    8.55    16    7.56     12     8.58    10    9.30     17    9.18    11     8.55    142    8.15    47   8.17    10   8.10   31   8.42   20   7.75    20   8.95    38     8.18
Education*              78    8.85    11    7.82    170   8.63   13   8.00   32   9.19    6    8.67    35    8.71    16    8.50     12     8.33    9     8.67     17    9.47    11     8.45    146    8.68    44   8.75    11   8.45   31   9.03   23   7.26    18   9.78    40     8.65
Social protection       80    7.16    10    7.70    156   7.45   13   7.00   32   7.13    7    7.57    34    7.88    16    6.81     12     8.00    9     6.78     17    8.47    12     7.08    144    7.47    44   7.84    10   6.20   32   7.59   24   6.25    20   7.95    38     7.29
Climate change*         78    7.27    10    8.30    158   7.22   13   6.92   33   7.24    8    8.13    32    6.50    15    6.40     11     6.73    9     7.44     16    8.75    12     7.67    139    7.85    40   7.95    11   7.18   31   7.87   23   7.09    18   8.50    36     7.22
Agricultural
                        82    9.01    11    8.82    166   8.39   12   8.50   32   9.56    7    8.29    34    8.79    16    8.75     12     8.17    9     9.11     17    9.47    12     8.92    149    8.75    45   9.04    11   7.91   33   9.24   24   7.17    20   9.40    40     8.93
development*
Natural resource
                        82    8.05    10    7.60    163   7.79   12   7.83   33   8.24    7    9.14    35    7.86    17    7.59     12     7.92    9     8.78     16    8.81    12     7.25    145    7.99    44   8.11    11   7.55   32   7.38   24   6.33    20   8.45    38     7.79
management
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                                          143
The World Bank Group                                                                                                                    Ghana                                                                                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                                                                                              Public sector
                                                                                                         Health /                                                  Natural                    governance /
                         Agriculture/   Climate                                                       communicable                                   Law and      resource     Private sector     public
                             rural     change /                              Financial Gender equity      /non-      Information                     justice /  management / development /      financial
                       development /    disaster                             markets /  / equality of communicable    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental foreign direct mgmt. / anti-        Social                   Urban     Water and
                        food security management    Education     Energy      banking   opportunity     diseases      technology   employment      framework    sustainability investment      corruption     protection   Transport development   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                          N     Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption         63    5.27     9    4.78    114   4.74   13   3.77   24   3.79    6    6.83    21    5.10    11    3.45     9      4.11    6     3.83     16    4.44    10     2.60    107    4.60    39   4.87    11   4.00   19   4.53   15   5.07    16   3.19    25     4.56
Information and
                        71    5.97    10    6.90    112   5.42   13   4.69   22   5.14    5    7.00    21    5.48    12    4.33     9      4.67    6     4.00     16    5.44     9     5.67    112    5.64    40   6.23    11   5.18   25   5.76   15   5.93    16   4.94    25     5.80
comm. technology
Transport               72    6.19     9    6.44    120   6.05   13   4.92   22   5.64    6    6.83    22    6.00    11    5.00     9      5.11    7     4.14     15    5.20     9     5.00    117    5.91    41   6.07    11   6.45   32   5.91   17   5.59    15   4.00    30     6.03
Crime and violence      58    5.33    10    5.50    102   4.97   13   4.38   22   4.55    5    5.80    17    4.59    11    4.09     9      4.78    6     3.67     14    4.71     9     5.00     96    4.32    35   5.54    10   5.20   20   5.10   14   5.14    15   2.93    25     4.64
Law and justice         59    5.08     8    5.13    109   5.46   13   5.08   23   4.65    6    6.67    20    4.95    12    4.83     8      5.00    7     3.57     15    4.93     9     4.89    94     4.45    33   5.70    11   4.82   21   4.95   15   5.87    15   3.13    23     4.96
Urban development       73    6.66    10    5.70    125   6.17   13   5.62   25   5.68    6    6.67    21    5.76    12    5.83     9      5.11    6     3.67     16    5.19    10     6.10    124    6.04    39   6.23    12   5.92   31   6.42   19   6.16    17   5.29    30     6.00
Environmental
                        72    6.51    10    5.90    122   6.04   13   6.00   25   5.88    5    7.20    22    5.82    13    4.54     9      6.33    7     3.71     16    5.25    10     6.10    113    5.68    37   6.62    12   5.75   31   5.74   17   5.59    16   5.25    28     6.00
sustainability
Regulatory
                        66    6.17     7    5.86    110   5.48   12   4.75   22   5.77    5    6.60    20    5.80    11    5.91     9      6.11    6     3.50     16    5.63    10     5.40    108    5.34    37   5.76    11   6.09   22   5.55   13   6.15    16   4.63    27     5.41
framework
(Non)Communicable
                        67    6.25     9    7.11    121   6.37   13   4.77   25   6.16    6    7.67    24    6.00    14    5.29     9      5.44    8     6.38     15    6.33    10     6.70    114    6.39    38   6.71    11   5.27   24   5.92   17   6.53    16   5.94    28     6.36
diseases
Poverty reduction       80    6.85     9    6.44    134   6.19   12   5.67   25   6.92    6    6.67    23    6.09    15    5.07     9      5.33    8     5.50     17    5.82    10     5.20    125    5.79    42   6.21    12   6.25   31   5.87   21   6.24    19   5.11    33     6.58
Gender equity           64    5.31    10    5.80    110   5.90   12   5.58   22   5.41    5    6.40    22    5.73    14    5.14     9      5.44    7     4.71     17    5.29    10     5.00    110    5.19    37   6.16    11   5.18   26   5.65   17   5.65    16   4.56    27     5.48
Domestic private
                        63    5.86     9    5.67    110   5.42   12   5.50   23   5.39    6    5.50    20    5.15    14    4.64     9      4.67    7     4.86     15    4.40    10     4.90    106    4.99    34   5.76    11   5.45   27   5.41   16   6.00    15   4.27    26     5.19
sector development
Foreign direct
                        66    6.33    10    6.40    119   6.11   13   4.92   23   6.04    6    5.50    18    6.22    13    5.00     8      4.88    7     4.71     16    6.06    10     6.40    112    5.61    39   6.33    12   6.25   26   6.23   18   6.06    17   5.24    28     5.75
investment
Water and sanitation    72    7.07    10    6.70    127   6.09   13   5.69   23   6.87    6    7.33    25    6.40    15    5.07     8      5.25    8     5.25     15    6.27    10     5.90    130    6.52    42   6.71    12   6.58   32   6.66   21   6.71    18   6.06    33     6.45
Trade and exports       64    6.00    10    6.60    115   5.36   13   5.00   22   6.32    6    5.17    17    5.12    13    4.77     9      4.56    6     3.83     15    4.80    10     5.00    113    5.37    35   5.60    11   6.64   26   5.15   17   6.00    17   4.53    27     5.52
Economic growth         68    6.57    10    6.00    127   5.83   12   5.33   24   6.17    6    6.67    24    5.83    14    5.21     9      5.00    8     5.63     16    4.63    10     5.80    125    5.73    43   6.26    12   6.92   30   6.30   17   5.82    16   5.13    31     5.94
Energy                  67    6.42    10    5.50    117   5.51   13   5.62   23   5.22    5    6.40    21    5.52    11    4.91     9      4.67    5     4.20     15    4.53    10     5.10    115    5.27    38   5.63    9    5.56   28   5.82   16   5.06    16   4.31    28     6.14
Disaster
                        66    5.77    10    5.80    111   5.66   13   4.62   24   5.04    5    6.00    21    5.00    13    4.08     9      5.11    5     4.00     16    4.81    10     4.70    108    5.28    39   5.51    9    4.56   24   5.08   17   5.76    15   4.47    26     5.46
management
Public sector
                        67    6.58     9    6.00    127   6.05   12   6.08   21   6.05    6    7.00    22    6.05    11    5.27     9      6.33    7     4.71     16    6.06     9     5.44    121    6.36    43   6.56    9    4.67   28   5.82   18   6.33    16   6.06    31     5.68
governance/reform
Job creation/
                        73    5.85    10    6.30    121   5.02   11   5.18   25   5.76    6    5.67    23    4.91    12    4.33     8      4.38    8     5.25     14    4.64     9     4.33    123    4.54    41   5.49    11   4.82   29   5.52   18   5.61    17   4.00    29     5.17
employment
Financial markets       69    5.90     9    6.44    114   5.92   12   5.00   23   5.78    4    7.00    20    5.75    12    6.42     9      4.78    6     4.83     16    4.44     8     5.50    111    5.06    34   6.26    8    4.50   25   6.00   16   5.56    15   5.20    27     5.48
Equality of
                        63    6.02    10    6.00    109   5.44   13   5.23   22   5.45    5    6.60    20    4.65    12    5.08     9      4.67    7     4.71     14    4.07     9     3.89    103    4.96    32   5.63    8    5.00   21   5.14   16   5.44    16   4.50    25     5.32
opportunity
Health                  74    7.03     9    6.56    131   6.35   13   5.77   24   6.88    6    7.00    24    6.83    13    5.23     9      5.00    8     6.13     16    5.88    10     6.10    128    6.68    40   7.10    11   6.91   28   6.71   15   6.80    17   6.35    30     6.73
Rural development       74    6.54    10    5.60    128   5.76   13   5.23   25   5.64    5    5.40    25    5.64    14    5.36     9      5.56    8     5.13     16    5.31    10     5.10    127    5.60    40   5.83    10   6.20   30   6.17   18   6.44    17   5.29    32     6.00
Global/regional
                        64    5.89    10    6.10    118   5.75   13   4.92   23   5.78    6    6.83    17    4.94    13    4.62     9      6.33    6     4.17     16    5.06    10     5.60    109    5.39    38   6.32    9    5.22   26   5.42   14   6.57    15   5.27    26     5.08
integration
Food security           71    6.06    10    6.80    120   5.89   13   5.08   24   5.92    6    6.83    22    6.00    12    4.25     9      5.89    8     4.88     15    5.13    10     5.40    120    5.38    39   6.10    10   6.50   28   6.11   16   5.25    18   5.28    28     5.64
Education               76    7.07     9    7.89    143   6.49   12   5.67   23   6.48    6    7.00    22    5.86    14    5.43     8      5.75    8     5.13     16    5.88    10     6.00    127    6.35    43   6.81    10   6.50   31   6.74   14   6.71    18   5.78    33     6.55
Social protection       62    5.68    10    6.10    109   5.48   12   4.83   23   5.35    6    5.67    21    4.90    13    4.38     9      5.56    6     4.50     16    4.56    10     4.30    110    4.76    38   5.68    9    5.11   25   5.44   14   5.86    13   5.15    26     4.92
Climate change          62    5.94    10    5.60    108   5.32   13   4.77   23   5.65    6    5.50    18    5.11    12    3.75     9      5.22    6     3.67     15    4.67    10     5.60    105    5.40    35   6.20    9    5.78   23   5.22   15   6.13    13   4.77    27     5.59
Agricultural
                        79    6.92    10    7.00    128   6.02   12   5.42   26   6.81    6    7.17    24    5.88    13    5.31     8      6.25    8     5.75     16    5.13    10     5.50    126    6.10    41   6.59    11   6.09   26   6.62   17   5.59    18   5.78    33     5.94
development
Natural resource
                        63    5.65    10    5.80    113   5.52   11   4.82   24   6.42    6    4.83    22    5.00    13    4.15     9      6.44    6     3.83     15    4.47    10     4.50    115    4.97    39   6.26    10   5.40   26   4.85   16   5.81    15   3.93    26     5.65
management
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                                          144
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana




In instances where more than 10% of respondents come from a specific sector, additional analyses are
conducted to further examine their perceptions as opposed to those from other sectors. In the case of
Ghana, there were 23% of respondents from the Education sector, 20% of respondents from the Public
sector governance/public financial management/anti-corruption sector, and there were 12% of
respondents from the Agriculture/rural development/food security sector.


Education Sector vs. Others
Education Sector N=179                All Others N=608

A. General Issues Facing Ghana

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Ghana. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Education Sector            All Others
Social protection                                                       5.8%                      3.9%
Transport                                                               9.2%                     11.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                         17.9%                    14.3%
Global/regional integration                                             1.7%                      1.0%
Gender equity                                                           1.2%                      1.9%
Domestic private sector development                                     5.2%                      8.3%
Foreign direct investment                                               2.3%                      2.7%
Water and sanitation                                                    13.9%                    12.3%
Anti-corruption                                                         11.0%                    15.0%
Job creation/employment                                                 28.3%                    33.6%
Rural development*                                                      4.0%                      9.2%
Financial markets                                                       1.7%                      1.0%
Urban development                                                       2.9%                      1.4%
Environmental sustainability                                            2.9%                      2.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%                      1.7%
Health                                                                  34.1%                    29.1%
Education*                                                              65.3%                    46.0%
Poverty reduction                                                       8.1%                      9.2%
Energy                                                                  16.8%                    21.1%
Food security                                                           11.0%                     7.2%
Climate change                                                          0.6%                      1.0%
Agricultural development                                                16.8%                    21.8%
Trade and exports*                                                      1.2%                      6.0%
Crime and violence                                                      1.7%                      2.0%
Economic growth                                                         12.7%                    13.6%
Law and justice                                                         5.2%                      4.1%
Regulatory framework                                                    1.2%                      0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                  0.6%                      0.2%
Natural resource management                                             6.4%                      7.7%
Disaster management                                                     0.0%                      0.5%
Information and communications technology                               4.0%                      2.9%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           145
The World Bank Group                                     Ghana




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                              Education Sector           All Others
Water and sanitation*                                                  2.3%                     8.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                7.4%                     6.0%
Economic growth                                                        34.7%                   35.5%
Climate change                                                         1.1%                     1.2%
Global/regional integration                                            0.0%                     0.5%
Gender equity                                                          4.0%                     2.2%
Rural development                                                      25.0%                   26.4%
Urban development                                                      3.4%                     2.8%
Regulatory framework                                                   0.6%                     0.3%
Social protection                                                      1.1%                     3.0%
Law and justice                                                        2.3%                     3.5%
Transport                                                              4.5%                     6.6%
Crime and violence                                                     2.3%                     1.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                 0.6%                     0.3%
Information and communications technology                              2.3%                     1.2%
Anti-corruption                                                        19.3%                   21.6%
Domestic private sector development                                    4.5%                     8.6%
Foreign direct investment                                              0.6%                     1.3%
Education*                                                             53.4%                   38.0%
Energy*                                                                11.4%                   17.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                        5.1%                     7.0%
Natural resource management                                            9.7%                     7.1%
Environmental sustainability                                           1.1%                     1.2%
Disaster management                                                    1.1%                     0.7%
Health                                                                 11.9%                   13.1%
Agricultural development                                               36.9%                   34.7%
Job creation/employment                                                38.6%                   33.8%
Financial markets                                                      1.1%                     1.2%
Trade and exports                                                      2.8%                     5.8%
Food security                                                          8.0%                     5.1%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          146
The World Bank Group                                    Ghana




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Education Sector           All Others
Energy                                                                27.9%                   33.1%
Gender equity                                                         1.1%                     1.7%
Equality of opportunity                                               3.9%                     3.1%
Social protection                                                     2.2%                     2.3%
Global/regional integration                                           1.7%                     1.3%
Climate change                                                        0.0%                     0.3%
Anti-corruption                                                       25.7%                   22.7%
Disaster management                                                   1.7%                     1.0%
Rural development*                                                    8.9%                    18.2%
Foreign direct investment                                             8.4%                     7.1%
Urban development                                                     0.6%                     1.3%
Water and sanitation                                                  2.8%                     4.3%
Education*                                                            41.3%                   29.3%
Information and communications technology                             1.7%                     4.1%
Regulatory framework                                                  0.6%                     1.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                0.0%                     0.3%
Trade and exports                                                     22.3%                   20.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                       12.8%                   10.9%
Domestic private sector development                                   11.7%                   16.1%
Job creation/employment*                                              44.1%                   31.6%
Agricultural development*                                             29.6%                   40.4%
Food security*                                                        10.6%                    6.1%
Transport                                                             4.5%                     5.3%
Natural resource management                                           16.8%                   14.4%
Environmental sustainability                                          2.2%                     1.5%
Health                                                                7.8%                    11.9%
Law and justice                                                       2.8%                     2.6%
Crime and violence                                                    0.0%                     0.3%
Financial markets                                                     3.9%                     5.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                         147
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Ghana, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Education Sector            All Others
Social protection                                                       2.3%                      3.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                         15.8%                    18.2%
Transport                                                               7.9%                     11.5%
Poverty reduction                                                       22.6%                    22.7%
Global/regional integration                                             1.7%                      1.5%
Gender equity                                                           1.7%                      1.5%
Crime and violence                                                      1.1%                      1.0%
Domestic private sector development                                     7.3%                     11.7%
Rural development                                                       14.1%                    17.2%
Foreign direct investment                                               1.7%                      3.0%
Water and sanitation                                                    10.2%                     8.7%
Energy                                                                  14.7%                    16.0%
Job creation/employment                                                 23.7%                    25.0%
Financial markets                                                       1.1%                      2.0%
Urban development                                                       1.7%                      1.5%
Environmental sustainability                                            2.8%                      1.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                 1.7%                      1.5%
Health                                                                  32.8%                    26.4%
Education*                                                              58.2%                    33.6%
Food security                                                           6.8%                      4.8%
Climate change                                                          0.0%                      0.7%
Agricultural development*                                               23.2%                    34.7%
Trade and exports                                                       4.5%                      8.5%
Economic growth                                                         19.8%                    15.5%
Law and justice                                                         3.4%                      2.2%
Regulatory framework                                                    1.1%                      0.8%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                  0.6%                      0.7%
Natural resource management                                             6.8%                      6.5%
Anti-corruption*                                                        7.3%                     13.5%
Information and communications technology                               1.7%                      1.5%
Disaster management                                                     0.6%                      0.7%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            148
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

                                                                    Education Sector          All Others
                                                                     N Mean SD          N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption*                                                    161   7.86   2.55   572     8.34   2.33
Information and communications technology                           162   7.78   2.18   565     8.10   1.97
Transport                                                           165   7.96   2.14   562     8.25   1.95
Crime and violence                                                  158   7.19   2.59   545     7.27   2.52
Law and justice                                                     158   7.05   2.44   549     7.10   2.50
Urban development*                                                  161   7.35   2.27   558     8.00   2.08
Environmental sustainability*                                       164   7.68   2.15   555     8.12   1.90
Regulatory framework*                                               155   6.88   2.43   533     7.50   2.28
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                              165   7.60   2.27   556     7.91   2.20
Poverty reduction                                                   166   8.47   2.03   560     8.72   1.82
Gender equity                                                       163   6.95   2.41   549     7.28   2.36
Domestic private sector development*                                155   7.43   2.16   552     8.04   2.17
Foreign direct investment*                                          159   7.53   2.17   550     7.94   2.10
Water and sanitation*                                               164   8.22   1.97   565     8.61   1.85
Trade and exports                                                   159   7.60   2.19   560     7.81   2.23
Economic growth                                                     162   8.17   2.15   566     8.51   1.96
Energy*                                                             164   8.17   2.16   561     8.60   1.93
Disaster management                                                 158   7.58   2.16   555     7.73   2.30
Public sector governance/reform                                     157   7.78   2.11   554     8.13   2.16
Job creation/employment                                             163   8.04   2.26   564     8.35   2.16
Financial markets                                                   155   7.37   2.27   539     7.74   2.16
Equality of opportunity                                             154   7.32   2.20   525     7.56   2.26
Health                                                              167   8.44   1.92   557     8.75   1.75
Rural development*                                                  159   8.21   2.00   548     8.66   1.85
Global/regional integration                                         155   7.21   2.31   531     7.61   2.30
Food security                                                       162   7.98   2.21   549     8.24   2.10
Education                                                           170   8.63   1.93   553     8.70   1.90
Social protection                                                   156   7.45   2.42   554     7.40   2.32
Climate change                                                      158   7.22   2.33   535     7.53   2.38
Agricultural development*                                           166   8.39   2.00   566     8.85   1.76
Natural resource management                                         163   7.79   2.31   559     7.91   2.35
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           149
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                                     Education Sector          All Others
                                                                      N Mean SD          N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                      114   4.74   2.81   420     4.55   2.62
Information and communications technology                            112   5.42   2.40   438     5.63   2.15
Transport                                                            120   6.05   2.43   458     5.80   2.30
Crime and violence                                                   102   4.97   2.72   389     4.74   2.44
Law and justice*                                                     109   5.46   2.76   392     4.86   2.51
Urban development                                                    125   6.17   2.57   473     6.03   2.28
Environmental sustainability                                         122   6.04   2.48   456     5.89   2.31
Regulatory framework                                                 110   5.48   2.45   418     5.61   2.37
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               121   6.37   2.55   448     6.23   2.19
Poverty reduction                                                    134   6.19   2.66   497     6.10   2.47
Gender equity                                                        110   5.90   2.60   436     5.40   2.37
Domestic private sector development                                  110   5.42   2.61   423     5.27   2.31
Foreign direct investment                                            119   6.11   2.54   442     5.88   2.31
Water and sanitation                                                 127   6.09   2.47   493     6.51   2.31
Trade and exports                                                    115   5.36   2.55   431     5.47   2.34
Economic growth                                                      127   5.83   2.66   475     5.93   2.40
Energy                                                               117   5.51   2.76   439     5.51   2.57
Disaster management                                                  111   5.66   2.64   430     5.24   2.43
Public sector governance/reform                                      127   6.05   2.57   455     6.17   2.24
Job creation/employment                                              121   5.02   2.68   467     5.11   2.48
Financial markets                                                    114   5.92   2.52   424     5.52   2.38
Equality of opportunity                                              109   5.44   2.44   405     5.21   2.39
Health                                                               131   6.35   2.42   475     6.65   2.20
Rural development                                                    128   5.76   2.51   483     5.81   2.40
Global/regional integration                                          118   5.75   2.39   424     5.56   2.26
Food security                                                        120   5.89   2.53   459     5.68   2.32
Education                                                            143   6.49   2.39   480     6.46   2.22
Social protection                                                    109   5.48   2.64   423     5.15   2.43
Climate change                                                       108   5.32   2.62   411     5.45   2.45
Agricultural development                                             128   6.02   2.33   484     6.23   2.25
Natural resource management                                          113   5.52   2.82   436     5.28   2.68
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            150
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana




Public Sector vs. Others
Public Sector Governance/Public Financial Management/Anti-Corruption Sector N=157
All Others N=630

A. General Issues Facing Ghana

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Ghana. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Public Sector             All Others
Social protection*                                                      7.4%                      3.6%
Transport                                                               14.8%                    10.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                         18.1%                    14.4%
Global/regional integration                                             0.7%                      1.3%
Gender equity                                                           1.3%                      1.8%
Domestic private sector development                                     8.7%                      7.4%
Foreign direct investment                                               1.3%                      2.9%
Water and sanitation                                                    14.1%                    12.3%
Anti-corruption                                                         18.8%                    12.9%
Job creation/employment                                                 29.5%                    33.1%
Rural development                                                       7.4%                      8.2%
Financial markets                                                       1.3%                      1.1%
Urban development                                                       0.0%                      2.1%
Environmental sustainability                                            2.7%                      2.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                 2.0%                      1.1%
Health*                                                                 22.8%                    32.1%
Education*                                                              42.3%                    52.4%
Poverty reduction                                                       8.1%                      9.2%
Energy*                                                                 27.5%                    18.3%
Food security*                                                          4.0%                      9.0%
Climate change                                                          2.0%                      0.7%
Agricultural development                                                20.1%                    20.8%
Trade and exports*                                                      8.7%                      3.9%
Crime and violence                                                      2.0%                      2.0%
Economic growth                                                         18.1%                    12.3%
Law and justice                                                         2.7%                      4.7%
Regulatory framework                                                    0.7%                      0.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                  0.0%                      0.3%
Natural resource management                                             6.0%                      7.7%
Disaster management                                                     0.0%                      0.5%
Information and communications technology                               1.3%                      3.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           151
The World Bank Group                                     Ghana




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Public Sector             All Others
Water and sanitation                                                  7.7%                      7.1%
Equality of opportunity*                                              10.3%                     5.3%
Economic growth                                                       31.6%                    36.2%
Climate change                                                        1.9%                      1.0%
Global/regional integration                                           0.6%                      0.3%
Gender equity                                                         0.6%                      3.0%
Rural development                                                     29.0%                    25.3%
Urban development                                                     1.9%                      3.2%
Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%                      0.5%
Social protection                                                     4.5%                      2.1%
Law and justice                                                       3.2%                      3.2%
Transport                                                             7.7%                      5.8%
Crime and violence                                                    2.6%                      1.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                0.6%                      0.3%
Information and communications technology                             1.9%                      1.3%
Anti-corruption                                                       21.9%                    20.8%
Domestic private sector development                                   9.7%                      7.2%
Foreign direct investment                                             0.0%                      1.4%
Education*                                                            34.2%                    43.3%
Energy                                                                17.4%                    15.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                       4.5%                      7.1%
Natural resource management                                           8.4%                      7.5%
Environmental sustainability                                          0.6%                      1.3%
Disaster management                                                   1.3%                      0.6%
Health                                                                13.5%                    12.7%
Agricultural development                                              34.8%                    35.3%
Job creation/employment                                               39.4%                    33.8%
Financial markets                                                     0.0%                      1.4%
Trade and exports                                                     4.5%                      5.3%
Food security                                                         2.6%                      6.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          152
The World Bank Group                                    Ghana




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Public Sector            All Others
Energy                                                                35.9%                   30.9%
Gender equity                                                         1.3%                     1.6%
Equality of opportunity                                               4.5%                     3.0%
Social protection                                                     1.3%                     2.6%
Global/regional integration                                           0.6%                     1.6%
Climate change                                                        0.6%                     0.2%
Anti-corruption                                                       19.9%                   24.2%
Disaster management                                                   1.3%                     1.1%
Rural development                                                     19.2%                   15.3%
Foreign direct investment                                             10.3%                    6.7%
Urban development                                                     1.3%                     1.1%
Water and sanitation                                                  2.6%                     4.3%
Education                                                             25.6%                   33.7%
Information and communications technology                             3.8%                     3.5%
Regulatory framework                                                  1.9%                     1.1%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                0.6%                     0.2%
Trade and exports*                                                    26.3%                   19.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                       10.9%                   11.5%
Domestic private sector development                                   14.1%                   15.3%
Job creation/employment*                                              26.9%                   36.4%
Agricultural development                                              44.2%                   36.4%
Food security                                                         4.5%                     7.8%
Transport                                                             5.1%                     5.1%
Natural resource management                                           16.7%                   14.5%
Environmental sustainability                                          0.6%                     1.9%
Health                                                                10.3%                   11.2%
Law and justice                                                       4.5%                     2.2%
Crime and violence                                                    0.0%                     0.3%
Financial markets                                                     4.5%                     4.8%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                         153
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Ghana, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Public Sector             All Others
Social protection                                                       2.0%                      3.2%
Public sector governance/reform*                                        23.7%                    16.2%
Transport                                                               11.2%                    10.6%
Poverty reduction                                                       23.0%                    22.6%
Global/regional integration                                             0.7%                      1.8%
Gender equity                                                           2.0%                      1.4%
Crime and violence                                                      1.3%                      1.0%
Domestic private sector development                                     13.8%                     9.9%
Rural development                                                       18.4%                    16.0%
Foreign direct investment                                               3.3%                      2.6%
Water and sanitation                                                    8.6%                      9.1%
Energy                                                                  19.7%                    14.7%
Job creation/employment                                                 24.3%                    24.8%
Financial markets                                                       2.0%                      1.8%
Urban development                                                       0.7%                      1.8%
Environmental sustainability                                            0.0%                      2.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                 2.6%                      1.3%
Health*                                                                 19.1%                    30.0%
Education*                                                              26.3%                    42.3%
Food security                                                           5.3%                      5.3%
Climate change                                                          0.7%                      0.5%
Agricultural development*                                               39.5%                    30.3%
Trade and exports                                                       7.2%                      7.7%
Economic growth                                                         17.1%                    16.3%
Law and justice                                                         2.6%                      2.4%
Regulatory framework                                                    0.7%                      1.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                  1.3%                      0.5%
Natural resource management                                             6.6%                      6.6%
Anti-corruption                                                         13.2%                    11.9%
Information and communications technology                               0.7%                      1.8%
Disaster management                                                     1.3%                      0.5%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            154
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                   Public Sector Gov./
                                                                     Public Financial
                                                                      Mgmt./Anti-
                                                                    Corruption Sector          All Others
                                                                     N Mean SD           N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                     150   8.28   2.47    583     8.23   2.37
Information and communications technology                           146   8.22   2.03    581     7.98   2.02
Transport                                                           146   8.34   1.97    581     8.15   2.01
Crime and violence                                                  139   7.32   2.72    564     7.23   2.49
Law and justice                                                     144   7.23   2.69    563     7.05   2.44
Urban development*                                                  146   8.27   1.93    573     7.75   2.18
Environmental sustainability*                                       144   8.34   1.91    575     7.94   1.98
Regulatory framework                                                138   7.70   2.25    550     7.28   2.34
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                              141   8.12   2.26    580     7.77   2.21
Poverty reduction                                                   145   8.83   1.84    581     8.62   1.88
Gender equity                                                       141   7.47   2.42    571     7.14   2.36
Domestic private sector development                                 142   8.18   2.22    565     7.84   2.16
Foreign direct investment*                                          145   8.28   1.97    564     7.73   2.15
Water and sanitation                                                146   8.62   1.95    583     8.50   1.87
Trade and exports                                                   145   7.99   2.18    574     7.70   2.23
Economic growth                                                     145   8.67   1.76    583     8.37   2.06
Energy                                                              149   8.72   1.91    576     8.44   2.01
Disaster management                                                 145   7.94   2.28    568     7.64   2.27
Public sector governance/reform                                     146   8.34   1.92    565     7.98   2.21
Job creation/employment                                             148   8.30   2.17    579     8.28   2.19
Financial markets                                                   142   7.69   2.26    552     7.65   2.17
Equality of opportunity                                             135   7.75   2.31    544     7.45   2.23
Health                                                              145   8.61   1.83    579     8.70   1.79
Rural development                                                   141   8.72   1.76    566     8.52   1.92
Global/regional integration                                         139   7.62   2.38    547     7.49   2.29
Food security                                                       142   8.15   2.28    569     8.19   2.09
Education                                                           146   8.68   2.00    577     8.69   1.89
Social protection                                                   144   7.47   2.38    566     7.39   2.33
Climate change*                                                     139   7.85   2.21    554     7.36   2.40
Agricultural development                                            149   8.75   1.86    583     8.74   1.82
Natural resource management                                         145   7.99   2.34    577     7.86   2.34
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           155
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                    Public Sector Gov./
                                                                      Public Financial
                                                                       Mgmt./Anti-
                                                                     Corruption Sector          All Others
                                                                      N Mean SD           N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                      107   4.60   2.66    427     4.59   2.67
Information and communications technology                            112   5.64   2.11    438     5.58   2.23
Transport                                                            117   5.91   2.33    461     5.83   2.32
Crime and violence*                                                  96    4.32   2.55    395     4.90   2.47
Law and justice*                                                     94    4.45   2.44    407     5.12   2.60
Urban development                                                    124   6.04   2.30    474     6.06   2.35
Environmental sustainability                                         113   5.68   2.37    465     5.98   2.34
Regulatory framework                                                 108   5.34   2.38    420     5.65   2.38
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               114   6.39   2.09    455     6.23   2.31
Poverty reduction                                                    125   5.79   2.45    506     6.20   2.52
Gender equity                                                        110   5.19   2.51    436     5.58   2.40
Domestic private sector development                                  106   4.99   2.36    427     5.37   2.37
Foreign direct investment                                            112   5.61   2.40    449     6.01   2.35
Water and sanitation                                                 130   6.52   2.34    490     6.40   2.36
Trade and exports                                                    113   5.37   2.51    433     5.47   2.35
Economic growth                                                      125   5.73   2.43    477     5.96   2.46
Energy                                                               115   5.27   2.74    441     5.57   2.58
Disaster management                                                  108   5.28   2.49    433     5.34   2.47
Public sector governance/reform                                      121   6.36   2.24    461     6.09   2.33
Job creation/employment*                                             123   4.54   2.33    465     5.24   2.55
Financial markets*                                                   111   5.06   2.51    427     5.75   2.37
Equality of opportunity                                              103   4.96   2.54    411     5.34   2.36
Health                                                               128   6.68   2.14    478     6.56   2.28
Rural development                                                    127   5.60   2.59    484     5.86   2.38
Global/regional integration                                          109   5.39   2.33    433     5.65   2.27
Food security                                                        120   5.38   2.21    459     5.82   2.40
Education                                                            127   6.35   2.24    496     6.50   2.26
Social protection*                                                   110   4.76   2.45    422     5.34   2.47
Climate change                                                       105   5.40   2.58    414     5.43   2.46
Agricultural development                                             126   6.10   2.18    486     6.21   2.29
Natural resource management                                          115   4.97   2.71    434     5.42   2.70
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            156
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana




Agriculture Sector vs. Others
Agriculture/Rural Development/Food Security Sector N=91                    All Others N=696

A. General Issues Facing Ghana

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Ghana. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Agriculture Sector          All Others
Social protection*                                                        0.0%                    4.9%
Transport                                                                10.3%                   11.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                          10.3%                   15.8%
Global/regional integration                                               1.1%                    1.2%
Gender equity                                                             2.3%                    1.6%
Domestic private sector development                                      10.3%                    7.3%
Foreign direct investment*                                                8.0%                    1.9%
Water and sanitation                                                     12.6%                   12.6%
Anti-corruption*                                                          5.7%                   15.2%
Job creation/employment                                                  37.9%                   31.6%
Rural development*                                                       16.1%                    7.0%
Financial markets                                                         0.0%                    1.3%
Urban development                                                         0.0%                    1.9%
Environmental sustainability                                              0.0%                    3.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                   1.1%                    1.3%
Health*                                                                  40.2%                   29.0%
Education                                                                55.2%                   49.8%
Poverty reduction                                                         8.0%                    9.1%
Energy                                                                   13.8%                   21.0%
Food security                                                             5.7%                    8.3%
Climate change                                                            0.0%                    1.0%
Agricultural development*                                                32.2%                   19.2%
Trade and exports                                                         3.4%                    5.1%
Crime and violence                                                        1.1%                    2.1%
Economic growth                                                           9.2%                   14.0%
Law and justice                                                           3.4%                    4.5%
Regulatory framework                                                      1.1%                    0.6%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                    0.0%                    0.3%
Natural resource management                                               4.6%                    7.7%
Disaster management                                                       0.0%                    0.4%
Information and communications technology                                 3.4%                    3.1%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           157
The World Bank Group                                     Ghana




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Agriculture Sector          All Others
Water and sanitation                                                    7.9%                    7.1%
Equality of opportunity*                                                1.1%                    7.0%
Economic growth*                                                       48.3%                   33.6%
Climate change                                                          0.0%                    1.3%
Global/regional integration                                             0.0%                    0.4%
Gender equity                                                           1.1%                    2.8%
Rural development                                                      28.1%                   25.8%
Urban development                                                       2.2%                    3.0%
Regulatory framework                                                    1.1%                    0.3%
Social protection                                                       1.1%                    2.8%
Law and justice                                                         1.1%                    3.5%
Transport                                                               5.6%                    6.2%
Crime and violence                                                      1.1%                    1.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                  0.0%                    0.4%
Information and communications technology                               1.1%                    1.4%
Anti-corruption*                                                       11.2%                   22.3%
Domestic private sector development                                     3.4%                    8.3%
Foreign direct investment                                               1.1%                    1.2%
Education                                                              47.2%                   40.7%
Energy                                                                 22.5%                   15.4%
Public sector governance/reform                                         7.9%                    6.4%
Natural resource management                                             9.0%                    7.5%
Environmental sustainability                                            1.1%                    1.2%
Disaster management                                                     0.0%                    0.9%
Health                                                                 10.1%                   13.2%
Agricultural development*                                              44.9%                   33.9%
Job creation/employment                                                27.0%                   35.9%
Financial markets                                                       1.1%                    1.2%
Trade and exports                                                       4.5%                    5.2%
Food security                                                           5.6%                    5.8%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          158
The World Bank Group                                    Ghana




A. General Issues Facing Ghana (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                            Agriculture Sector          All Others
Energy                                                                29.2%                   32.3%
Gender equity                                                          3.4%                    1.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                1.1%                    3.6%
Social protection                                                      2.2%                    2.3%
Global/regional integration                                            2.2%                    1.3%
Climate change                                                         0.0%                    0.3%
Anti-corruption                                                       22.5%                   23.5%
Disaster management                                                    0.0%                    1.3%
Rural development*                                                    23.6%                   15.1%
Foreign direct investment                                              5.6%                    7.6%
Urban development                                                      2.2%                    1.0%
Water and sanitation                                                   2.2%                    4.2%
Education                                                             31.5%                   32.1%
Information and communications technology                              4.5%                    3.5%
Regulatory framework                                                   0.0%                    1.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                 0.0%                    0.3%
Trade and exports                                                     15.7%                   21.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                       13.5%                   11.1%
Domestic private sector development                                    9.0%                   15.9%
Job creation/employment                                               32.6%                   34.7%
Agricultural development                                              42.7%                   37.3%
Food security                                                          4.5%                    7.5%
Transport                                                              9.0%                    4.6%
Natural resource management                                           14.6%                   15.0%
Environmental sustainability                                           2.2%                    1.6%
Health                                                                16.9%                   10.2%
Law and justice                                                        0.0%                    3.0%
Crime and violence                                                     0.0%                    0.3%
Financial markets                                                      5.6%                    4.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                         159
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Ghana, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Agriculture Sector          All Others
Social protection                                                         3.3%                    2.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                          11.0%                   18.5%
Transport                                                                13.2%                   10.4%
Poverty reduction                                                        22.0%                   22.8%
Global/regional integration                                               2.2%                    1.5%
Gender equity                                                             0.0%                    1.8%
Crime and violence                                                        0.0%                    1.2%
Domestic private sector development                                       7.7%                   11.1%
Rural development*                                                       35.2%                   14.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                 2.2%                    2.8%
Water and sanitation*                                                     3.3%                    9.8%
Energy                                                                    8.8%                   16.6%
Job creation/employment                                                  25.3%                   24.7%
Financial markets                                                         2.2%                    1.8%
Urban development                                                         3.3%                    1.3%
Environmental sustainability                                              0.0%                    2.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                   1.1%                    1.6%
Health                                                                   27.5%                   27.9%
Education                                                                40.7%                   39.0%
Food security                                                             4.4%                    5.4%
Climate change                                                            0.0%                    0.6%
Agricultural development                                                 38.5%                   31.2%
Trade and exports                                                         7.7%                    7.6%
Economic growth                                                          16.5%                   16.5%
Law and justice                                                           0.0%                    2.8%
Regulatory framework                                                      1.1%                    0.9%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                    0.0%                    0.7%
Natural resource management                                               7.7%                    6.4%
Anti-corruption                                                           9.9%                   12.4%
Information and communications technology                                 3.3%                    1.3%
Disaster management                                                       0.0%                    0.7%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            160
The World Bank Group                                      Ghana




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                    Agriculture/ Rural
                                                                     Development /
                                                                      Food Security
                                                                          Sector               All Others
                                                                     N Mean SD           N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                      85   8.25   2.38    648     8.24   2.40
Information and communications technology*                           83   7.52   2.23    644     8.09   1.98
Transport                                                            82   8.11   1.95    645     8.19   2.01
Crime and violence                                                   80   6.79   2.59    623     7.31   2.53
Law and justice                                                      77   6.62   2.50    630     7.14   2.48
Urban development                                                    83   7.47   2.13    636     7.90   2.14
Environmental sustainability                                         80   7.71   1.96    639     8.06   1.97
Regulatory framework                                                 77   7.01   2.24    611     7.40   2.34
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                              81   7.19   2.17    640     7.92   2.22
Poverty reduction                                                    81   8.60   1.63    645     8.67   1.90
Gender equity*                                                       80   6.61   2.05    632     7.28   2.40
Domestic private sector development*                                 79   7.38   2.23    628     7.97   2.16
Foreign direct investment*                                           79   7.27   2.22    630     7.92   2.10
Water and sanitation                                                 84   8.45   2.00    645     8.53   1.87
Trade and exports                                                    82   7.68   1.94    637     7.77   2.26
Economic growth                                                      86   8.57   1.99    642     8.41   2.01
Energy                                                               81   8.69   1.81    644     8.48   2.01
Disaster management                                                  78   7.45   2.25    635     7.73   2.27
Public sector governance/reform                                      81   8.01   2.42    630     8.06   2.12
Job creation/employment                                              82   8.05   2.45    645     8.31   2.15
Financial markets                                                    78   7.51   2.02    616     7.68   2.21
Equality of opportunity                                              75   7.56   1.89    604     7.50   2.29
Health                                                               81   8.69   1.91    643     8.68   1.78
Rural development                                                    78   8.63   1.85    629     8.55   1.90
Global/regional integration                                          77   7.17   2.16    609     7.56   2.32
Food security                                                        79   8.08   2.35    632     8.19   2.10
Education                                                            78   8.85   1.94    645     8.67   1.91
Social protection                                                    80   7.16   2.19    630     7.44   2.36
Climate change                                                       78   7.27   2.31    615     7.48   2.38
Agricultural development                                             82   9.01   1.61    650     8.71   1.85
Natural resource management                                          82   8.05   2.28    640     7.87   2.35
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           161
The World Bank Group                                       Ghana




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Ghana? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                     Agriculture/ Rural
                                                                      Development /
                                                                       Food Security
                                                                           Sector               All Others
                                                                      N Mean SD           N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption*                                                      63   5.27   2.62    471     4.50   2.66
Information and communications technology                             71   5.97   1.93    479     5.53   2.23
Transport                                                             72   6.19   2.07    506     5.80   2.36
Crime and violence                                                    58   5.33   2.42    433     4.72   2.50
Law and justice                                                       59   5.08   2.31    442     4.98   2.61
Urban development*                                                    73   6.66   1.88    525     5.97   2.39
Environmental sustainability*                                         72   6.51   1.99    506     5.84   2.38
Regulatory framework*                                                 66   6.17   2.09    462     5.50   2.41
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                67   6.25   2.09    502     6.26   2.29
Poverty reduction*                                                    80   6.85   2.37    551     6.02   2.51
Gender equity                                                         64   5.31   1.79    482     5.53   2.50
Domestic private sector development*                                  63   5.86   2.22    470     5.22   2.38
Foreign direct investment                                             66   6.33   1.92    495     5.87   2.41
Water and sanitation*                                                 72   7.07   2.11    548     6.34   2.37
Trade and exports*                                                    64   6.00   2.06    482     5.37   2.41
Economic growth*                                                      68   6.57   1.94    534     5.82   2.50
Energy*                                                               67   6.42   2.48    489     5.38   2.61
Disaster management                                                   66   5.77   2.31    475     5.26   2.49
Public sector governance/reform                                       67   6.58   2.22    515     6.09   2.32
Job creation/employment*                                              73   5.85   2.53    515     4.98   2.50
Financial markets                                                     69   5.90   2.33    469     5.56   2.42
Equality of opportunity*                                              63   6.02   2.28    451     5.16   2.40
Health                                                                74   7.03   2.06    532     6.52   2.27
Rural development*                                                    74   6.54   2.13    537     5.70   2.45
Global/regional integration                                           64   5.89   2.13    478     5.56   2.31
Food security                                                         71   6.06   2.25    508     5.68   2.38
Education*                                                            76   7.07   2.05    547     6.38   2.27
Social protection                                                     62   5.68   2.09    470     5.16   2.51
Climate change                                                        62   5.94   1.96    457     5.36   2.54
Agricultural development*                                             79   6.92   2.22    533     6.08   2.26
Natural resource management                                           63   5.65   2.39    486     5.29   2.75
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            162
The World Bank Group                                                                                               Ghana                                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG
                                                             H3. Currently, do you
                                                          professionally collaborate/     H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                             work with the WBG?                 Observer          Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate         Use WBG website

Indicator Question                                          No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                              5.31          6.65         6.36              5.52    5.87         6.28       5.91           6.23       5.87         6.42     5.98        6.06
Bank Group's effectiveness in Ghana.
To what extent do you believe the World Bank
Group's staff is well prepared to help Ghana solve its        5.94          7.07         6.95              6.04    6.40         6.93       6.51           6.72       6.49         6.80     6.49        6.79
most complicated development challenges?
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                              6.31          7.08         7.02              6.34    6.63         6.89       6.63           6.91       6.67         6.84     6.76        6.58
relevant role in development in Ghana
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
                                                              5.41          6.43         6.32              5.47    5.93         5.97       5.85           6.17       5.84         6.30     5.98        5.83
consider the development priorities for Ghana
Responsiveness                                                5.60          6.08         5.93              5.76    5.91         5.75       5.80           6.01       5.80         6.05     5.97        5.54
Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
                                                              5.13          5.94         5.70              5.32    5.52         5.59       5.53           5.58       5.43         5.89     5.57        5.48
services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                              5.05          6.02         5.72              5.27    5.44         5.73       5.48           5.65       5.40         5.98     5.68        5.11
circumstances)
Being inclusive                                               5.47          6.34         6.16              5.60    5.86         6.08       5.88           6.04       5.82         6.26     5.92        5.95
Openness (sharing data and other information)                 5.83          6.98         6.77              5.86    6.25         6.65       6.26           6.66       6.30         6.64     6.35        6.44
Staff accessibility                                           4.77          5.87         5.70              4.83    5.18         5.65       5.13           5.82       5.23         5.64     5.24        5.59
Straightforwardness and honesty                               5.74          6.82         6.54              6.00    6.25         6.46       6.22           6.54       6.26         6.49     6.32        6.28
Collaboration with civil society                              5.23          6.10         5.90              5.46    5.67         5.81       5.49           6.29       5.67         5.84     5.66        5.84
Collaboration with the Government                             7.17          7.56         7.45              7.26    7.44         7.20       7.24           7.67       7.37         7.34     7.37        7.36
Collaboration with other donors and development
                                                              6.54          6.99         6.84              6.80    6.88         6.68       6.77           6.96       6.82         6.83     6.82        6.82
partners
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
                                                              5.40          6.22         5.99              5.55    5.70         6.03       5.77           5.92       5.71         6.14     5.79        5.85
the ground
To what extent does the World Bank Group's work
                                                              6.05          6.91         6.77              6.15    6.40         6.71       6.47           6.55       6.40         6.80     6.53        6.38
help to achieve development results in Ghana?
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet
                                                              4.92          6.42         6.15              5.04    5.45         6.11       5.55           5.92       5.55         5.99     5.66        5.65
the needs of Ghana
The World Bank Group meets Ghana's needs for
                                                              5.49          6.80         6.50              5.75    6.08         6.38       6.08           6.43       6.15         6.24     6.18        6.15
knowledge services
Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific development
                                                              5.09          6.32         6.02              5.33    5.58         6.00       5.70           5.77       5.63         6.01     5.81        5.48
challenges and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
                                                              6.09          7.08         6.89              6.26    6.44         6.99       6.57           6.72       6.56         6.78     6.60        6.65
and activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of
the World Bank Group's knowledge work and                     6.40          7.34         7.25              6.46    6.78         7.17       6.85           7.03       6.81         7.22     6.92        6.86
activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                              6.06          6.84         6.75              6.11    6.42         6.61       6.36           6.78       6.41         6.71     6.47        6.50
Bank Group makes appropriate use of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.
                                                                                                                    163
The World Bank Group                                                                                                  Ghana                                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group
                                     Office of the                   Consultant on                 Bilateral/      Private/    NGO/CBO/                    Independent
                                      President/     Employee of a        WBG           Local     Multilateral     Financial     Private                   Government
                                       Minister        Ministry       Project/PMU    Government     Agency       Sector/Bank   Foundation       Media       Institution   Trade Union   Academia        Other
                                      N     Mean       N    Mean       N    Mean      N    Mean    N     Mean     N    Mean    N     Mean   N      Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean    N    Mean   N      Mean
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank         16      5.31     175    6.10     26     6.69    174   5.78   10      6.50   60     5.62   61    6.30   16      6.00    19     6.63   11     5.27   64   5.70   31      5.13
Group's effectiveness in Ghana.
To what extent do you believe the
WBG's staff is well prepared to
help Ghana solve its most            14      5.93     160    6.42     28     6.82    164   6.02   11      7.18   60     7.00   58    6.88   14      6.64    18     7.56    8     7.25   57   6.49   28      6.29
complicated development
challenges?
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in   16      5.19     182    6.90     27     6.85    183   6.84   12      6.17   64     6.67   68    6.75   19      6.21    19     7.79   12     6.42   69   6.28   35      5.86
development in Ghana*
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the     15      4.93     175    6.12     28     6.29    173   5.85   11      5.36   61     5.74   65    5.78   19      5.68    19     7.26   12     6.00   67   5.58   35      5.20
development priorities for Ghana
Responsiveness*                      16      4.19     160    6.04     26     6.73    163   5.79   12      5.00   59     5.92   58    6.03   17      5.18    19     6.95   11     6.00   60   5.48   29      5.55
Flexibility (in terms of the
institution’s products and           15      4.07     154    5.70     27     6.26    164   5.20   11      6.09   59     5.93   57    6.09   14      4.79    19     6.26   10     5.70   61   5.33   30      5.13
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                     16      5.19     157    5.75     25     5.72    170   5.17   13      5.00   57     5.56   56    6.07   18      6.00    19     7.00    9     5.56   66   5.12   31      5.03
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                     15      4.33     153    6.18     26     6.15    156   5.67   13      5.85   59     5.81   53    6.28   17      5.29    19     7.00   12     4.75   61   6.00   31      5.35
Openness (sharing data and other
                                     15      4.60     168    6.82     27     7.33    167   6.37   12      6.00   62     6.31   62    6.63   17      5.29    19     6.84   10     5.60   63   5.62   33      5.39
information)*
Staff accessibility*                 14      4.43     152    5.82     26     6.35    155   4.74   13      5.77   57     5.16   60    5.63   16      4.38    19     6.74   12     4.75   57   4.93   27      5.00
Straightforwardness and honesty*     15      5.47     166    6.65     27     6.48    165   6.23   13      6.54   63     5.98   57    6.67   17      5.29    18     7.11   12     6.33   62   5.56   29      5.45
Collaboration with civil society*    15      5.20     160    6.16     27     5.37    160   5.64   11      6.00   63     5.33   62    5.71   17      4.65    19     5.79   12     4.58   60   5.00   31      5.61
Collaboration with the
                                     14      5.57     170    7.85     26     7.58    174   7.38   13      6.08   63     7.63   61    6.75   17      6.41    19     8.11   11     7.91   64   6.89   32      6.88
Government*
Collaboration with other donors
                                     14      5.86     155    7.34     28     6.54    157   6.80   13      6.15   61     6.80   60    6.35   16      6.13    18     6.89   11     7.27   60   6.40   28      6.21
and development partners*
The speed in which it gets things
                                     13      4.92     155    6.11     26     6.15    158   5.77   13      6.15   58     5.48   57    6.07   16      5.94    18     6.22   12     5.92   60   5.37   30      4.60
accomplished on the ground
To what extent does the WBG's
work help to achieve development     17      5.88     172    6.49     28     6.14    179   6.55   13      6.46   59     6.86   64    6.27   19      5.68    18     7.78   12     6.67   63   6.19   35      6.26
results in Ghana?
The WBG's financial instruments
                                     16      4.88     180    5.57     26     7.35    168   5.60   13      5.62   64     5.61   60    6.03   19      5.42    18     6.28   10     5.80   67   4.73   31      5.23
meet the needs of Ghana*
The WBG meets Ghana's needs for
                                     16      5.00     174    6.09     25     7.56    166   6.05   13      5.69   62     6.16   59    6.49   18      5.89    18     7.50   10     6.40   67   5.34   33      5.67
knowledge services*
Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific
development challenges and           13      4.77     163    5.82     26     6.46    169   5.62   14      5.50   58     5.67   62    6.03   17      5.47    17     6.24   11     5.82   60   5.17   29      5.07
country circumstances
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
WBG's knowledge work and             15      6.07     177    6.69     27     6.70    174   6.50   15      6.73   61     6.39   67    6.81   16      6.00    18     7.17   11     7.36   63   6.14   33      6.64
activities make to development
results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the WBG's       14      6.21     168    7.15     28     7.07    168   6.74   15      6.47   63     6.54   64    7.27   17      6.82    18     7.33   10     7.80   62   6.35   30      6.23
knowledge work and activities?
Where country systems are
adequate, the WBG makes              15      5.53     158    6.47     29     7.00    153   6.88   14      5.36   57     6.14   57    6.67   16      5.75    17     6.76   10     7.00   59   5.85   27      5.52
appropriate use of them*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                       164
The World Bank Group                                 Ghana                              Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix I: Ghana FY 2014 Questionnaire




                            World Bank Group Country Survey FY14 – Ghana


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Ghana or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Ghana, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Ghana.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING GHANA

 A1. In general would you say that Ghana is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                     165
The World Bank Group                                        Ghana                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Ghana.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Ghana?
 (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                          17     Education
       assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)      18     Poverty reduction
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public    19     Energy
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4    Global/regional integration                           20     Food security
  5    Gender equity                                         21     Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  6    Domestic private sector development                   22     Agricultural development
  7    Foreign direct investment                             23     Trade and exports
  8    Water and sanitation                                  24     Crime and violence
  9    Anti corruption                                       25     Economic growth
 10    Job creation/employment                               26     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11    Rural development                                     27     Regulatory framework
 12    Financial markets                                     28     Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 13    Urban development                                     29     Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 14    Environmental sustainability                          30     Disaster management
 15    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
                                                             31     Information and communications technology
 16    Health




                                                            166
The World Bank Group                                           Ghana                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                               16     Anti corruption
  2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             17     Domestic private sector development
  3    Economic growth                                    18     Foreign direct investment
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      19     Education
  5    Global/regional integration                        20     Energy
                                                                 Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  6    Gender equity                                      21     effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                 expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  7    Rural development                                  22     Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
  8    Urban development                                  23     Environmental sustainability
  9    Regulatory framework                               24     Disaster management
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 10                                                       25     Health
       social assistance)
 11    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)            26     Agricultural development
 12    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)   27     Job creation/employment
 13    Crime and violence                                 28     Financial markets
 14    Communicable/non-communicable diseases             29     Trade and exports
 15    Information and communications technology          30     Food security




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               167
The World Bank Group                                          Ghana                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy                                             16      Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 2    Gender equity                                      17      Trade and exports
                                                                 Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             18      effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                 expenditure, fiscal system reform)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 4                                                       19      Domestic private sector development
      social assistance)
 5    Global/regional integration                        20      Job creation/employment
 6    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      21      Agricultural development
 7    Anti corruption                                    22      Food security
 8    Disaster management                                23      Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 9    Rural development                                  24      Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 10   Foreign direct investment                          25      Environmental sustainability
 11   Urban development                                  26      Health
 12   Water and sanitation                               27      Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 13   Education                                          28      Crime and violence
 14   Information and communications technology
                                                         29      Financial markets
 15   Regulatory framework


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following
 TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Better employment opportunities for young people
  2    Better employment opportunities for women
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  6    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  7    A growing middle class
  8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
  9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 10    Consistent economic growth
 11    More reliable social safety net
 12    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14    Better quality public services
 15    Other (please specify):_____________________________________




                                                              168
The World Bank Group                                            Ghana                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Ghana?
          1                 2               3       4       5              6        7        8            9              10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                              Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Ghana.
          1             2           3           4   5       6              7        8        9           10              
                                                                                                          Very
 Not effective at all                                                                                                Don't know
                                                                                                      effective


 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Ghana solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2       3       4       5   6   7             8        9                 10                      
                                                                                        To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                 Don't know
                                                                                                     degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in Ghana, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
 resources (financial and knowledge services) in Ghana? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                               17       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
      assistance)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 2    effectiveness, public financial management, public         18       Health
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           19       Education
 4    Poverty reduction                                          20       Food security
 5    Global/regional integration                                21       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Gender equity                                              22       Agricultural development
 7    Crime and violence                                         23       Trade and exports
 8    Domestic private sector development                        24       Economic growth
 9    Rural development                                          25       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10   Foreign direct investment                                  26       Regulatory framework
 11   Water and sanitation                                       27       Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 12   Energy                                                     28       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 13   Job creation/employment                                    29       Anti corruption
 14   Financial markets                                          30       Information and communications technology
 15   Urban development
                                                                 31       Disaster management
 16   Environmental sustainability




                                                                169
The World Bank Group                                          Ghana                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Ghana?
                                                                        Greatest Value            Second Greatest Value
                                                                 (Choose only ONE)                (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                                
 2     Data                                                                                                  
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                      
 4     Financial resources                                                                                   
 5     Capacity development                                                                                  
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                  
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                            
 8     Donor coordination                                                                                    
 9     Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                                                              
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________                                                      


 How effectively do the World Bank Group’s activities below support Ghana’s efforts to achieve
 development results?
                                                                 Not effective                                     Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                        effective   know
  B6    Convening/facilitating                                      1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  B7    Data                                                        1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  B8    Policy advice, studies, analyses                            1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  B9    Financial resources                                         1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B10    Technical assistance                                        1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B11    Mobilizing third party financial resources                  1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B12    Donor coordination                                          1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 B13    Linkage to South-South knowledge sharing                    1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      


 The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Ghana. To which
 degree would Ghana benefit, if capacity building were to support...?
                                                                 To no                                      To a very
                                                                                                                           Don't
                                                                 degree                                    significant
                                                                                                                           know
                                                                 at all                                       degree
        Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
 B14    media) to help them more effectively engage and             1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        participate in development efforts
        The public sector, related to implementation of
 B15                                                                1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        specific development projects on the ground
        The public sector, related to changing institutions
 B16                                                                1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        (organizations or sociopolitical conditions)
        The private sector, related to institutional and
 B17                                                                1     2      3    4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
        policy change




                                                              170
The World Bank Group                                           Ghana                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
 each of the following areas in Ghana? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
 below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                   Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                   at all                                       effective   know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B18                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B19                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B20                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)


 When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Ghana to help ensure better development
 results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
 please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                   Not important                                Very        Don't
                                                                   at all                                   important       know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B21                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B22                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B23                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)


 B24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Staff too inaccessible
 2     Not exploring alternative policy options
 3     Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Ghana
 4     Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5     Arrogant in its approach
 6     Not aligned with country priorities
 7     The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8     World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 9     Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 10    Too influenced by developed countries
 11    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 12    World Bank Group’s processes too slow
 13    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 14    Not aligned with other donors’ work
 15    Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 16    Not client focused
 17    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 18    Don’t know




                                                               171
The World Bank Group                                          Ghana                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B25. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Capacity development
 2     Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 3     Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 4     Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 5     Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6     Trust Fund management
 7     Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8     Don’t know


 B26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which
 TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 2     Donor community
 3     Media
 4     NGOs
 5     Local Government
 6     Private sector
 7     Parliament
 8     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 9     Beneficiaries
 10    Foundations
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    Other (please specify): __________________________
 13    Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
 Ghana?
                                                                  Strongly                                     Strongly   Don't
                                                                  disagree                                        agree   know
         Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B27                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         relevant role in development in Ghana
         The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B28                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         consider the development priorities for Ghana
         The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B29                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         strategies that are realistic for Ghana
         The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B30                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         stakeholders in Ghana with respect




                                                               172
The World Bank Group                                           Ghana                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Ghana, in terms of each of
 the following?
                                                                     To no                                     To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't
                                                                     degree at                                significant
                                                                                                                            know
                                                                     all                                         degree
 B31     Responsiveness                                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B32                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B33                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         circumstances)
 B34     Being inclusive                                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B35     Openness (sharing data and other information)                   1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B36     Staff accessibility                                             1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B37     Straightforwardness and honesty                                 1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B38     Group who are making decisions important to my                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         work
 B39     Collaboration with civil society                                1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
 B40     Collaboration with the Government                               1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Collaboration with other donors and development
 B41                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         partners
 B42     Collaboration with the private sector                           1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B43                                                                     1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         the ground
 B44     Being a long-term partner                                       1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       



 B45. To be a more effective development partner in Ghana, do you believe that the World Bank Group
 should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                       Less local presence       Don't know
                                           presence is adequate


 B46. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 3     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5     Poor donor coordination
 6     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7     The Government works inefficiently
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                   173
The World Bank Group                                          Ghana                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Ghana?
                                                                 Not important                            Very     Don't
                                                                 at all                               important    know
  1    Anti corruption                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  2    Information and communications technology                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  4    Crime and violence                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  6    Urban development                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  7    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  8    Regulatory framework                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 10    Poverty reduction                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 11    Gender equity                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 12    Domestic private sector development                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 13    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 14    Water and sanitation                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 15    Trade and exports                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 16    Economic growth                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 17    Energy                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 18    Disaster management                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 19    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 20    Job creation/employment                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 21    Financial markets                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 22    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 23    Health                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 24    Rural development                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 25    Global/regional integration                                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 26    Food security                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 27    Education                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 28                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       assistance)
 29    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 30    Agricultural development                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 31    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       




                                                              174
The World Bank Group                                          Ghana                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Ghana? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the sectors
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                       effective   know
  1    Anti corruption                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  2    Information and communications technology                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  4    Crime and violence                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  6    Urban development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  7    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  8    Regulatory framework                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 10    Poverty reduction                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 11    Gender equity                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 12    Domestic private sector development                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 13    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 14    Water and sanitation                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 15    Trade and exports                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 16    Economic growth                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 17    Energy                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 18    Disaster management                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 19    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 20    Job creation/employment                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 21    Financial markets                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 22    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 23    Health                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 24    Rural development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 25    Global/regional integration                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 26    Food security                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 27    Education                                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 28                                                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       assistance)
 29    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 30    Agricultural development                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 31    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      




                                                              175
The World Bank Group                                               Ghana                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in
 Ghana? (Select only ONE response)
  1    At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
  2    In the country
  3    Don’t know


 C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
 Ghana?
         1             2       3       4       5       6           7         8           9                  10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                 To a very significant
                                                                                                                             Don't know
 all                                                                                                          degree


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Ghana?
                                                               Strongly                                                  Strongly    Don't
                                                               disagree                                                     agree    know
       The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
       (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
 C5                                                            1        2    3       4       5     6    7        8   9       10       
       Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of
       Ghana
       The World Bank Group meets Ghana’s needs
 C6    for knowledge services (e.g., research,                 1        2    3       4       5     6    7        8   9       10       
       analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group measures and corrects its work in real time
 in Ghana?
             1             2       3       4       5       6           7         8       9               10                         
                                                                                                 To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                         Don't know
                                                                                                              degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                       176
The World Bank Group                                              Ghana                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
 you do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never


 In Ghana, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                             To no                                                       To a very
                                                                                                                                      Don't
                                                             degree at                                                  significant
                                                                                                                                      know
                                                             all                                                           degree
  D2     Are timely                                           1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D3                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Ghana’s development
  D4                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         priorities
  D5     Lead to practical solutions                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D6                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D7                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         good practices
  D8     Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                 1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

  D9     Are adequately disseminated                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

 D10     Are translated enough into local language            1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are adaptable to Ghana’s specific
 D11     development challenges and country                   1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         circumstances


 D12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3   4      5       6            7           8       9                  10                        
 Not significant at all                                                                              Very significant       Don't know



 D13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities?
         1                2       3    4         5       6            7           8       9               10                       
 Very low                                                                                         Very high technical
                                                                                                                            Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                            quality




                                                                      177
The World Bank Group                                         Ghana                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/
 advisory work contribute to solving Ghana’s development challenges?
                                                         To no                                 To a very
                                                                                                             Don't
                                                         degree at                            significant
                                                                                                             know
                                                         all                                     degree
        Conceptualization (understanding and framing
 E1                                                      1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        the problem)
 E2     Design (appraising and planning the solutions)   1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        Implementation (Executing, carrying out,
 E3     monitoring and making appropriate                1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        adjustments)
 E4     Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      



 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                         Strongly                                 Strongly   Don't
                                                         disagree                                    agree   know
         The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E5                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         promptly
         The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E6     and evaluates the projects and programs it      1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         supports
         The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E7                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         reviews are done in a timely fashion
         The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
  E8                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         requirements are reasonable
         The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
  E9                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         lending are reasonable
         The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
 E10                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         in Ghana
         Working with the World Bank Group
 E11                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         increases Ghana’s institutional capacity
         The World Bank Group ensures consistency
 E12                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         and continuity through staff changes
         Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
         financial management, etc.) are adequate,
 E13                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
         of them
         The World Bank Group provides effective
 E14     implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         projects)


 E15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Ghana?
 (Select only one response)
 1     The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Ghana
 2     The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Ghana
 3     The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
 4     Don’t know
 5     Prefer not to answer




                                                             178
The World Bank Group                                         Ghana                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN GHANA
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Ghana’s economy
  2    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
  3    Offer more innovative financial products
  4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
  5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
  6    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Ghana’s specific challenges
  7    Offer more innovative knowledge services
  8    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
  9    Increase the level of capacity development in the country
 10    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 11    Work faster
 12    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Ghana, and
 taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
 World Bank Group should offer more of in Ghana? (Select only ONE response)
  1    Financial services
  2    Knowledge products
  3    Convening services
  4    None of the above
  5    The combination is appropriate for Ghana
  6    Don’t know




                                                              179
The World Bank Group                                         Ghana                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Ghana? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?                    (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1    Blogs
 2    Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials
 7    Mobile phones
 8    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 9    World Bank Group’s website
 10   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 G3                                                                                                     Yes         No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G4                                                                                                     Yes         No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                        Yes         No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                              Yes         No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                           Yes         No




                                                                180
The World Bank Group                                        Ghana                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use? (Select only ONE response)
 1     The World Bank Group’s country website (www.worldbank.org/ghana)
 2     The World Bank Group’s main website (www.worldbank.org)


 G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 1     High speed
 2     Dial-up


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                    Strongly                              Strongly   Don't
                                                                    disagree                                 agree   know
         I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than
 G10                                                                1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         I did a few years ago
         I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G11     navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank       1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Group website)
         I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 G12     websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Bank Group website)
         The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G13     Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) are valuable sources   1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         of information about the institution
         When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G14     know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         them, etc.)
         The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             181
The World Bank Group                                        Ghana                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?          (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
                                                             Natural resource management / environmental
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security   11
                                                             sustainability
                                                             Private sector development / foreign direct
 2    Climate change / disaster management             12
                                                             investment
                                                             Public sector governance / public financial
 3    Education                                        13
                                                             management / anti corruption
 4    Energy                                           14    Social protection
 5    Financial markets / banking                      15    Transport
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity          16    Urban development
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                     17    Water and sanitation
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology        18    Generalist
 9    Job creation/employment
                                                       19    Other (please specify): _________________________
 10   Law and justice / regulatory framework




                                                            182
The World Bank Group                                          Ghana                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Ghana? (Select
 all that apply)
 1    The World Bank (IDA)
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    None


 H5. Do your projects involve both the World Bank and the IFC?
 (If YES please go to Question H6; If NO please go to H7)
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H6. If yes, what was your view on the two institutions working together in Ghana?   (Select only
 ONE response)
 1    Working well together
 2    Collaborating but needs improvement
 3    In conflict
 4    Other
 5    Don’t know


 H7. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Ghana?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H8. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Northern Sector (Northern, Upper East, Upper West)
 2    Southern Sector (Brong Ahafo, Ashanti)
 3    Western Sector (Central, Western Region)
 4    Eastern Sector (East, Greater Accra, Volta)



                                Thank you for completing the survey!



                                                               183
