                       96120




 Macedonia
  The World Bank
Country Survey FY14

  Report of Findings
    March 2014
The World Bank                           Macedonia                          Country Survey 2014



Acknowledgements
The Macedonia Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of
the World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group
(PORG) team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica
Cameron, Svetlana Markova, and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data
support. The report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal
(Director, ECRGP). PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Macedonia
country team and the local fielding agency Hogg Robinson Group. In particular, PORG is
grateful to Tatiana Proskuryakova (Country Manager), Denis Boskovski (Senior Country
Operations Officer) and Anita Bozinovska (Program Assistant) for their ongoing support
throughout the Country Opinion Survey process.




                                             1
The World Bank                                       Macedonia                                    Country Survey 2014




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................6

         IV. General Issues Facing Macedonia ..............................................12

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................17

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ......................................25

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................31

       VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia ..........37

         IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................43

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................50

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................57




                                                          2
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
        Macedonia perceive the World Bank;
       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Macedonia regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Macedonia;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Macedonia;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank’s effectiveness and results,
               project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
               communication and information sharing in Macedonia; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Macedonia.
       Use data to help inform Macedonia country team’s strategy.




II. Methodology
From December 2013 to January 2014, stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Macedonia
were invited to provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in
a country survey. Paper questionnaires were sent to 843 potential respondents. Of those, 159
were completed with a representative of the fielding agency or were received and returned via
post (19% response rate; all in Macedonian). Online questionnaires were sent to 23,000 potential
respondents via email. Of those, 1,012 were completed (4% response rate; 950 in Macedonian
and 62 in English).

Further examination of these respondents indicated that overall familiarity with the World Bank
Group was quite low (Mean = 5.0) and that just 18% professionally collaborated/worked with the
WBG in Macedonia. To preserve the validity of the data, especially as relates to their overall
attitudes toward the Bank, perceptions of the Bank’s effectiveness and results, perceptions of the
Bank’s knowledge work and activities, and working with the Bank, only responses from those
who indicated that they professionally collaborate/work with the WBG in Macedonia are
presented in the body of this report (N = 208). The responses from those who indicated that they
do not professionally collaborate/work with the WBG in Macedonia are noted in regards to
general issues facing Macedonia, the Bank’s future role in Macedonia; and the Bank’s
communication and information sharing in Macedonia. A full comparison of between those who
do and those who do not professionally collaborate/work with the WBG in Macedonia is
presented in the Appendix (see page 121).




                                                3
The World Bank                             Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime Minister;
the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry, ministerial
department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World Bank Group-
supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing implementation of a
project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral agencies; private
sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks; NGOs; community-
based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-
based groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; youth organizations; and the judiciary
branch.

Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Macedonia; their overall attitudes toward
the WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities;
working with the WBG; the Bank’s future role in Macedonia; and the Bank’s communication
and information sharing in Macedonia. In addition, every country that engages in the Country
Survey must include specific indicator questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual
Corporate Scorecard. These questions are identified throughout the survey report.

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Macedonia
   is headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities, which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty, which areas
   would contribute most to generating economic growth, and what would best achieve “shared
   prosperity? in Macedonia.

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their
   familiarity with the WBG, the Bank’s effectiveness in Macedonia, Bank staff preparedness to
   help Macedonia solve its development challenges, the effectiveness of the Bank’s activities,
   to what extent the Bank should provide capacity building support to groups outside the
   government and the public sector, the importance and effectiveness of the Bank’s current
   capacity building work, their agreement with various statements regarding the Bank’s work,
   and the extent to which the Bank is an effective development partner. Respondents were also
   asked to indicate the sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the Bank to
   focus its resources, the Bank’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses, the Bank’s most
   effective instruments, with which stakeholder groups the Bank should collaborate more, if
   the Bank should have more or less of a local presence in Macedonia, and to what they
   attributed slowed or failed reform efforts.

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent
   to which the Bank’s work helps achieve development results in Macedonia, the extent to
   which the Bank meets Macedonia’s needs for knowledge services and financial instruments,
   the extent to which the Bank’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold it accountable for
   achieving results, and the importance of the Bank’s involvement and the Bank’s level of
   effectiveness across twenty-five development areas. Respondents were also asked to indicate
   if Bank decisions regarding its Macedonia program were made primarily in country or at
   Headquarters.



                                               4
The World Bank                             Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult Bank knowledge work and the sectoral areas on which it
   would be most valuable for the Bank to focus its knowledge work and activities.
   Respondents were also asked to rate the quality of the Bank’s knowledge work and activities,
   including how significant of a contribution it makes to development results and its technical
   quality.

E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which various
   aspects of the Bank’s delivery work contributes to solving Macedonia’s development
   challenges and their level of agreement with a series of statements regarding working with
   the Bank. Respondents were also asked to indicate if the Bank operates with too much risk.

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia: Respondents were asked to
   indicate what the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Macedonia, the two areas
   related to economic diversification to which the Bank should give greater support, and which
   of its services the Bank should offer more of in Macedonia.

G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.
   Respondents were also asked to evaluate the Bank’s information accessibility and
   responsiveness to information requests.

H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank Group in
   Macedonia, with which of the WBG agencies they work, their exposure to the Bank in
   Macedonia, and their geographic location.



In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 240 respondents (48% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY ’10. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were
possible. Additional comparisons to the 281 respondents (64% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY ’06 can be found in the Appendix (see page 140).




                                               5
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
       For further analyses, the few respondents from the office of a Ministry were combined
        with those from the office of the President/Prime Minister; respondents from PMUs were
        combined with consultants working on WBG-supported projects; the few respondents
        from the financial sector/private banks were combined with those from the private sector;
        those from multilateral agencies were combined with those from bilateral agencies; the
        few respondents from private foundations were combined with those from NGOs; and the
        few respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, the media, faith-based groups,
        youth organizations, and the judiciary branch were included in the “Other? category.




                                                6
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Comparisons of ratings for the WBG’s sector importance and effectiveness across
        respondents’ specializations can be found in the Appendix (see page 143).




                                               7
The World Bank                                Macedonia                              Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The majority of respondents were from Skopje. Only significant geographic location
        differences in ratings of indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this report.
        All geographic locations comparisons can be found in the Appendix (see page 103).




                                                  8
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the World Bank Group

       As noted in the Methodology, responses only from those who professionally
        collaborate/work with the World Bank Group will be presented in the body of this report.
        Differences in responses to all questions, based on collaboration with the World Bank
        Group in Macedonia, can be found in the Appendix (see page 121).




                                                9
The World Bank                               Macedonia                             Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Exposure to the World Bank Group

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on exposure to the World Bank
        Group in Macedonia, can be found in the Appendix (see page 145). Please note that
        where these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall views of the
        Bank, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                                10
The World Bank                                Macedonia                             Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group

       Respondents’ familiarity with the World Bank Group in Macedonia in this country
        survey was statistically similar to that of respondents in the FY ’10 country survey (6.3).
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister had the highest
        levels of familiarity with the World Bank Group in Macedonia whereas respondents from
        NGOs/private foundations had the lowest levels of familiarity; however, this did not
        reach statistical significance.
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group were significantly,
        moderately correlated with their perceptions of the World Bank Group’s overall
        effectiveness in Macedonia and perceptions of the World Bank Group’s ability to help
        achieve development results in Macedonia.




                                                 11
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Macedonia

Macedonia Heading in the Right Direction

       A majority of respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister,
        employees of ministries, local government, NGOs/private foundations, and independent
        government institutions indicated that Macedonia was headed in the right direction.
        Respondents from other stakeholder groups were divided as to whether Macedonia was
        headed in the right direction, wrong direction, or unsure.
       Among those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate
        with the World Bank Group, a plurality indicated that Macedonia was headed in the
        wrong direction.




                                              12
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)
Development Priority
       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that economic growth (67%) and EU
        accession (49%) were the most important development priorities for Macedonia.
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and academia indicated that education
        was the most important development priority for Macedonia.
       Among those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate
        with the World Bank Group, EU integration, economic growth, and poverty reduction
        were considered the most important development priorities.




                                              13
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)
Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction
       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that increasing economic growth
        (39%), increasing employment (25%), and agriculture development (25%) would
        contribute most to poverty reduction in Macedonia.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group also considered economic growth, job creation/employment, and
        foreign direct investment as the factors that would contribute most to poverty reduction
        in Macedonia.




                                                14
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)
Factors Contributing to Economic Growth
       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that enhancing the environment for
        private sector growth (31%) and increasing agricultural productivity and adapting it to
        climate changes (28%) would contribute most to economic growth in Macedonia.
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from academia indicated
        that public sector governance/reform would contribute most to economic growth.
        Respondents from NGOs/private foundations indicated that energy would contribute
        most to economic growth.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate
        with the World Bank Group also considered business environment/private sector
        development, foreign direct investment, EU integration, job creation/employment, and
        trade and exports as the factors that would contribute most to economic growth.




                                               15
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)
Achieving “Shared Prosperity?

       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group also considered better employment opportunities for young people
        and consistent economic growth, as well as a growing middle class, as the best ways to
        achieve “shared prosperity?.




                                               16
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


Focusing World Bank Group Resources
       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that it would be most productive for
        the Bank to focus most of its resources on economic growth (25%) in Macedonia.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group also considered transport and economic growth as the areas on which
        the Bank should focus most of its resources.




                                               17
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents’ ratings for the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in this country survey
        were statistically similar to that of respondents in the FY ’10 country survey (6.4).
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and consultants on
        WBG-supported projects/PMUs gave the highest ratings for the World Bank Group’s
        effectiveness in Macedonia whereas respondents from the private sector/financial
        sector/private banks and other organizations gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from local government, the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister,
        and independent government institutions gave the highest ratings for the extent to which
        the World Bank’s work achieves development results in Macedonia whereas respondents
        from the private sector/financial sector/private banks gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               18
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and bilateral or
        multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World Bank
        Group’s staff is well prepared to help Macedonia solve its most complicated development
        challenges whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and
        other organizations gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               19
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest
        ratings across all of the country survey indicator questions whereas respondents from the
        private sector/financial sector/private banks and other organizations gave significantly
        lower ratings. Responses for individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be
        found in the Appendix (see page 146).




                                                20
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value
       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest values to
        Macedonia were its financial resources (41%), the Bank’s knowledge (38%), and policy
        and economic advice (33%).




                                              21
The World Bank                  Macedonia            Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Effectiveness




                                   22
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest weaknesses
        in its work in Macedonia were its being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
        procedures (45%), imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
        (38%), and not exploring alternative policy options (33%).




                                                23
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Capacity Building
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest
        ratings for the extent which Macedonia would benefit from WBG capacity building
        support to the public sector, related to implementation of specific development projects
        on the ground, whereas respondents from NGOs/private foundations gave significantly
        lower ratings.




                                                24
The World Bank                 Macedonia    Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                  25
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among six of these
        twenty-five areas of development. Those areas with significant stakeholder group
        differences were:
             Employees of ministries and respondents from local government gave the highest
              importance ratings for the Bank being involved in “Poverty reduction? whereas
              respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and the
              private sector/financial sector/private banks gave significantly lower ratings;
             Employees of ministries and respondents from local government and the office of
              the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest importance ratings for the
              Bank being involved in “Foreign direct investment? whereas respondents from
              bilateral or multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings;
             Respondents from local government gave the highest importance ratings for the
              Bank being involved in “Water and sanitation? whereas respondents from the
              office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and the private sector/financial
              sector/private banks gave significantly lower ratings;
             Employees of ministries and respondents from academia, local government, and
              the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest importance
              ratings for the Bank being involved in “Job creation/employment? whereas
              respondents from private sector/financial sector/private banks gave significantly
              lower ratings;
             Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the
              highest importance ratings for the Bank being involved in “Rural development?
              whereas respondents from private sector/financial sector/private banks and
              bilateral or multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings; and
             Respondents from local government and academia gave the highest importance
              ratings for the Bank being involved in “Social protection? whereas respondents
              from private sector/financial sector/private banks gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                26
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Importance of Specific Areas (continued)
       For those areas of development that could be compared, respondents in this year’s
        country survey tended to give higher importance ratings for the WBG being involved
        compared to respondents from the FY ’10 country survey. Those differences that reached
        statistical significance are noted in the chart.




                                              27
The World Bank                               Macedonia                             Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas
       Respondents across all stakeholder group gave statistically similar ratings for the World
        Bank Group’s effectiveness in these areas.




                                                28
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       For those areas of development that could be compared, respondents in this year’s
        country survey gave higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness across all areas
        compared to respondents from the FY ’10 country survey. Those differences that reached
        statistical significance are noted in the chart.




                                              29
The World Bank                                Macedonia                             Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Macedonia,
bivariate correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the twenty-five
specific areas of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the Bank’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the Bank’s ability to help achieve development results increase.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the Bank’s ability to help achieve development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the Bank’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s overall effectiveness in Macedonia. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
                The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at education;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at transport;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at energy;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at rural development; and
                The Bank’s effectiveness at social protection.

       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        Bank’s ability to help achieve development results in Macedonia, suggesting that ratings
        of effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the Bank’s ability to
        help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
        analyses were:
                The Bank’s effectiveness at economic growth;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at energy;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at agricultural development;
                The Bank’s effectiveness at public sector governance/reform; and
                The Bank’s effectiveness at education.




                                                 30
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Macedonia

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic for
        Macedonia, currently plays a relevant role in development in Macedonia, and that the
        World Bank Group is aligned with their development priorities for Macedonia compared
        to respondents from the FY ’10 country survey.
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister had the highest
        levels of agreement that the World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
        realistic for Macedonia whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks and other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister, local government,
        and bilateral or multilateral agencies had the highest levels of agreement that the World
        Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Macedonia whereas
        respondents from other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                31
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of agreement
        across all areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’10 country survey.
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister had the highest
        levels of agreement that the Bank effectively monitors and evaluates its projects, that
        working with the Bank increases institutional capacity, that the Bank ensures consistency
        through staff changes, that where country systems are adequate, the Bank uses them, and
        that the Bank provides effective implementation support whereas respondents from other
        organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from the office of
        the President/Prime Minister/Minister and local government had the highest levels of
        agreement that the Bank’s approvals are done in a timely fashion whereas respondents
        from other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from
        NGOs/private foundations had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank’s lending
        conditions are reasonable whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                32
The World Bank                               Macedonia                             Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner
       Respondents in this country survey had statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s staff
        accessibility and straightforwardness compared to respondents from the FY ’10 survey.
       There were significant stakeholder group differences across many of these aspects. For
        the most part, respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave
        the highest ratings across these areas whereas respondents from the private sector/
        financial sector/private banks tended to give significantly lower ratings. Those areas with
        significant stakeholder group differences were: responsiveness, flexibility (in terms of
        changing country circumstances), inclusiveness, openness, straightforwardness and
        honesty, ease of access to decision makers, collaboration with groups outside of
        government, collaboration with other development partners, and the speed in which
        things get accomplished.
       Respondents from Outside Skopje gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
        inclusiveness compared to respondents from Skopje.




                                                 33
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Internal Evaluation Mechanisms

       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest
        ratings for the extent to which the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation mechanisms
        hold it accountable for achieving results in Macedonia whereas consultants on WBG-
        supported projects/PMUs and respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private
        banks and other organizations gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               34
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Delivery Work

       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest
        ratings for the extent to which the World Bank Group’s delivery work contributes to
        conceptualization whereas employees of ministries and respondents from the private
        sector/financial sector/private banks and other organizations gave significantly lower
        ratings.




                                                35
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Risk-Taking




Where Decisions are Made

       A plurality of respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that decisions about
        the program in Macedonia were made at Headquarters (Washington, D.C.). A plurality of
        respondents from local government, however, indicated that decisions about the program
        in Macedonia were made in Macedonia.




                                               36
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that the Bank should improve the
        quality of its experts as related to Macedonia’s specific challenges (30%) and reduce the
        complexity of obtaining Bank financing (22%) to make itself of greater value in
        Macedonia.
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister, employees of
        ministries, and consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs indicated that the Bank
        should collaborate more effectively with Government clients.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group also considered reaching out more to groups outside of Government,
        offering more innovative financial products, and increasing the level of capacity
        development in Macedonia as the best ways to make the Bank of greater value.




                                                37
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia(cont.)

Focusing Services
       Although a plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank
        should focus more on its financial services, respondents from bilateral or multilateral
        agencies indicated that the Bank should also focus on financial services and knowledge
        products, respondents from academia indicated that the combination of Bank services is
        appropriate for Macedonia, and respondents from other organization indicated that the
        Bank should focus on knowledge products.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group indicated that the Bank should focus more on its financial services,
        followed by its knowledge products.




                                               38
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia(cont.)

Contributing to Economic Diversification

       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group also considered investments in energy efficiency and renewable
        energy, transport infrastructure, and business environment reforms to increase
        Macedonia’s competitiveness as the areas in which greater support from the Bank would
        be of most value.




                                              39
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia(cont.)

Local Presence in Macedonia

       More than two-thirds of respondents who indicated that they do not professionally
        collaborate with the World Bank Group indicated that the Bank should have more of a
        local presence in Macedonia to be a more effective development partner.




                                              40
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia(cont.)

Collaborating with Stakeholders in Macedonia

       A plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with the private sector and local government in Macedonia, except the
        majority of respondents from NGOs/private foundations indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with NGOs and the majority of respondents from academia indicated
        that the Bank should collaborate more with academia/research institutes/think tanks.
       The majority of respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate
        with the World Bank Group indicated that the Bank should collaborate more with the
        private sector in Macedonia, followed by academia/research institutes/think tanks, local
        government, and NGOs.




                                                41
The World Bank                                Macedonia                              Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia(cont.)

Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts

       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group indicated that they attribute failed or slow reform efforts to the Bank
        not being sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground and there not being
        an adequate level of citizel/civil society participation, followed by political pressures and
        obstacles and reforms being not well thought out in light of country challenges.




                                                  42
The World Bank                    Macedonia                   Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities




                                     43
The World Bank                             Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Focusing World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities
       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that it would be most productive for
        the Bank to focus its knowledge work on labor markets/job creation (26%) in Macedonia.
       Respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should focus its
        knowledge work and activities on economic growth and transport, but consultants on
        WBG-supported projects/PMUs indicated that the Bank’s knowledge work should focus
        on energy, respondents from local government indicated job creation, and those from
        other organizations indicated health.




                                               44
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Macedonia’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister had the highest
        levels of agreement that the World Bank Group meets Macedonia’s needs for knowledge
        services whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               45
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities
       Respondents in this country survey gave statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s
        knowledge work and acivities being a source of relevant information on global good
        practices and being adaptable to Macedonia’s circumstances compared to respondents
        from the FY ’10 country survey.
       Respondents the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister gave the highest ratings
        that the Bank’s knowledge work and activities are timely, adequately disseminated,
        translated enough into local language, and adaptable to Macedonia’s circumstances
        whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks gave
        significantly lower ratings. Respondents the office of the President/Prime Minister/
        Minister also gave the highest ratings for the Bank’s knowledge work and activities
        leading to practical solutions whereas respondents from other organizations and the
        private sector/financial sector/private banks gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                46
The World Bank                        Macedonia                       Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)




Technical Quality of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)




                                         47
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Macedonia’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister had the highest
        levels of agreement that the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of
        Macedonia whereas respondents from academia and the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               48
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Most Effective Instruments

       The majority of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank’s
        investment lending was its most effective instrument in promoting economic
        development in Macedonia. However, respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies
        indicated that the Bank’s technical assistance was its most effective instrument,
        respondents from NGOs/private foundations and other organizations indicated that grant
        funding was its most effective instrument, and respondents from academia indicated that
        its knowledge products/services and technical assistance were its most effective
        instruments in promoting economic development.




                                               49
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents in the FY ’10 country survey indicated that they got most of their
        information about economic and social development issues in Macedonia from the
        Internet (62%), local television (54%), and local newspapers (40%).
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group also indicated that they primarily utilize local television and local
        newspapers for their information about economic and social development issues.




                                                50
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

       Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they preferred to get
        information from the World Bank Group via seminars/workshops/conferences and
        e-Newsletters, respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies preferred the WBG’s
        website and respondents from NGOs/private foundations preferred social media.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group indicated a preference for e-Newsletters to receive information from
        the Bank, followed by seminars/workshops/conferences, social media, publications, and
        the Bank website.




                                               51
The World Bank                              Macedonia                           Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Access to Information
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and other
        organizations were significantly more likely to have been aware of the Bank’s Access to
        Information policy compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups (no
        respondents from academia were aware).
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group were significantly less likely to have been aware of the Bank’s
        Access to Information policy, to have requested information from the Bank, and to have
        received the requested information compared to respondents who indicated that they do
        collaborate with the Bank.




                                               52
The World Bank                              Macedonia                             Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)
       Respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and independent
        government institutions had the highest levels of agreement that they use the WBG’s data
        more often whereas employees of ministries and respondents from the private sector/
        financial sector/private banks and other organizations had significantly lower levels of
        agreement.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        Bank had significantly lower levels of agreement that they use the WBG’s data more
        often compared to respondents who indicated that they do collaborate with the Bank.




Internet Access

       All but one respondent indicated that they had access to the Internet, which was the same
        as the FY ’10 country survey (99%, all but one respondent).
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group had statistically similar rates of Internet access as respondents who
        indicated that they do collaborate with the Bank.




                                                53
The World Bank                               Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Website Usage
       Respondents in this year’s survey indicated statistically similar rates of usage for the
        World Bank Group’s website compared to respondents from the FY ’10 country survey.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group were significantly less likely to have used the World Bank Group’s
        website compared to respondents who indicated that they do collaborate with the Bank.




       Respondents in this year’s country survey indicated statistically similar usage for the
        Bank’s country and main websites compared to respondents from the FY ’10 survey.
       Respondents from local government were significantly more likely to have utilized the
        Bank’s country website compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group had statistically similar usage for the Bank’s country and main
        websites as respondents who indicated that they do collaborate with the Bank.




                                                54
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Website Usage (continued)
       Although the vast majority of all respondents indicated using a high speed Internet
        connection when visiting the Bank’s website, those respondents who indicated that they
        do not professionally collaborate with the World Bank Group were significantly more
        likely to use a low speed connection compared to respondents who indicated that they do
        collaborate with the Bank.




Website/Social Media Evaluation
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that they find the Bank’s websites easy to navigate compared to respondents from the
        FY ’10 country survey.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group had significantly lower levels of agreement that they find the
        information on the Bank’s websites useful and that they find the Bank’s websites easy to
        navigate compared to respondents who indicated that they do collaborate with the Bank.




                                               55
The World Bank                              Macedonia                            Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the Bank they know how to find it compared to
        respondents from the FY ’10 country survey.
       Those respondents who indicated that they do not professionally collaborate with the
        World Bank Group had significantly lower levels of agreement that the Bank is
        responsive to their information requests and that when they need information from the
        Bank they know how to find it compared to respondents who indicated that they do
        collaborate with the Bank.




                                               56
The World Bank                                   Macedonia                                Country Survey 2014



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 58

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 75

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations........... 100

          D. Responses to All Questions among WBG Collaborators
             and Non-Collaborators ............................................................... 118

          E. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ................... 137

          F. Responses to Sector Specific Questions by Specialization .......... 140

          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank ........ 142

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 143

          I. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2014 Macedonia Questionnaire ................................................ 144


                                              MACEDONIA




                                                     57
The World Bank                                    Macedonia                                  Country Survey 2014


Appendix A:
Responses to All Questions across Collaborating Respondents (N=208)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).



A. General Issues Facing Macedonia

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Macedonia is headed in...?                                 (N=205)
The right direction                                                                          50.2%
The wrong direction                                                                          25.9%
Not sure                                                                                     23.9%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Macedonia.
   Please identify which of the following you consider the most important         Percentage of Respondents
   development priorities in Macedonia. (Choose no more than THREE)               (Responses Combined; N=206)
Job creation/employment                                                                      32.0%
Economic growth                                                                              27.7%
EU integration                                                                               26.7%
Transport                                                                                    20.9%
Poverty reduction                                                                            19.9%
Education                                                                                    19.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                                    17.5%
Public sector governance/reform                                                              16.5%
Health                                                                                       14.6%
Energy                                                                                       14.6%
Law and justice                                                                              14.1%
Business environment and private sector development                                          12.1%
Agricultural development                                                                     12.1%
Trade and exports                                                                            11.2%
Social protection                                                                            6.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                              5.8%
Rural development                                                                            5.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                                 4.4%
Gender equity                                                                                3.4%
Climate change and green growth                                                              3.4%
Regulatory framework                                                                         2.9%
Information and communications technology                                                    2.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                                      2.4%
Water and sanitation                                                                         1.9%
Disaster management                                                                          0.0%




                                                      58
The World Bank                                   Macedonia                               Country Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Macedonia?                     Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=208)
Economic growth                                                                          52.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                  42.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                                31.7%
Education                                                                                23.1%
Business environment and private sector development                                      22.1%
EU integration                                                                           16.3%
Rural development                                                                        14.9%
Agricultural development                                                                 14.4%
Energy                                                                                   10.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          9.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                          8.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                                  7.7%
Social protection                                                                        7.7%
Trade and exports                                                                        7.2%
Transport                                                                                5.8%
Environmental sustainability                                                             4.3%
Law and justice                                                                          3.4%
Climate change and green growth                                                          2.9%
Gender equity                                                                            2.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                     2.4%
Information and communications technology                                                2.4%
Health                                                                                   1.9%
Regulatory framework                                                                     1.4%
Disaster management                                                                      0.0%




                                                      59
The World Bank                                       Macedonia                                 Country Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth          Percentage of Respondents
   in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)                                         (Responses Combined; N=207)
Foreign direct investment                                                                      36.7%
Job creation/employment                                                                        36.7%
Business environment and private sector development                                            33.3%
Trade and exports                                                                              26.1%
EU integration                                                                                 24.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                                                20.3%
Energy                                                                                         19.8%
Agricultural development                                                                       19.3%
Transport                                                                                      16.4%
Education                                                                                      10.1%
Regulatory framework                                                                           9.2%
Rural development                                                                              7.7%
Law and justice                                                                                7.2%
Information and communications technology                                                      6.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                                5.8%
Social protection                                                                              4.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                                        3.9%
Environmental sustainability                                                                   1.9%
Health                                                                                         1.9%
Gender equity                                                                                  1.4%
Climate change and green growth                                                                1.4%
Disaster management                                                                            0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                           0.0%

5. When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country,
   which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved             Percentage of Respondents
   in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)                                           (Responses Combined; N=206)
Better employment opportunities for young people                                               41.7%
Consistent economic growth                                                                     35.9%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                               22.8%
businesses)
A growing middle class                                                                         20.4%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                      17.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                   9.7%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability             9.7%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                        8.3%
Greater access to economic opportunities for ethnic minorities                                 5.8%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                      5.3%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                            5.3%
More reliable social safety net                                                                5.3%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                4.4%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                        2.9%
Better quality public services                                                                 1.5%
Other                                                                                          1.5%




                                                         60
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                          Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                   N         DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                              206        0       6.46     1.87
   Macedonia? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Overall Effectiveness                                                         N         DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group's
                                                                              199        8       6.69     2.02
   effectiveness in Macedonia.* (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                            N         DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Macedonia solve its most
                                                                              195        12      7.11     1.89
    complicated development challenges?*
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
   on development results in Macedonia, in which sectoral areas do you
   believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its attention and              Percentage of Respondents
   resources in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)                              (Responses Combined; N=208)
Transport                                                                                     29.3%
Economic growth                                                                               26.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                                               22.1%
Education                                                                                     21.2%
Poverty reduction                                                                             20.2%
Business environment and private sector development                                           20.2%
Job creation/employment                                                                       20.2%
Health                                                                                        15.4%
Agricultural development                                                                      14.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                                     13.5%
Energy                                                                                        13.5%
Rural development                                                                             13.0%
EU integration                                                                                10.6%
Trade and exports                                                                             10.6%
Social protection                                                                             6.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                                       6.7%
Law and justice                                                                               5.8%
Climate change and green growth                                                               4.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                          4.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                                  3.8%
Information and communications technology                                                     3.8%
Water and sanitation                                                                          2.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                               2.4%
Gender equity                                                                                 1.0%
Disaster management                                                                           0.0%




                                                               61
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                                           Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                          Percentage of Respondents (N=207)
                                                                                                  nd
   activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity                Greatest       2 Greatest
   is of second greatest value in Macedonia?                                       Value           Value             Combined
Financial resources                                                                40.6%           15.5%               56.1%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                   18.4%           19.9%               38.3%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                         12.6%           18.0%               30.5%
Technical assistance                                                               5.3%            13.6%               18.9%
Capacity development of staff at state institutions                                3.4%            11.2%               14.5%
Data                                                                               7.7%            5.8%                13.6%
Convening/facilitating                                                             6.3%            4.4%                10.6%
Coordination with development partners                                             1.9%            7.8%                9.7%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                      2.4%            3.4%                5.8%
Other                                                                              1.4%            0.5%                1.9%

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support                                     Effectiveness
Macedonia’s efforts to achieve development results?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                                  N         DK       Mean       SD
6.   Convening/facilitating                                                              177           31        6.38      1.99
7.   Data                                                                                188           20        7.20      1.98
8.   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                    192           16        7.36      1.83
9.   Financial resources                                                                 194           14        7.46      1.93
10. Technical assistance                                                                 191           17        7.21      1.84
11. Mobilizing third party financial resources                                           178           30        6.92      1.99
12. Coordination with development partners                                               178           30        6.79      1.87
13. Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                        161           47        6.96      1.96

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number                                      Degree
of ways in Macedonia. To what degree would Macedonia benefit, if
capacity building were to support…?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                                     N         DK       Mean       SD
14. Groups outside of government to help them more effectively engage
                                                                                         192           11        7.17      2.21
    and participate in development efforts
15. The public sector, related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                         202            4        7.73      1.98
    projects on the ground
16. The public sector, related to changing institutions                                  192           10        7.45      2.06

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the                                   Effectiveness
capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in
Macedonia? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
below, please respond “Don’t know?) (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)              N         DK       Mean       SD
17. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                       175           25        7.42      1.84
18. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)                 129           64        6.09      2.24
19. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                         152           42        6.86      1.93
    goals)




                                                              62
The World Bank                                         Macedonia                                 Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Macedonia to                       Importance
help ensure better development results, looking forward, how
IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of
the areas listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                      N         DK     Mean       SD
20. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)               187       14      8.18      1.83
21. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)         157       40      7.36      2.31
22. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                 165       32      7.91      1.99
    goals)

23. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest          Percentage of Respondents
    WEAKNESSES in its work in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)                     (Responses Combined; N=207)
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Macedonia                              22.7%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                         17.9%
Don’t know                                                                                       16.9%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                            13.5%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                   13.5%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                     11.6%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                            10.6%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                              10.1%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                         8.7%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                         7.7%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                      7.7%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                            7.2%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                         5.3%
Not aligned with other development partners’ work                                                4.3%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                           3.4%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                            1.9%
Not client focused                                                                               1.4%
Other                                                                                            1.4%

24. Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the
    MOST effective in promoting economic development in Macedonia?                     Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                          (Responses Combined; N=205)
Investment lending                                                                               51.2%
Grant funding                                                                                    34.1%
Technical assistance                                                                             33.7%
Capacity development of staff at state institutions                                              22.0%
Knowledge products/services                                                                      21.0%
Policy based lending/budget support to the Government                                            18.0%
Don’t know                                                                                       3.4%
Other                                                                                            0.0%




                                                          63
The World Bank                                      Macedonia                                  Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

25. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development         Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                         (Responses Combined; N=206)
Private sector                                                                                 46.6%
Local government                                                                               33.0%
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                                       24.8%
NGOs                                                                                           20.4%
Beneficiaries                                                                                  16.5%
Media                                                                                          9.7%
Parliament                                                                                     7.8%
Community of development partners                                                              6.8%
Community-based organizations                                                                  6.3%
Foundations                                                                                    5.8%
Other                                                                                          2.9%
Faith-based organizations                                                                      2.4%
Don’t know                                                                                     1.9%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the                  Level of Agreement
World Bank Group’s work in Macedonia?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N        DK     Mean       SD
26. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                               192       10      7.02      2.01
    development in Macedonia*
27. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                               191       13      6.84      1.91
    development priorities for Macedonia*
28. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                               193       11      7.23      1.84
    realistic for Macedonia
29. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Macedonia
                                                                               187       16      7.60      1.94
    with respect




                                                       64
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                                 Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner                          Degree
in Macedonia, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                             N         DK     Mean       SD
30. Responsiveness*                                                                 7.54       28      7.54      1.88
31. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)*         7.07       29      7.07      1.81
32. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       7.11       28      7.11      2.01
33. Being inclusive*                                                                7.23       31      7.23      1.90
34. Openness*                                                                       7.21       13      7.21      2.15
35. Staff accessibility*                                                            7.43       21      7.43      2.16
36. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                7.68       26      7.68      1.96
37. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                    7.36       32      7.36      2.08
    decisions important to my work
38. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government*                            6.68       45      6.68      2.21
39. Collaboration with the Government*                                              8.11       23      8.11      1.64
40. Collaboration with other development partners*                                  7.47       43      7.47      1.87
41. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                   7.40       26      7.40      1.82
42. Being a long-term partner                                                       8.19       15      8.19      1.81

43. To be a more effective development partner in Macedonia, do you believe                Percentage of Respondents
    that the World Bank Group should have…?                                                         (N=207)
More local presence                                                                                  63.8%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                      24.2%
Less local presence                                                                                  4.8%
Don't know                                                                                           7.2%

44. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
    place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                             Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                              (Responses Combined; N=206)
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                     28.6%
ground
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                      26.1%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                  25.6%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                    24.6%
Poor coordination with development partners                                                          22.2%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                16.7%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                   10.8%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                   9.9%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                                8.9%
Other                                                                                                3.9%




                                                              65
The World Bank                                      Macedonia                          Country Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results

1.    In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be         Importance
      involved in the following areas of development in Macedonia?
      (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                            N    DK    Mean        SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                       182   15    7.31       2.45
2.    Information and communications technology                             191    6    7.19       2.09
3.    Transport                                                             197    4    8.52       1.80
4.    Law and justice                                                       191    7     7.50      2.18
5.    Environmental sustainability                                          195    4     7.82      1.87
6.    Regulatory framework                                                  186    7     7.49      1.96
7.    Poverty reduction                                                     195    4     8.33      1.80
8.    Gender equity                                                         186   13     6.71      2.56
9.    Business environment and private sector development                   194    5     8.37      1.74
10.   Foreign direct investment                                             195    4     8.28      1.80
11.   Water and sanitation                                                  190   10     7.84      1.93
12.   Trade and exports                                                     188   10     7.54      2.04
13.   Economic growth                                                       198    3     8.63      1.56
14.   Energy                                                                193    6     8.40      1.75
15.   Disaster management                                                   183   15     6.54      2.34
16.   Public sector governance/reform                                       191    9     7.79      1.91
17.   Job creation/employment                                               196    4     8.23      1.88
18.   Equality of opportunity                                               184   13     6.96      2.42
19.   Health                                                                192    7     7.84      2.00
20.   Rural development                                                     196    4     8.19      1.77
21.   EU integration                                                        193    6     7.28      2.59
22.   Education                                                             192    6     8.00      1.93
23.   Social protection                                                     189   10     7.34      2.30
24.   Climate change and green growth                                       194    6     7.44      2.21
25.   Agricultural development                                              195    4     8.45      1.71




                                                       66
The World Bank                                               Macedonia                        Country Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2.    How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of                  Effectiveness
      the work it does in the following areas of development in Macedonia?
      (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                              N        DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                          83       111     5.70      2.59
2.    Information and communications technology                                85       111     6.36      2.35
3.    Transport                                                               133        62     7.38      1.96
4.    Law and justice                                                          88       107      6.30     2.25
5.    Environmental sustainability                                            104        92      6.72     2.11
6.    Regulatory framework                                                    107        86      6.95     2.07
7.    Poverty reduction                                                       121        72      6.41     2.42
8.    Gender equity                                                            83       109      6.16     2.62
9.    Business environment and private sector development                     116        77      6.62     2.15
10.   Foreign direct investment                                               113        83      6.32     2.23
11.   Water and sanitation                                                    115        78      6.97     2.26
12.   Trade and exports                                                        97        93      6.24     2.36
13.   Economic growth                                                         120        74      7.06     2.24
14.   Energy                                                                  119        74      7.31     2.29
15.   Disaster management                                                      80       111      6.08     2.45
16.   Public sector governance/reform                                         121        71      6.64     2.25
17.   Job creation/employment                                                 122        71      6.18     2.48
18.   Equality of opportunity                                                  88       103      5.93     2.66
19.   Health                                                                  105        88      6.44     2.42
20.   Rural development                                                       105        87      6.30     2.49
21.   EU integration                                                          103        88      5.83     2.61
22.   Education                                                               109       82       6.41     2.48
23.   Social protection                                                        99       94       6.31     2.57
24.   Climate change and green growth                                         100       94       6.59     2.49
25.   Agricultural development                                                108       86       6.66     2.25

3.   Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support         Percentage of Respondents
     the program in Macedonia?                                                                (N=206)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                      49.5%
In the country                                                                                24.8%
Don't know                                                                                    25.7%


Achieving Development Results                                                 N         DK      Mean      SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
    development results in Macedonia?*                                        194       12       6.63     1.85
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 67
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                       Country Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Macedonia? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)      N       DK      Mean       SD
5. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
    Development Policy Loan, trust funds/grants, Program 4 Result, etc.)     185     21       6.52      2.02
    meet the needs of Macedonia*
6. The World Bank Group meets Macedonia’s needs for knowledge
                                                                             182     20       6.52      2.05
    services (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*


Internal Evaluation Mechanisms                                               N       DK      Mean       SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal
    evaluation mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving
                                                                             156     50       6.79      1.99
    results in Macedonia?
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work           Percentage of Respondents
    and activities in the work you do?                                                 (N=365)
Weekly                                                                                     4.3%
Monthly                                                                                   17.8%
A few times a year                                                                        37.0%
Rarely                                                                                    32.2%
Never                                                                                      8.7%




                                                                68
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                        Country Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

2.    When thinking about the development challenges in Macedonia, where do
      you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank Group to focus
      its knowledge work and activities in the next few years?                    Percentage of Respondents
      (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=206)
Economic growth                                                                             35.9%
Transport                                                                                   23.3%
Job creation/employment                                                                     19.4%
Education                                                                                   19.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                           18.9%
Energy                                                                                      18.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                                             17.5%
Business environment and private sector development                                         17.0%
Agricultural development                                                                    15.0%
Health                                                                                      14.1%
Trade and exports                                                                           13.6%
EU integration                                                                              12.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                                   10.7%
Rural development                                                                           8.7%
Social protection                                                                           7.8%
Law and justice                                                                             5.3%
Anti-corruption                                                                             4.9%
Environmental sustainability                                                                4.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                                     4.4%
Climate change and green growth                                                             4.4%
Regulatory framework                                                                        3.9%
Information and communications technology                                                   3.4%
Gender equity                                                                               1.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                        1.9%
Disaster management                                                                         0.0%

In Macedonia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s                  Degree
knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                     N        DK      Mean       SD
3.    Are timely                                                            165       35      6.98      1.96
4.    Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                            168        33      6.70     2.02
      preparation
5.    Are relevant to Macedonia’s development priorities                    176        23      7.37     1.88
6.    Lead to practical solutions                                           173        25      7.32     1.89
7.    Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                  181        18      7.24     1.93
8.    Are source of relevant information on global good practices           177        21      7.67     1.93
9.    Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                  180        19      7.66     1.89
10.   Are adequately disseminated                                           166        29      6.75     2.28
11.   Are translated enough into local language                             159        39      6.67     2.19
12.   Are adaptable to Macedonia’s specific development challenges and
                                                                            171        27      7.10     2.08
      country circumstances*




                                                              69
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                       Country Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

Overall Evaluations                                                          N       DK      Mean       SD
13. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results in    195      10       7.50      1.85
    your country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
14. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities?*                                 181      26       7.38      1.73
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank                    Degree
Group’s delivery work contribute to solving Macedonia’s development
challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)         N       DK      Mean        SD
1. Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                184      21      7.16       1.92
2.   Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                         181      23       7.15      1.93
3.   Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring, and making
                                                                            186      20       7.25      1.90
     appropriate adjustments)
4.   Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                          180      23       7.40      1.92

                                                                                  Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                     N       DK      Mean       SD
5.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                          143      61      7.54      1.95
6.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects
                                                                            180      24       7.52     1.97
     and programs it supports
7.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                            164      39       7.50     1.96
     fashion
8.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                            148      52       7.36     1.98
     reasonable
9.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable        162      38       7.35     2.07
10. The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Macedonia               155      47       7.19     2.02
11. Working with the World Bank Group increases Macedonia’s
                                                                            183      18       7.54     1.99
    institutional capacity
12. The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                            166      36       7.45     2.04
    changes
13. Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                            146      55       7.36     2.00
    appropriate use of them*
14. The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support          172      30       7.72     1.93

15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group       Percentage of Respondents
    operates in Macedonia?                                                             (N=205)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Macedonia                                      3.4%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Macedonia                               22.0%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                    42.4%
Don't know                                                                                22.4%
Prefer not to answer                                                                       9.8%



                                                                 70
The World Bank                                      Macedonia                                Country Survey 2014


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia

1.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of        Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)                          (Responses Combined; N=202)
Offer more innovative financial products                                                     32.2%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                               31.2%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                    23.8%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., state, local)                    20.8%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                19.8%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                             13.9%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Macedonia’s specific challenges             11.4%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                     11.4%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Macedonia’s
                                                                                              9.9%
economy
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                        4.5%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                   4.5%
Work faster                                                                                   2.5%
Other                                                                                         1.0%

2.  When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
    offers in Macedonia, and taking into account its limited level of resources,
    which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should          Percentage of Respondents
    offer more of in Macedonia?                                                             (N=206)
Financial services                                                                           44.7%
Knowledge products                                                                           25.2%
The combination is appropriate for Macedonia                                                 11.7%
Don't know                                                                                   9.2%
Convening services                                                                           5.8%
None of the above                                                                            3.4%

3.   Please identify the TWO areas related to economic diversification in
     Macedonia where greater support from the World Bank Group would be            Percentage of Respondents
     most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)                                      (Responses Combined; N=207)
Transport infrastructure                                                                     35.7%
Investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy                                        33.8%
Business environment reforms to increase country’s competitiveness                           30.4%
Skills development and innovation                                                            27.1%
Conducting analysis of the profile of poverty and trends                                     18.8%
Public sector reform                                                                         13.5%
Information and communication technology                                                     11.1%
Increasing the efficiency of the social protection system                                    9.7%
Climate change                                                                               4.3%
Other                                                                                        1.9%
Don’t know                                                                                   1.0%




                                                        71
The World Bank                                      Macedonia                                Country Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing
1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social              Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)                     (Responses Combined; N=207)
Local television                                                                             40.6%
Local newspapers                                                                             33.8%
World Bank Group website                                                                     23.7%
Social media                                                                                 19.8%
Periodicals                                                                                  16.4%
International television                                                                     13.0%
International newspapers                                                                     11.1%
Other                                                                                        11.1%
Local radio                                                                                  4.8%
Blogs                                                                                        2.4%

2.    How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?       Percentage of Respondents
      (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (Responses Combined; N=208)
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences                                            40.4%
e-Newsletters                                                                                34.6%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                         30.3%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                  23.6%
Social media                                                                                 19.2%
World Bank Group’s website                                                                   16.3%
Blogs                                                                                        10.1%
Instant messaging                                                                            7.7%
Other                                                                                        1.9%

3.    Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy
      under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                                     (N=208)
Yes                                                                                          24.0%
No                                                                                           76.0%

4.    Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities   Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                                     (N=206)
Yes                                                                                          45.1%
No                                                                                           54.9%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                 (N=95)
Yes                                                                                          91.6%
No                                                                                           8.4%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                      (N=203)
Yes                                                                                          99.5%
No                                                                                            .5%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?                                       (N=202)
Yes                                                                                          85.6%
No                                                                                           14.4%




                                                        72
The World Bank                                     Macedonia                                 Country Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

                                                                                    Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                               (N=341)
The World Bank Group’s country website                                                       56.1%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                                          43.9%

9.  Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank       Percentage of Respondents
    Group website?                                                                           (N=180)
High speed                                                                                   94.4%
Low speed (below 256 Kbps)                                                                   5.6%


Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                       Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N       DK     Mean      SD
10. I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than I did a few
                                                                            196         10      6.43     2.55
    years ago
11. I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate                 176          5      7.19     1.88
12. I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful        174          4      7.75     1.83
13. The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                            145         59      6.42     2.36
    information about the institution
14. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                            202          5      7.37     2.22
    find it
15. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                            172         33      7.60     2.24
    inquiries



H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                     Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                         (N=205)
Local Government Office or Staff                                                              18.5%
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                       18.0%
Private Sector Organization                                                                   12.2%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                        7.8%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                 6.8%
Multilateral Agency                                                                           5.9%
Independent Government Institution                                                            4.4%
Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported project/program                   3.4%
NGO                                                                                           3.4%
Project Management Unit overseeing implementation of project                                  2.9%
Bilateral Agency                                                                              2.9%
Office of Minister                                                                            2.4%
Private Foundation                                                                            2.4%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                     2.0%
Media                                                                                         2.0%
Judiciary Branch                                                                              2.0%
Office of the President, Prime Minister                                                       1.0%
Other                                                                                         1.0%
Faith-Based Group                                                                              .5%
Youth Organization                                                                             .5%



                                                       73
The World Bank                                      Macedonia                             Country Survey 2014


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                       (N=204)
Education                                                                                 10.3%
Financial markets/banking                                                                 10.3%
Public sector governance/public financial management/anti-corruption                      10.3%
Private sector development/foreign direct investment                                      9.3%
Law and justice/regulatory framework                                                      8.3%
Other                                                                                     8.3%
Agriculture/rural development/food security                                               6.4%
Energy                                                                                    6.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                   5.4%
Information and communications technology                                                 4.4%
Social protection                                                                         3.9%
Transport                                                                                 3.9%
Gender equity/equality of opportunity                                                     2.9%
Natural resource management/environmental sustainability                                  2.9%
Urban development                                                                         2.9%
Climate change/disaster management                                                        1.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                      1.5%
Health/Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                             1.0%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group   Percentage of Respondents
  in your country?                                                                        (N=208)
Yes                                                                                       100.0%
No                                                                                         0.0%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in   Percentage of Respondents
  Macedonia? (Select all that apply)                                                      (N=200)
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                     79.0%
International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                   25.5%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                       2.5%
None                                                                                      10.0%

5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank      Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)                                           (N=208)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                             55.8%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                            33.7%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                         22.1%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)                 14.9%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                        13.5%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
6. Which best represents your geographic location?                                        (N=206)
Skopje                                                                                    76.2%
Outside Skopje                                                                            23.8%




                                                        74
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister N=7  Employee of a Ministry N=37  Consultant on WBG project/PMU N=13
Local Government N=38  Bilateral/Multilateral Agency N=18  Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=39
NGO/Private Foundation N=12  Independent Government Institution N=9  Academia/Research Institute N=16  Other N=16

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia

In general, how would you say that Macedonia is headed in...?*
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
The right direction                                   85.7%           56.8%         33.3%           73.0%       27.8%             35.9%            50.0%        88.9%         33.3%        31.3%
The wrong direction                                   14.3%           21.6%         33.3%           8.1%        44.4%             33.3%            33.3%          -           40.0%        31.3%
Not sure                                                -             21.6%         33.3%           18.9%       27.8%             30.8%            16.7%        11.1%         26.7%        37.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   75
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                          Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Macedonia. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Macedonia. (Choose no more than 3)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local      Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government      Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Social protection                                     0.0%            8.1%          0.0%            8.1%         0.0%              7.7%             0.0%         11.1%         13.3%        6.3%
Transport                                             14.3%           29.7%         15.4%           32.4%        22.2%             23.1%            0.0%         0.0%          13.3%        12.5%
Public sector governance/reform                       14.3%           16.2%         15.4%           10.8%        22.2%             15.4%            16.7%        22.2%         20.0%        25.0%
EU integration                                        42.9%           24.3%         30.8%           29.7%        16.7%             25.6%            33.3%        33.3%         20.0%        25.0%
Gender equity*                                        0.0%            0.0%          23.1%           2.7%         5.6%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%          6.7%         0.0%
Business environment and private sector
                                                      0.0%            10.8%         23.1%            5.4%        16.7%             17.9%            16.7%        22.2%         13.3%         0.0%
development
Foreign direct investment*                            0.0%            16.2%         23.1%           43.2%        0.0%              10.3%            0.0%         33.3%         6.7%         12.5%
Water and sanitation                                  0.0%            5.4%          0.0%            2.7%         0.0%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Anti-corruption                                       14.3%           5.4%          15.4%           2.7%         0.0%              5.1%             16.7%        0.0%          6.7%         6.3%
Job creation/employment                               28.6%           29.7%         23.1%           48.6%        27.8%             25.6%            25.0%        66.7%         26.7%        25.0%
Rural development                                     0.0%            2.7%          15.4%           5.4%         0.0%              2.6%             16.7%        0.0%          6.7%         6.3%
Environmental sustainability                          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%         11.1%             5.1%             16.7%        11.1%         6.7%         6.3%
Equality of opportunity                               0.0%            5.4%          0.0%            0.0%         5.6%              2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          6.7%         0.0%
Health                                                14.3%           10.8%         7.7%            10.8%        11.1%             28.2%            8.3%         11.1%         6.7%         25.0%
Education                                             14.3%           13.5%         15.4%           13.5%        44.4%             12.8%            33.3%        11.1%         40.0%        18.8%
Poverty reduction                                     14.3%           10.8%         7.7%            37.8%        16.7%             25.6%            16.7%        0.0%          13.3%        25.0%
Energy                                                14.3%           18.9%         7.7%            8.1%         16.7%             10.3%            8.3%         33.3%         20.0%        12.5%
Climate change and green growth*                      0.0%            0.0%          7.7%            2.7%         5.6%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%          20.0%        0.0%
Agricultural development*                             42.9%           16.2%         23.1%           2.7%         11.1%             0.0%             16.7%        11.1%         6.7%         31.3%
Trade and exports                                     14.3%           8.1%          15.4%           8.1%         22.2%             15.4%            8.3%         0.0%          6.7%         12.5%
Economic growth                                       42.9%           35.1%         30.8%           10.8%        22.2%             41.0%            25.0%        22.2%         20.0%        25.0%
Law and justice                                       0.0%            18.9%         0.0%            5.4%         22.2%             23.1%            8.3%         11.1%         20.0%        12.5%
Regulatory framework                                  14.3%           5.4%          0.0%            2.7%         0.0%              2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
Disaster management                                   0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Information and communications
                                                      0.0%             8.1%         0.0%             2.7%         0.0%             0.0%             8.3%          0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
technology
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   76
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Water and sanitation                                  0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            5.3%        5.6%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%         0.0%
Equality of opportunity                               0.0%            5.4%          15.4%           0.0%        16.7%             7.7%             8.3%         0.0%          12.5%        18.8%
Economic growth                                       71.4%           59.5%         53.8%           52.6%       38.9%             53.8%            58.3%        66.7%         43.8%        43.8%
Climate change and green growth                       0.0%            8.1%          7.7%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%          6.3%         0.0%
EU integration                                        28.6%           8.1%          7.7%            26.3%       11.1%             17.9%            8.3%         0.0%          31.3%        6.3%
Gender equity                                         0.0%            2.7%          15.4%           0.0%        5.6%              2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%         0.0%
Rural development                                     28.6%           13.5%         15.4%           13.2%       38.9%             10.3%            16.7%        33.3%         0.0%         6.3%
Regulatory framework*                                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         18.8%
Social protection                                     0.0%            5.4%          7.7%            7.9%        5.6%              10.3%            0.0%         11.1%         12.5%        6.3%
Law and justice                                       0.0%            2.7%          7.7%            7.9%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%         6.3%
Transport                                             0.0%            13.5%         0.0%            5.3%        5.6%              5.1%             8.3%         11.1%         0.0%         0.0%
Information and communications
                                                      0.0%             2.7%         0.0%             0.0%        0.0%             2.6%             16.7%         0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
technology
Anti-corruption                                       0.0%             5.4%         7.7%             5.3%        5.6%             20.5%            8.3%          0.0%          6.3%         6.3%
Business environment and private sector
                                                      14.3%           29.7%         38.5%            5.3%       22.2%             41.0%            8.3%         11.1%         18.8%        12.5%
development*
Foreign direct investment*                            42.9%           40.5%         23.1%           57.9%       11.1%             20.5%            8.3%         33.3%         18.8%        18.8%
Education                                             28.6%           13.5%         23.1%           15.8%       22.2%             25.6%            33.3%        44.4%         37.5%        18.8%
Energy*                                               0.0%            8.1%          15.4%           2.6%        16.7%             10.3%            41.7%        11.1%         12.5%        0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                       28.6%           8.1%          0.0%            5.3%        11.1%             7.7%             8.3%         0.0%          12.5%        25.0%
Environmental sustainability                          0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            2.6%        5.6%              5.1%             0.0%         11.1%         6.3%         12.5%
Disaster management                                   0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Health                                                0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%          0.0%         12.5%
Agricultural development                              28.6%           10.8%         23.1%           10.5%       11.1%             15.4%            16.7%        11.1%         18.8%        18.8%
Job creation/employment                               14.3%           37.8%         30.8%           50.0%       55.6%             38.5%            41.7%        55.6%         43.8%        50.0%
Trade and exports                                     14.3%           8.1%          7.7%            15.8%       5.6%              5.1%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   77
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Macedonia? (Choose no more than 3)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Energy*                                               0.0%            13.5%         7.7%            18.4%       27.8%             15.4%            50.0%        22.2%         6.7%         37.5%
Gender equity*                                        0.0%            0.0%          15.4%           0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          6.7%         0.0%
Equality of opportunity*                              14.3%           0.0%          23.1%           2.6%        5.6%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          13.3%        0.0%
Social protection                                     0.0%            2.7%          15.4%           2.6%        5.6%              2.6%             8.3%         0.0%          13.3%        6.3%
EU integration                                        28.6%           27.0%         38.5%           26.3%       11.1%             33.3%            16.7%        33.3%         6.7%         18.8%
Climate change and green growth*                      0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%          13.3%        0.0%
Anti-corruption                                       0.0%            8.1%          7.7%            2.6%        5.6%              7.7%             8.3%         11.1%         0.0%         0.0%
Disaster management                                   0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Rural development                                     28.6%           8.1%          7.7%            13.2%       0.0%              2.6%             16.7%        0.0%          6.7%         6.3%
Foreign direct investment                             28.6%           48.6%         30.8%           42.1%       22.2%             33.3%            8.3%         66.7%         33.3%        37.5%
Water and sanitation                                  0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Education*                                            0.0%            8.1%          0.0%            0.0%        27.8%             12.8%            16.7%        22.2%         20.0%        0.0%
Information and communications
                                                      0.0%             2.7%         7.7%             2.6%        5.6%             10.3%            16.7%         0.0%          0.0%        18.8%
technology
Regulatory framework                                  0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            13.2%       11.1%             7.7%             16.7%        0.0%          6.7%         25.0%
Trade and exports                                     42.9%           24.3%         23.1%           36.8%       27.8%             33.3%            16.7%        11.1%         13.3%        12.5%
Public sector governance/reform*                      42.9%           21.6%         38.5%           7.9%        11.1%             23.1%            16.7%        0.0%          46.7%        18.8%
Business environment and private sector
                                                      57.1%           40.5%         30.8%           21.1%       44.4%             38.5%            25.0%        33.3%         26.7%        25.0%
development
Job creation/employment                               14.3%           43.2%         23.1%           47.4%       44.4%             41.0%            16.7%        11.1%         20.0%        43.8%
Agricultural development                              28.6%           18.9%         15.4%           18.4%       22.2%             15.4%            25.0%        33.3%         20.0%        12.5%
Transport                                             14.3%           16.2%         7.7%            13.2%       22.2%             12.8%            25.0%        33.3%         13.3%        25.0%
Environmental sustainability                          0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            2.6%        0.0%              2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          6.7%         0.0%
Health                                                0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             8.3%         11.1%         0.0%         6.3%
Law and justice                                       0.0%            5.4%          7.7%            7.9%        5.6%              5.1%             0.0%         11.1%         26.7%        6.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   78
The World Bank                                                                             Macedonia                                                                          Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                               Office of       Employee    Consultant on                  Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                  President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local      Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                       Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government      Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Better employment opportunities for
                                                57.1%           36.1%         23.1%           47.4%         50.0%            38.5%            41.7%        44.4%         56.3%        33.3%
young people
Better employment opportunities for
                                                0.0%             0.0%         7.7%            10.5%         11.1%            2.6%             8.3%          0.0%          6.3%         6.7%
women
Greater access to micro-finance for the
                                                14.3%            5.6%         7.7%            18.4%         5.6%             5.1%             8.3%         11.1%          6.3%        20.0%
poor
Greater voice and participation for
citizens to help ensure greater                 0.0%            16.7%         15.4%            0.0%         11.1%            15.4%            8.3%          0.0%         18.8%         0.0%
accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition
                                                14.3%            8.3%         7.7%             2.6%         5.6%             0.0%             8.3%          0.0%          6.3%        13.3%
for citizens
Greater access to economic
                                                0.0%             5.6%         7.7%             5.3%         11.1%            7.7%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         6.7%
opportunities for ethnic minorities
Better entrepreneurial opportunities
(i.e., to start small and medium sized          28.6%           25.0%         23.1%           18.4%         27.8%            28.2%            16.7%        33.3%         12.5%        20.0%
businesses)
A growing middle class                          14.3%           16.7%         15.4%           21.1%         22.2%            25.6%            25.0%        33.3%         12.5%        20.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live
                                                28.6%            2.8%         23.1%           10.5%         0.0%             7.7%             8.3%          0.0%         12.5%         0.0%
in rural areas
Better opportunity for the poor who live
                                                0.0%             2.8%         0.0%             2.6%         0.0%             5.1%             16.7%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
in urban areas
Consistent economic growth                      14.3%           44.4%         46.2%           28.9%         38.9%            35.9%            25.0%        55.6%         37.5%        20.0%
More reliable social safety net                 0.0%            2.8%          7.7%            15.8%         0.0%             2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         13.3%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                 14.3%           5.6%          0.0%            2.6%          0.0%             2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          12.5%        13.3%
Education and training that better
                                                0.0%            16.7%         15.4%            2.6%         16.7%            23.1%            25.0%        22.2%         18.8%        33.3%
ensure job opportunity
Better quality public services                  14.3%            2.8%         0.0%             0.0%         0.0%             0.0%             8.3%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Other                                           0.0%             2.8%         0.0%             5.3%         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%




                                                                                             79
The World Bank                                                                                             Macedonia   Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                               80
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Macedonia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus
most of its attention and resources in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Social protection                                     0.0%            5.4%          7.7%            7.9%        0.0%              2.6%             8.3%         11.1%         12.5%        18.8%
Public sector governance/reform                       0.0%            16.2%         15.4%           10.5%       33.3%             33.3%            33.3%        11.1%         31.3%        31.3%
Transport                                             28.6%           16.2%         30.8%           42.1%       38.9%             33.3%            16.7%        55.6%         18.8%        18.8%
Poverty reduction                                     0.0%            27.0%         23.1%           21.1%       11.1%             12.8%            25.0%        33.3%         18.8%        31.3%
EU integration                                        28.6%           13.5%         7.7%            13.2%       5.6%              12.8%            8.3%         0.0%          12.5%        0.0%
Gender equity                                         0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
Business environment and private sector
                                                      14.3%           18.9%         15.4%            7.9%       27.8%             30.8%            16.7%        33.3%         37.5%         6.3%
development
Rural development                                     42.9%           13.5%         7.7%            21.1%       5.6%              5.1%             8.3%         11.1%         18.8%        6.3%
Foreign direct investment*                            28.6%           8.1%          0.0%            34.2%       0.0%              15.4%            8.3%         11.1%         0.0%         0.0%
Water and sanitation*                                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            13.2%       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Energy                                                14.3%           16.2%         30.8%           7.9%        11.1%             7.7%             8.3%         22.2%         6.3%         18.8%
Job creation/employment                               28.6%           27.0%         0.0%            28.9%       27.8%             12.8%            8.3%         11.1%         18.8%        25.0%
Environmental sustainability                          0.0%            5.4%          0.0%            2.6%        0.0%              7.7%             8.3%         0.0%          6.3%         0.0%
Equality of opportunity                               0.0%            8.1%          15.4%           2.6%        5.6%              2.6%             25.0%        0.0%          18.8%        0.0%
Health*                                               0.0%            10.8%         15.4%           7.9%        16.7%             10.3%            25.0%        33.3%         12.5%        43.8%
Education                                             28.6%           18.9%         23.1%           10.5%       38.9%             10.3%            33.3%        11.1%         25.0%        43.8%
Climate change and green growth                       0.0%            5.4%          7.7%            2.6%        0.0%              2.6%             8.3%         11.1%         12.5%        0.0%
Agricultural development                              42.9%           18.9%         23.1%           5.3%        16.7%             10.3%            25.0%        0.0%          18.8%        12.5%
Trade and exports                                     0.0%            10.8%         7.7%            21.1%       11.1%             15.4%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
Economic growth                                       42.9%           32.4%         15.4%           18.4%       33.3%             35.9%            16.7%        22.2%         12.5%        18.8%
Law and justice                                       0.0%            8.1%          15.4%           2.6%        0.0%              7.7%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%         12.5%
Regulatory framework                                  0.0%            0.0%          7.7%            0.0%        11.1%             7.7%             8.3%         11.1%         6.3%         0.0%
Anti-corruption                                       0.0%            5.4%          0.0%            0.0%        5.6%              0.0%             0.0%         11.1%         6.3%         0.0%
Information and communications
                                                      0.0%             2.7%         15.4%            0.0%        0.0%             10.3%            8.3%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
technology
Disaster management                                   0.0%             0.0%         0.0%             0.0%        0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   81
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Macedonia?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Greatest Value
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Convening/facilitating                                28.6%           5.6%          0.0%            2.6%        5.6%              7.7%             25.0%        0.0%          6.3%         0.0%
Data                                                  0.0%            11.1%         7.7%            5.3%        11.1%             7.7%             8.3%         0.0%          6.3%         12.5%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                      0.0%            30.6%         15.4%           10.5%       22.2%             10.3%            25.0%        22.2%         31.3%        12.5%
Financial resources*                                  57.1%           36.1%         38.5%           68.4%       33.3%             25.6%            33.3%        33.3%         43.8%        31.3%
Capacity development of staff at state
                                                      0.0%             2.8%         7.7%             2.6%        0.0%             5.1%             0.0%          0.0%          6.3%         6.3%
institutions
Technical assistance                                  14.3%           0.0%          0.0%             0.0%       11.1%             12.8%            0.0%         11.1%          0.0%        12.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources            0.0%            11.1%         23.1%            7.9%       16.7%             25.6%            0.0%         22.2%          0.0%        6.3%
Coordination with development partners                0.0%            0.0%          7.7%             2.6%       0.0%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%           0.0%        6.3%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                         0.0%            2.8%          0.0%             0.0%       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         11.1%          6.3%        6.3%
Other                                                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%       0.0%              5.1%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        6.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

 nd                                                  Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
2 Greatest Value
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Convening/facilitating                                0.0%            5.6%          0.0%            5.3%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         11.1%         0.0%         18.8%
Data                                                  14.3%           0.0%          7.7%            2.6%        11.1%             7.9%             8.3%         0.0%          12.5%        6.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                      14.3%           22.2%         38.5%           26.3%       27.8%             7.9%             16.7%        11.1%         12.5%        18.8%
Financial resources                                   14.3%           8.3%          23.1%           15.8%       16.7%             18.4%            8.3%         22.2%         12.5%        25.0%
Capacity development of staff at state
                                                      14.3%           13.9%         0.0%             7.9%       16.7%             10.5%            8.3%          0.0%         12.5%        25.0%
institutions
Technical assistance                                  14.3%            8.3%         15.4%           10.5%       22.2%             21.1%            16.7%        11.1%         18.8%         0.0%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                                      28.6%           27.8%         7.7%            21.1%        0.0%             10.5%            41.7%        33.3%         12.5%         6.3%
resources*
Coordination with development partners                0.0%             5.6%         0.0%             7.9%        5.6%             18.4%            0.0%         11.1%         12.5%         0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                         0.0%             8.3%         7.7%             2.6%        0.0%             2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%          0.0%
Other                                                 0.0%             0.0%         0.0%             0.0%        0.0%             2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   82
The World Bank                                                                                             Macedonia                                                  Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Macedonia’s efforts to achieve development results?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Macedonia. To what degree would Macedonia benefit, if capacity building were to support…?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Macedonia?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                               83
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Macedonia to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be
involved in the following aspects of capacity building?




(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Staff too inaccessible                                0.0%             5.6%         0.0%             0.0%       11.1%             2.6%             0.0%          0.0%          6.3%         6.3%
Not exploring alternative policy options              0.0%             5.6%         15.4%            5.3%       11.1%             10.3%            16.7%         0.0%          6.3%         6.3%
Not adequately sensitive to
                                                      0.0%            25.0%         15.4%           44.7%       11.1%             25.6%            16.7%        11.1%         18.8%         6.3%
political/social realities in Macedonia*
Not enough public disclosure of its work              0.0%            22.2%         15.4%           7.9%        33.3%             17.9%            16.7%        33.3%         12.5%        25.0%
Arrogant in its approach                              14.3%           13.9%         0.0%            5.3%        0.0%              2.6%             8.3%         0.0%          6.3%         0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                   28.6%           8.3%          7.7%            13.2%       11.1%             10.3%            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         18.8%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                 14.3%           0.0%          7.7%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%         6.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                                      14.3%           11.1%         15.4%            5.3%        5.6%             5.1%             16.7%         0.0%         18.8%         6.3%
complex
Not willing to honestly criticize policies
                                                      0.0%             8.3%         7.7%            10.5%       16.7%             12.8%            8.3%         11.1%         12.5%        25.0%
and reform efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries                 0.0%             5.6%         0.0%            26.3%       11.1%             20.5%            0.0%         11.1%         12.5%        12.5%
Imposing technocratic solutions without
                                                      28.6%            5.6%         15.4%            7.9%       11.1%             5.1%             16.7%        11.1%         18.8%        18.8%
regard to political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                 0.0%             2.8%         0.0%             7.9%       16.7%             15.4%            0.0%         11.1%          6.3%         0.0%
Too bureaucratic in its operational
                                                      0.0%            13.9%         15.4%            5.3%        0.0%             10.3%            0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        18.8%
policies and procedures
Not aligned with other development
                                                      14.3%            5.6%         7.7%             2.6%        0.0%             5.1%             8.3%          0.0%          6.3%         0.0%
partners’ work
Not collaborating enough with non-state
                                                      14.3%            2.8%         23.1%            7.9%       27.8%             15.4%            8.3%         11.1%         25.0%        18.8%
actors
Not client focused                                    14.3%           2.8%          0.0%             0.0%       5.6%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Other                                                 0.0%            2.8%          0.0%             2.6%       0.0%              0.0%             8.3%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Don’t know                                            28.6%           16.7%         15.4%            5.3%       11.1%             17.9%            25.0%        44.4%         18.8%        12.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                   84
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in promoting economic development in Macedo nia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Capacity development of staff at state
                                                      28.6%           22.9%         15.4%           18.4%       22.2%             23.1%            9.1%         22.2%         18.8%        43.8%
institutions
Policy based lending/budget support to
                                                      42.9%           31.4%         0.0%            18.4%       11.1%             7.7%             45.5%        11.1%          6.3%        18.8%
the Government*
Knowledge products/services                           42.9%           20.0%         23.1%           10.5%       22.2%             25.6%            9.1%         22.2%         43.8%        6.3%
Investment lending                                    57.1%           62.9%         53.8%           60.5%       38.9%             51.3%            54.5%        66.7%         18.8%        31.3%
Technical assistance*                                 0.0%            28.6%         46.2%           26.3%       55.6%             46.2%            9.1%         44.4%         43.8%        18.8%
Grant funding                                         28.6%           20.0%         38.5%           44.7%       11.1%             30.8%            63.6%        22.2%         37.5%        50.0%
Other                                                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Don’t know*                                           0.0%            2.9%          0.0%            0.0%        16.7%             0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%         12.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your
country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Academia/think tanks/research
                                                      14.3%           25.0%         23.1%            7.9%       33.3%             23.1%            33.3%        11.1%         75.0%        18.8%
institutes*
Community of development partners*                    42.9%           5.6%          7.7%            0.0%        16.7%             5.1%             0.0%         11.1%         12.5%        0.0%
Media                                                 0.0%            8.3%          0.0%            0.0%        11.1%             20.5%            8.3%         11.1%         12.5%        18.8%
NGOs                                                  0.0%            16.7%         30.8%           21.1%       27.8%             15.4%            50.0%        11.1%         12.5%        25.0%
Local government*                                     42.9%           36.1%         15.4%           76.3%       33.3%             10.3%            8.3%         22.2%         18.8%        31.3%
Private sector*                                       57.1%           47.2%         46.2%           26.3%       44.4%             79.5%            33.3%        77.8%         6.3%         43.8%
Parliament*                                           14.3%           8.3%          0.0%            26.3%       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         12.5%
Community-based organizations                         14.3%           5.6%          15.4%           7.9%        5.6%              5.1%             8.3%         11.1%         0.0%         0.0%
Beneficiaries                                         0.0%            16.7%         30.8%           7.9%        16.7%             20.5%            8.3%         22.2%         25.0%        12.5%
Foundations                                           0.0%            5.6%          7.7%            5.3%        0.0%              7.7%             16.7%        0.0%          0.0%         12.5%
Faith-based organizations                             0.0%            2.8%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              2.6%             16.7%        0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
Other                                                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        5.6%              2.6%             8.3%         0.0%          12.5%        6.3%
Don’t know                                            0.0%            5.6%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              0.0%             0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   85
The World Bank                                                                                 Macedonia                                                                            Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Macedonia? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Macedonia, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                 86
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To be a more effective development partner in Macedonia, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
More local presence                                   57.1%           64.9%         84.6%           73.7%       72.2%             55.3%            50.0%        44.4%         62.5%        68.8%
The current level of local presence is
                                                      42.9%           27.0%         7.7%            23.7%       22.2%             23.7%            33.3%        33.3%         25.0%        12.5%
adequate
Less local presence                                      -               -          7.7%               -           -              18.4%              -          11.1%          6.3%          -
Don't know                                               -             8.1%           -              2.6%        5.6%             2.6%             16.7%        11.1%          6.3%        18.8%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
The World Bank Group does not do
                                                      28.6%           13.5%         15.4%           13.2%        5.6%             5.4%             0.0%          0.0%          6.7%         6.3%
adequate follow through/follow-up
There is not an adequate level of
                                                      0.0%            18.9%         23.1%           18.4%       16.7%             10.8%            8.3%         12.5%         13.3%        31.3%
citizen/civil society participation
The World Bank Group is not sensitive
enough to political/social realities on the           42.9%           16.2%         30.8%           44.7%       22.2%             29.7%            33.3%        12.5%         13.3%        37.5%
ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                      0.0%            32.4%         46.2%           10.5%       50.0%             24.3%            33.3%        12.5%         20.0%        25.0%
Government*
Poor coordination with development
                                                      14.3%           18.9%         0.0%            23.7%       27.8%             24.3%            25.0%        25.0%         26.7%        25.0%
partners
The World Bank Group works too slowly                 14.3%           13.5%         23.1%           7.9%        0.0%              2.7%             0.0%         0.0%          6.7%         25.0%
The Government works inefficiently                    0.0%            5.4%          0.0%            13.2%       11.1%             13.5%            16.7%        0.0%          26.7%        12.5%
Political pressures and obstacles*                    0.0%            13.5%         23.1%           13.2%       44.4%             45.9%            33.3%        25.0%         26.7%        12.5%
Reforms are not well thought out in light
                                                      42.9%           29.7%         23.1%           26.3%       11.1%             18.9%            16.7%        50.0%         40.0%        25.0%
of country challenges
Other                                                 14.3%            2.7%         0.0%             2.6%        5.6%             5.4%             0.0%         12.5%          6.7%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   87
The World Bank                                                                              Macedonia                                                                          Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Macedonia? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                              88
The World Bank                                                                                Macedonia                                                                             Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Macedonia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Macedonia?
                                                Office of       Employee     Consultant on                     Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent     Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                   President/Prime       of a       WBG Project/         Local       Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government       Research
(Responses Combined)                        Minister/Minister    Ministry        PMU           Government       Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution     Institute     Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)         57.1%           48.6%           53.8%           21.1%          50.0%             61.5%            63.6%        88.9%          43.8%        60.0%
In the country                                   28.6%           32.4%           23.1%           47.4%          27.8%             7.7%             18.2%          -            25.0%        6.7%
Don't know                                       14.3%           18.9%           23.1%           31.6%          22.2%             30.8%            18.2%        11.1%          31.3%        33.3%




                                                                                                89
The World Bank                                                                                            Macedonia                                                                          Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Macedonia? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
                                                      Office of         Employee        Consultant on                    Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                         President/Prime         of a          WBG Project/          Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                              Minister/Minister      Ministry           PMU            Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Weekly                                                    -               2.7%               -                 2.6%       11.1%             10.3%            8.3%           -             -            -
Monthly                                                 14.3%             24.3%            38.5%               5.3%       16.7%             17.9%              -          11.1%         31.3%        18.8%
A few times a year                                      42.9%             35.1%            46.2%               31.6%      44.4%             20.5%            50.0%        77.8%         50.0%        37.5%
Rarely                                                  14.3%             32.4%            15.4%               50.0%      22.2%             30.8%            41.7%        11.1%         12.5%        43.8%
Never                                                   28.6%             5.4%               -                 10.5%      5.6%              20.5%              -            -           6.3%           -

                                                                                                               90
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                           Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

When thinking about the development challenges in Macedonia, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the World Bank Group to focus its knowledge work and activities in the
next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local       Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government       Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Social protection                                           0.0%         2.7%             7.7%          10.5%         5.6%               12.8%          0.0%          0.0%         12.5%      12.5%
Public sector governance/reform                            16.7%        13.5%             7.7%          10.5%        38.9%               12.8%         18.2%         33.3%         31.3%      18.8%
Transport                                                  33.3%        24.3%            30.8%          31.6%        22.2%               15.4%         18.2%         33.3%         12.5%      12.5%
Poverty reduction                                          16.7%        24.3%             7.7%          26.3%         5.6%               25.6%          0.0%         11.1%         12.5%      25.0%
EU integration                                             16.7%        13.5%             7.7%          13.2%        11.1%               12.8%          9.1%         22.2%          6.3%      12.5%
Gender equity                                               0.0%         2.7%             7.7%           0.0%         0.0%                0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         12.5%       0.0%
Business environment and private sector
                                                           33.3%        16.2%             7.7%           5.3%        44.4%               20.5%          9.1%         22.2%         18.8%      12.5%
development
Rural development                                          33.3%         8.1%            15.4%          15.8%         0.0%               10.3%          9.1%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
Foreign direct investment*                                 16.7%         8.1%             7.7%          31.6%         0.0%                5.1%          9.1%         11.1%          6.3%       0.0%
Water and sanitation                                        0.0%         0.0%             7.7%           7.9%         0.0%                0.0%          0.0%          0.0%          0.0%       0.0%
Energy                                                      0.0%        27.0%            38.5%          10.5%        16.7%               12.8%          9.1%         33.3%         18.8%       6.3%
Job creation/employment                                    16.7%        13.5%            15.4%          34.2%        22.2%               10.3%         36.4%         22.2%         12.5%      18.8%
Environmental sustainability                                0.0%         5.4%             0.0%           2.6%         0.0%                5.1%          9.1%         11.1%          6.3%       6.3%
Equality of opportunity                                     0.0%         2.7%             0.0%           2.6%        16.7%                2.6%          9.1%          0.0%          0.0%      12.5%
Health*                                                     0.0%        13.5%            15.4%           7.9%         5.6%               10.3%          9.1%         33.3%          6.3%      50.0%
Education                                                  16.7%        21.6%             7.7%           7.9%        22.2%               23.1%         27.3%         22.2%         31.3%      18.8%
Climate change and green growth*                            0.0%         0.0%             7.7%           2.6%         0.0%                2.6%          9.1%         11.1%         25.0%       0.0%
Agricultural development                                    0.0%        24.3%            23.1%          13.2%        22.2%                0.0%         18.2%          0.0%         18.8%      25.0%
Trade and exports                                          33.3%        10.8%             0.0%          18.4%        16.7%               15.4%         18.2%          0.0%          0.0%      25.0%
Economic growth                                            50.0%        37.8%            38.5%          23.7%        44.4%               46.2%         45.5%         22.2%         31.3%      25.0%
Law and justice                                             0.0%         0.0%             7.7%           5.3%         0.0%               12.8%          0.0%          0.0%         12.5%       6.3%
Regulatory framework                                        0.0%         2.7%             7.7%           2.6%         0.0%               10.3%          0.0%          0.0%          6.3%       0.0%
Anti-corruption                                             0.0%         2.7%             7.7%           2.6%         5.6%                5.1%          9.1%          0.0%          6.3%      12.5%
Information and communications
                                                             0.0%        5.4%             7.7%           2.6%          0.0%               7.7%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
technology
Disaster management                                          0.0%        0.0%             0.0%           0.0%          0.0%               0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   91
The World Bank                                                                                                  Macedonia                                         Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Macedonia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                                                                  92
The World Bank                                                                                             Macedonia                                  Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s delivery work contribute to solving Macedonia’s development challenges?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                               93
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Macedonia?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
The World Bank Group takes too much
                                                         -             5.4%            -                -          -              5.1%               -             -           6.7%         6.3%
risk in Macedonia
The World Bank Group does not take
                                                      33.3%           21.6%         30.8%           16.2%       22.2%             12.8%            33.3%        11.1%         33.3%        37.5%
enough risk in Macedonia
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk
                                                      50.0%           35.1%         46.2%           70.3%       44.4%             33.3%            33.3%        66.7%         26.7%        18.8%
is appropriate
Don't know                                              -             27.0%         15.4%           10.8%       5.6%              33.3%            25.0%        22.2%         33.3%        31.3%
Prefer not to answer                                  16.7%           10.8%         7.7%            2.7%        27.8%             15.4%            8.3%           -             -          6.3%


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Provide more adequate data/
knowledge/statistics/figures on                       0.0%            13.5%         23.1%            7.9%        5.9%             10.3%            0.0%          0.0%          6.7%        18.8%
Macedonia’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with
                                                      71.4%           29.7%         46.2%           31.6%        5.9%             7.7%             9.1%          0.0%          6.7%         6.3%
Government clients (e.g., state, local)*
Offer more innovative financial products              57.1%           27.0%         7.7%            36.8%       35.3%             48.7%            36.4%        14.3%         26.7%        12.5%
Improve the competitiveness of its
                                                      0.0%            29.7%         0.0%             7.9%       11.8%             12.8%            9.1%         28.6%          6.7%        18.8%
financing compared to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                      28.6%            8.1%         30.8%           13.2%       58.8%             35.9%            45.5%        28.6%         60.0%        50.0%
Government*
Improve the quality of its experts as
related to Macedonia’s specific                       0.0%            10.8%         7.7%             7.9%        5.9%             17.9%            18.2%        28.6%          6.7%        12.5%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge
                                                      14.3%            8.1%         0.0%            18.4%        5.9%             12.8%            0.0%          0.0%         20.0%        12.5%
services
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                0.0%             5.4%         0.0%             2.6%        5.9%             7.7%             9.1%          0.0%          0.0%         6.3%
Increase the level of capacity
                                                      0.0%            24.3%         23.1%           26.3%       17.6%             20.5%            18.2%        71.4%         26.7%        18.8%
development in the country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining
                                                      28.6%           21.6%         30.8%           13.2%       17.6%             15.4%            36.4%        28.6%         13.3%        25.0%
World Bank Group financing
Increase availability of Fee-Based
                                                      0.0%             2.7%         7.7%             5.3%        0.0%             0.0%             9.1%          0.0%         20.0%         6.3%
services
Work faster                                           0.0%             0.0%         0.0%             0.0%       5.9%              5.1%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        12.5%
Other*                                                0.0%             0.0%         0.0%             0.0%       11.8%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                   94
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                           Country Survey 2013

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Macedonia, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you
believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Macedonia?*
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute       Other
Financial services                                    57.1%           50.0%         69.2%           71.1%       29.4%             41.0%            41.7%        55.6%         6.3%           12.5%
Knowledge products                                    14.3%           30.6%         15.4%           10.5%       29.4%             23.1%            25.0%        22.2%         31.3%          56.3%
Convening services                                      -               -           7.7%            2.6%        5.9%              10.3%            8.3%         11.1%         18.8%            -
None of the above                                       -             5.6%            -             2.6%          -               2.6%             8.3%           -           6.3%           6.3%
The combination is appropriate for
                                                      28.6%            8.3%            -             5.3%       23.5%             12.8%              -          11.1%         37.5%           6.3%
Macedonia
Don't know                                               -             5.6%         7.7%             7.9%       11.8%             10.3%            16.7%           -             -           18.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please identify the TWO areas related to economic diversification in Macedonia where greater support from the World Bank Group would be most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute       Other
Skills development and innovation                     42.9%           29.7%         7.7%            13.2%       38.9%             25.6%            16.7%        44.4%         43.8%          31.3%
Transport infrastructure                              28.6%           29.7%         46.2%           57.9%       38.9%             20.5%            33.3%        33.3%         31.3%          31.3%
Investments in energy efficiency and
                                                      0.0%            29.7%         53.8%           39.5%       38.9%             38.5%            16.7%        44.4%         18.8%          37.5%
renewable energy
Business environment reforms to
                                                      42.9%           29.7%         23.1%           10.5%       44.4%             35.9%            41.7%        66.7%         18.8%          31.3%
increase country’s competitiveness*
Increasing the efficiency of the social
                                                      0.0%             8.1%         7.7%             5.3%        5.6%             10.3%            25.0%         0.0%         18.8%          18.8%
protection system
Conducting analysis of the profile of
                                                      14.3%           13.5%         23.1%           42.1%       11.1%             10.3%            8.3%         11.1%          6.3%          25.0%
poverty and trends*
Information and communication
                                                      14.3%           10.8%         23.1%            0.0%        0.0%             30.8%            8.3%          0.0%         12.5%           0.0%
technology*
Climate change                                        0.0%            8.1%          0.0%             2.6%       0.0%              2.6%             8.3%          0.0%         12.5%          6.3%
Public sector reform                                  14.3%           10.8%         7.7%             7.9%       22.2%             17.9%            8.3%          0.0%         25.0%          18.8%
Other                                                 0.0%            8.1%          0.0%             0.0%       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         6.3%           0.0%
Don’t know                                            0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%       0.0%              0.0%             0.0%          0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   95
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Local newspapers                                      14.3%           32.4%         15.4%           18.4%       38.9%             38.5%            41.7%        66.7%         50.0%        33.3%
International newspapers                              0.0%            2.7%          23.1%           7.9%        16.7%             10.3%            8.3%         11.1%         25.0%        20.0%
Local radio*                                          0.0%            2.7%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              5.1%             16.7%        11.1%         0.0%         20.0%
Local television                                      42.9%           40.5%         46.2%           52.6%       44.4%             38.5%            33.3%        33.3%         31.3%        26.7%
International television                              0.0%            10.8%         7.7%            10.5%       16.7%             15.4%            8.3%         11.1%         18.8%        20.0%
Periodicals                                           14.3%           10.8%         30.8%           18.4%       16.7%             20.5%            25.0%        0.0%          18.8%        6.7%
World Bank Group web site                             42.9%           27.0%         23.1%           23.7%       27.8%             28.2%            8.3%         33.3%         18.8%        6.7%
Social media                                          14.3%           21.6%         23.1%           18.4%       0.0%              20.5%            33.3%        22.2%         6.3%         40.0%
Blogs                                                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        0.0%              2.6%             8.3%         11.1%         12.5%        0.0%
Other                                                 14.3%           18.9%         15.4%           7.9%        22.2%             5.1%             0.0%         0.0%          12.5%        13.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Blogs                                                 14.3%           8.1%          7.7%            5.3%        11.1%             17.9%            16.7%        0.0%          6.3%         12.5%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                  14.3%           40.5%         7.7%            31.6%       27.8%             28.2%            25.0%        33.3%         50.0%        25.0%
e-Newsletters                                         28.6%           32.4%         38.5%           26.3%       27.8%             38.5%            16.7%        44.4%         50.0%        37.5%
Instant messaging                                     0.0%            8.1%          15.4%           7.9%        5.6%              5.1%             16.7%        11.1%         0.0%         12.5%
World Bank Group’s
                                                      42.9%           48.6%         46.2%           50.0%       33.3%             30.8%            33.3%        55.6%         56.3%        12.5%
seminars/workshops/conferences
World Bank Group’s publications and
                                                      28.6%           18.9%         38.5%           21.1%       27.8%             25.6%            25.0%        33.3%         12.5%        25.0%
other written materials
Social media*                                         28.6%           10.8%         30.8%           10.5%       16.7%             17.9%            50.0%        0.0%          12.5%        37.5%
World Bank Group’s website                            28.6%           10.8%         15.4%           15.8%       38.9%             12.8%            8.3%         11.1%         6.3%         31.3%
Other                                                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%            0.0%        5.6%              2.6%             0.0%         0.0%          6.3%         6.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Yes                                                   42.9%           29.7%         23.1%           28.9%       16.7%             10.3%            33.3%        22.2%            -         50.0%
No                                                    57.1%           70.3%         76.9%           71.1%       83.3%             89.7%            66.7%        77.8%         100.0%       50.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                   96
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Yes                                                   66.7%           38.9%         46.2%           52.6%       66.7%             28.2%            41.7%        44.4%         50.0%        50.0%
No                                                    33.3%           61.1%         53.8%           47.4%       33.3%             71.8%            58.3%        55.6%         50.0%        50.0%

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Yes                                                   80.0%           80.0%        100.0%          100.0%       91.7%             90.9%           100.0%        75.0%         100.0%       87.5%
No                                                    20.0%           20.0%           -               -         8.3%              9.1%               -          25.0%            -         12.5%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Yes                                                   100.0%         100.0%        100.0%          100.0%      100.0%            100.0%           100.0%        100.0%        100.0%       93.8%
No                                                       -              -             -               -           -                 -                -             -             -         6.3%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Yes                                                   100.0%          80.0%         84.6%           86.5%      100.0%             81.1%            75.0%        100.0%        87.5%        80.0%
No                                                       -            20.0%         15.4%           13.5%         -               18.9%            25.0%           -          12.5%        20.0%

Which do you primarily use?*
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
The World Bank Group’s country website                42.9%           43.8%         45.5%           85.3%       55.6%             45.2%            66.7%        44.4%         50.0%        61.5%
The World Bank Group’s main website                   57.1%           56.3%         54.5%           14.7%       44.4%             54.8%            33.3%        55.6%         50.0%        38.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank website?
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
                                                 President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
Percentage of Respondents                        Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
High speed                                            100.0%          93.8%         90.9%           88.2%       94.4%            100.0%           100.0%        100.0%        92.9%        92.3%
Low speed (below 256 Kbps)                               -            6.3%          9.1%            11.8%       5.6%                -                -             -          7.1%         7.7%




                                                                                                   97
The World Bank                                                                                Macedonia   Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                 98
The World Bank                                                                                   Macedonia                                                                         Country Survey 2013

H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Macedonia? (Select all that apply)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
The World Bank (IBRD)                                 100.0%          77.1%         76.9%           86.1%       83.3%             75.7%            90.0%        77.8%         75.0%        62.5%
International Finance Corporation (IFC)               42.9%           25.7%         15.4%           8.3%        38.9%             37.8%            20.0%        33.3%         18.8%        31.3%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee
                                                      28.6%            5.7%         0.0%             0.0%        0.0%             2.7%             0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Agency (MIGA)*
None                                                   0.0%           14.3%         15.4%            8.3%        5.6%             5.4%             10.0%        11.1%         12.5%        12.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Office of       Employee    Consultant on                 Bilateral/     Private Sector/       NGO/      Independent    Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                        President/Prime       of a      WBG Project/       Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/     Private    Government      Research
(Responses Combined)                             Minister/Minister    Ministry       PMU         Government     Agency         Private Bank      Foundation    Institution    Institute     Other
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in
                                                      28.6%            2.7%         15.4%            7.9%       11.1%             17.9%            33.3%        22.2%         25.0%        18.8%
informal conversations, etc.)
Use World Bank Group reports/data                     28.6%           16.2%         15.4%           13.2%       27.8%             25.6%            8.3%         22.2%         50.0%        25.0%
Engage in World Bank Group
                                                      28.6%           27.0%         69.2%           36.8%       27.8%             23.1%            41.7%        44.4%         37.5%        25.0%
related/sponsored events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional
                                                      57.1%           78.4%         53.8%           57.9%       61.1%             53.8%            41.7%        44.4%         43.8%        37.5%
duties
Use World Bank Group website for
                                                      14.3%            8.1%         7.7%            10.5%       11.1%             20.5%            8.3%         33.3%         12.5%        18.8%
information, data, research, etc.




                                                                                                   99
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                            Country Survey 2013




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations
Skopje N=157               Outside Skopje N=49

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia
In general, how would you say that Macedonia is headed in...?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                   Skopje                  Outside Skopje
The right direction                                                         46.5%                       64.6%
The wrong direction                                                         27.7%                       20.8%
Not sure                                                                    25.8%                       14.6%
*Significantly different between locations

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Macedonia. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Macedonia. (Choose no more than 3)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                        Skopje                  Outside Skopje
Social protection                                                           5.8%                        8.3%
Transport                                                                   19.9%                       22.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                             17.9%                       12.5%
EU integration                                                              25.6%                       29.2%
Gender equity                                                               4.5%                        0.0%
Business environment and private sector development*                        15.4%                       2.1%
Foreign direct investment*                                                  12.2%                       33.3%
Water and sanitation                                                        1.9%                        2.1%
Anti-corruption                                                             5.8%                        4.2%
Job creation/employment                                                     29.5%                       41.7%
Rural development                                                           5.1%                        6.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                4.5%                        4.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                     1.9%                        4.2%
Health                                                                      15.4%                       12.5%
Education                                                                   21.2%                       14.6%
Poverty reduction*                                                          16.0%                       33.3%
Energy                                                                      15.4%                       12.5%
Climate change and green growth                                             3.8%                        2.1%
Agricultural development                                                    14.1%                       6.3%
Trade and exports                                                           11.5%                       10.4%
Economic growth                                                             28.8%                       22.9%
Law and justice*                                                            16.7%                       4.2%
Regulatory framework                                                        2.6%                        4.2%
Disaster management                                                         0.0%                        0.0%
Information and communications technology                                   2.6%                        4.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                               100
The World Bank                                          Macedonia                                        Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Skopje               Outside Skopje
Water and sanitation                                                   1.9%                     4.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                8.9%                     4.1%
Economic growth                                                        54.1%                    44.9%
Climate change and green growth                                        2.5%                     4.1%
EU integration                                                         13.4%                    22.4%
Gender equity                                                          2.5%                     4.1%
Rural development                                                      15.3%                    14.3%
Regulatory framework                                                   1.3%                     2.0%
Social protection                                                      7.6%                     8.2%
Law and justice                                                        2.5%                     4.1%
Transport                                                              5.1%                     8.2%
Information and communications technology                              3.2%                     0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                        8.3%                     8.2%
Business environment and private sector development*                   27.4%                    6.1%
Foreign direct investment*                                             25.5%                    53.1%
Education*                                                             26.8%                    12.2%
Energy                                                                 9.6%                     12.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                        10.2%                    6.1%
Environmental sustainability                                           5.1%                     2.0%
Disaster management                                                    0.0%                     0.0%
Health                                                                 1.9%                     2.0%
Agricultural development                                               15.9%                    10.2%
Job creation/employment                                                41.4%                    46.9%
Trade and exports*                                                     5.1%                     14.3%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          101
The World Bank                                                   Macedonia                                   Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Macedonia? (Choose no more than 3)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Skopje             Outside Skopje
Energy                                                                       19.2%                  22.4%
Gender equity                                                                1.9%                   0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                      4.5%                   2.0%
Social protection                                                            3.8%                   8.2%
EU integration                                                               23.1%                  26.5%
Climate change and green growth                                              1.9%                   0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                              6.4%                   4.1%
Disaster management                                                          0.0%                   0.0%
Rural development                                                            6.4%                   12.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                    36.5%                  36.7%
Water and sanitation                                                         0.0%                   0.0%
Education*                                                                   12.8%                  2.0%
Information and communications technology                                    7.1%                   4.1%
Regulatory framework                                                         7.7%                   14.3%
Trade and exports                                                            24.4%                  32.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                              19.9%                  20.4%
Business environment and private sector development*                         38.5%                  18.4%
Job creation/employment                                                      35.3%                  42.9%
Agricultural development                                                     18.6%                  22.4%
Transport*                                                                   19.2%                  6.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                 1.3%                   4.1%
Health                                                                       1.3%                   4.1%
Law and justice                                                              8.3%                   2.0%
*Significantly different between locations

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Skopje             Outside Skopje
Better employment opportunities for young people                             40.0%                  49.0%
Better employment opportunities for women                                    3.9%                   10.2%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                 7.7%                   16.3%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                             11.6%                  4.1%
greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                          5.8%                   4.1%
Greater access to economic opportunities for ethnic
                                                                             3.9%                   12.2%
minorities*
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and
                                                                             23.2%                  22.4%
medium sized businesses)
A growing middle class                                                       21.3%                  16.3%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                      7.7%                   8.2%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                      2.6%                   4.1%
Consistent economic growth*                                                  39.4%                  22.4%
More reliable social safety net*                                             3.2%                   12.2%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                              3.9%                   6.1%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity*                   21.9%                  2.0%
Better quality public services                                               1.3%                   2.0%
Other                                                                        1.3%                   2.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                   102
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                                   Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Macedonia, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its attention and resources in Macedonia?
(Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Skopje             Outside Skopje
Social protection                                                      5.1%                  12.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                        22.3%                 22.4%
Transport                                                              29.3%                 26.5%
Poverty reduction                                                      18.5%                 26.5%
EU integration                                                         10.8%                 8.2%
Gender equity                                                          1.3%                  0.0%
Business environment and private sector development*                   24.8%                 6.1%
Rural development                                                      12.1%                 16.3%
Foreign direct investment*                                             8.3%                  30.6%
Water and sanitation*                                                  0.6%                  8.2%
Energy                                                                 15.3%                 6.1%
Job creation/employment                                                19.7%                 22.4%
Environmental sustainability                                           4.5%                  2.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                6.4%                  8.2%
Health                                                                 16.6%                 12.2%
Education                                                              22.9%                 16.3%
Climate change and green growth                                        4.5%                  4.1%
Agricultural development                                               16.6%                 10.2%
Trade and exports*                                                     8.3%                  18.4%
Economic growth                                                        27.4%                 22.4%
Law and justice                                                        7.0%                  0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                   3.8%                  6.1%
Anti-corruption                                                        3.2%                  0.0%
Information and communications technology                              4.5%                  2.0%
Disaster management                                                    0.0%                  0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                             103
The World Bank                                            Macedonia                                          Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
 second greatest value in Macedonia?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Convening/facilitating                                                   6.4%                      6.1%
Data                                                                     8.3%                      6.1%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                         19.2%                     16.3%
Financial resources*                                                     34.0%                     59.2%
Capacity development of staff at state institutions                      3.8%                      2.0%
Technical assistance                                                     7.1%                      0.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                               14.7%                     6.1%
Coordination with development partners                                   1.9%                      2.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                            2.6%                      2.0%
Other                                                                    1.9%                      0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Convening/facilitating*                                                  2.6%                      10.2%
Data                                                                     6.5%                      4.1%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                         18.1%                     24.5%
Financial resources                                                      14.8%                     18.4%
Capacity development of staff at state institutions                      12.3%                     8.2%
Technical assistance*                                                    16.8%                     4.1%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                               16.1%                     22.4%
Coordination with development partners                                   8.4%                      6.1%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                            3.9%                      2.0%
Other                                                                    0.6%                      0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Macedonia’s efforts to achieve development results?




 (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                            104
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                               Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Macedonia. To what degree would
Macedonia benefit, if capacity building were to support…?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Macedonia?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Macedonia to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?




(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




                                                                       105
The World Bank                                                 Macedonia                                 Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Macedonia?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                       Skopje            Outside Skopje
Staff too inaccessible                                                     4.5%                  0.0%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                   8.3%                  6.1%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                           17.9%                34.7%
Macedonia*
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                   20.5%                10.2%
Arrogant in its approach                                                   5.8%                 4.1%
Not aligned with country priorities*                                       7.1%                 20.4%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                      1.9%                 2.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                   10.3%                4.1%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in
                                                                           14.1%                 2.0%
the country*
Too influenced by developed countries                                      11.5%                20.4%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                           10.9%                10.2%
realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                                     5.1%                 14.3%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                8.3%                 6.1%
Not aligned with other development partners’ work                          3.2%                 8.2%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                             16.0%                6.1%
Not client focused                                                         1.9%                 0.0%
Other                                                                      1.3%                 2.0%
Don’t know                                                                 19.2%                10.2%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in promoting economic development
in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                       Skopje            Outside Skopje
Capacity development of staff at state institutions                        21.4%                24.5%
Policy based lending/budget support to the Government                      18.2%                18.4%
Knowledge products/services                                                21.4%                20.4%
Investment lending                                                         51.3%                49.0%
Technical assistance                                                       35.7%                26.5%
Grant funding*                                                             29.9%                46.9%
Other                                                                      0.0%                 0.0%
Don’t know                                                                 4.5%                 0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                   106
The World Bank                                            Macedonia                                          Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Academia/think tanks/research institutes*                                29.7%                       10.2%
Community of development partners                                        8.4%                        2.0%
Media*                                                                   12.9%                       0.0%
NGOs                                                                     19.4%                       22.4%
Local Government*                                                        23.9%                       63.3%
Private sector*                                                          51.0%                       34.7%
Parliament*                                                              3.9%                        20.4%
Community Based Organizations                                            7.1%                        2.0%
Beneficiaries                                                            16.1%                       16.3%
Foundations                                                              4.5%                        10.2%
Faith based organizations                                                3.2%                        0.0%
Other                                                                    3.9%                        0.0%
Don’t know                                                               2.6%                        0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Macedonia?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                            107
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                                     Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Macedonia, in terms of each of the following?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To be a more effective development partner in Macedonia, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?

Percentage of Respondents                                                              Skopje         Outside Skopje
More local presence                                                                    61.5%             69.4%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                        25.0%             22.4%
Less local presence                                                                    5.1%              4.1%
Don't know                                                                             8.3%              4.1%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                   Skopje         Outside Skopje
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                                       9.8%              10.4%
through/follow-up
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                                       14.4%             25.0%
participation
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                                       24.8%             41.7%
political/social realities on the ground*
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government*                                   29.4%             10.4%
Poor coordination with development partners                                            21.6%             25.0%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                  8.5%              10.4%
The Government works inefficiently                                                     9.8%              12.5%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                      26.8%             18.8%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                        28.1%             20.8%
Other                                                                                  4.6%              2.1%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                       108
The World Bank                                          Macedonia                                         Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Macedonia? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                           109
The World Bank                                           Macedonia                                         Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Macedonia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Macedonia? *

Percentage of Respondents                                               Skopje                 Outside Skopje
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                56.8%                      24.5%
In the country                                                          20.0%                      40.8%
Don't know                                                              23.2%                      34.7%
*Significantly different between locations



                                                           110
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                                    Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Macedonia?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Skopje               Outside Skopje
Weekly                                                                 4.5%                     4.1%
Monthly                                                                19.1%                    12.2%
A few times a year                                                     38.2%                    34.7%
Rarely                                                                 28.7%                    44.9%
Never                                                                  9.6%                     4.1%




                                                             111
The World Bank                                                       Macedonia                                     Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

When thinking about the development challenges in Macedonia, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the
World Bank Group to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                   Skopje         Outside Skopje
Social protection*                                                                     5.2%              16.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                                        17.4%             18.4%
Transport                                                                              23.2%             22.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                      18.7%             20.4%
EU integration                                                                         12.3%             12.2%
Gender equity                                                                          2.6%              0.0%
Business environment and private sector development*                                   21.3%             4.1%
Rural development                                                                      7.1%              14.3%
Foreign direct investment*                                                             5.8%              24.5%
Water and sanitation*                                                                  0.6%              6.1%
Energy*                                                                                21.3%             6.1%
Job creation/employment*                                                               16.1%             30.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                           5.2%              2.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                                3.9%              6.1%
Health                                                                                 14.8%             12.2%
Education                                                                              21.3%             14.3%
Climate change and green growth                                                        4.5%              4.1%
Agricultural development                                                               15.5%             14.3%
Trade and exports                                                                      11.6%             20.4%
Economic growth                                                                        38.1%             30.6%
Law and justice                                                                        5.2%              4.1%
Regulatory framework                                                                   3.9%              4.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                        5.8%              2.0%
Information and communications technology                                              3.9%              2.0%
Disaster management                                                                    0.0%              0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

In Macedonia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                       112
The World Bank                                                         Macedonia                                Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s delivery work contribute to solving
Macedonia’s development challenges?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                         113
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                           Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Macedonia?

Percentage of Respondents                                                  Skopje                  Outside Skopje
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Macedonia                      2.6%                        6.3%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Macedonia                22.6%                       20.8%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                     39.4%                       52.1%
Don't know                                                                 23.9%                       16.7%
Prefer not to answer                                                       11.6%                       4.2%




                                                              114
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                      Country Survey 2013




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Macedonia? (Choose no more
than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Skopje                Outside Skopje
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                        9.9%                     10.2%
Macedonia’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g.,
                                                                        17.9%                    28.6%
state, local)
Offer more innovative financial products                                33.8%                    26.5%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                        14.6%                    12.2%
markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                          33.8%                    24.5%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Macedonia’s
                                                                        12.6%                     6.1%
specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                10.6%                    14.3%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                  3.3%                     8.2%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country               23.2%                    26.5%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                        21.2%                    16.3%
financing
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                             4.6%                      4.1%
Work faster                                                             2.6%                      2.0%
Other                                                                   1.3%                      0.0%

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Macedonia, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in
Macedonia?*

Percentage of Respondents                                               Skopje                Outside Skopje
Financial services                                                      39.4%                    61.2%
Knowledge products                                                      27.7%                    18.4%
Convening services                                                      5.8%                     6.1%
None of the above                                                       3.9%                     2.0%
The combination is appropriate for Macedonia                            12.9%                    8.2%
Don't know                                                              10.3%                    4.1%
*Significantly different between locations

Please identify the TWO areas related to economic diversification in Macedonia where greater support from the World Bank
Group would be most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Skopje                Outside Skopje
Skills development and innovation*                                      32.7%                    10.2%
Transport infrastructure                                                32.7%                    44.9%
Investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy                   32.7%                    34.7%
Business environment reforms to increase country’s
                                                                        35.3%                    16.3%
competitiveness*
Increasing the efficiency of the social protection system               8.3%                     14.3%
Conducting analysis of the profile of poverty and trends*               14.1%                    34.7%
Information and communication technology                                12.8%                    6.1%
Climate change                                                          3.8%                     6.1%
Public sector reform                                                    12.8%                    16.3%
Other                                                                   2.6%                     0.0%
Don’t know                                                              0.0%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                               115
The World Bank                                           Macedonia                                          Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Macedonia? (Choose no more
than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Local newspapers*                                                       37.8%                      22.4%
International newspapers                                                11.5%                      10.2%
Local radio*                                                            3.2%                       10.2%
Local television                                                        40.4%                      40.8%
International television                                                12.2%                      12.2%
Periodicals                                                             17.3%                      14.3%
World Bank Group web site                                               23.7%                      24.5%
Social media                                                            17.3%                      28.6%
Blogs                                                                   2.6%                       2.0%
Other                                                                   12.8%                      6.1%
*Significantly different between locations

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Blogs                                                                   8.9%                       14.3%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                    30.6%                      28.6%
e-Newsletters                                                           37.6%                      26.5%
Instant messaging                                                       6.4%                       12.2%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences                       40.1%                      40.8%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials             25.5%                      16.3%
Social media*                                                           15.9%                      30.6%
World Bank Group’s website                                              17.8%                      12.2%
Other                                                                   2.5%                       0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
Percentage of Respondents                                              Skopje                  Outside Skopje
Yes                                                                    21.0%                      32.7%
No                                                                     79.0%                      67.3%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?
Percentage of Respondents                                               Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Yes                                                                     42.6%                      55.1%
No                                                                      57.4%                      44.9%

Were you able to obtain this information?
Percentage of Respondents                                               Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Yes                                                                     89.7%                      96.3%
No                                                                      10.3%                      3.7%

Do you have access to the Internet?
Percentage of Respondents                                               Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Yes                                                                     99.4%                     100.0%
No                                                                      0.60%                        -

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
Percentage of Respondents                                               Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Yes                                                                     85.6%                      87.2%
No                                                                      14.4%                      12.8%



                                                              116
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                            Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?*
Percentage of Respondents                                                   Skopje                 Outside Skopje
The World Bank Group’s country website                                      48.5%                        81.4%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                         51.5%                        18.6%
*Significantly different between locations

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank website?*
Percentage of Respondents                                                   Skopje                 Outside Skopje
High speed                                                                  96.3%                        88.4%
Low speed (below 256 Kbps)                                                  3.7%                         11.6%
*Significantly different between locations

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Macedonia? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                        Skopje                 Outside Skopje
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                       77.0%                        84.8%
International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                                    30.9%                        8.7%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                         3.3%                         0.0%
None                                                                        10.5%                        8.7%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Macedonia? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                        Skopje                 Outside Skopje
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                                            16.6%                        10.2%
conversations, etc.)
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                           23.6%                        18.4%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                            31.8%                        36.7%
events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                               58.6%                        46.9%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                            14.0%                        12.2%
etc.




                                                              117
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Collaborators
Collaborators N=208              Non-Collaborators N=935

A. General Issues Facing Macedonia
In general, how would you say that Macedonia is headed in...?*
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
The right direction                                                                    50.2%                            28.8%
The wrong direction                                                                    25.9%                            44.1%
Not sure                                                                               23.9%                            27.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Macedonia. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Macedonia. (Choose no more than 3)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Social protection                                                                      6.3%                             8.6%
Transport                                                                              20.9%                            21.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                                        16.5%                            16.0%
EU integration                                                                         26.7%                            26.9%
Gender equity                                                                          3.4%                             3.1%
Business environment and private sector development                                    12.1%                            14.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                              17.5%                            15.3%
Water and sanitation                                                                   1.9%                             0.9%
Anti-corruption                                                                        5.8%                             10.1%
Job creation/employment*                                                               32.0%                            21.7%
Rural development                                                                      5.3%                             5.5%
Environmental sustainability                                                           4.4%                             4.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                                2.4%                             5.5%
Health                                                                                 14.6%                            15.4%
Education                                                                              19.4%                            19.7%
Poverty reduction                                                                      19.9%                            24.0%
Energy                                                                                 14.6%                            15.9%
Climate change and green growth                                                        3.4%                             3.1%
Agricultural development                                                               12.1%                            10.2%
Trade and exports                                                                      11.2%                            7.6%
Economic growth                                                                        27.7%                            25.4%
Law and justice                                                                        14.1%                            14.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                   2.9%                             2.5%
Disaster management                                                                    0.0%                             0.6%
Information and communications technology                                              2.9%                             3.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       118
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Water and sanitation                                                                   2.4%                             1.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                                7.7%                             12.2%
Economic growth*                                                                       52.4%                            44.9%
Climate change and green growth                                                        2.9%                             1.8%
EU integration                                                                         16.3%                            18.8%
Gender equity                                                                          2.9%                             2.3%
Rural development                                                                      14.9%                            17.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                   1.4%                             2.7%
Social protection                                                                      7.7%                             5.5%
Law and justice                                                                        3.4%                             6.7%
Transport                                                                              5.8%                             8.0%
Information and communications technology                                              2.4%                             1.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                        8.2%                             11.1%
Business environment and private sector development                                    22.1%                            22.5%
Foreign direct investment*                                                             31.7%                            24.5%
Education                                                                              23.1%                            21.9%
Energy                                                                                 10.1%                            10.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                                        9.1%                             11.5%
Environmental sustainability                                                           4.3%                             2.8%
Disaster management                                                                    0.0%                             0.5%
Health                                                                                 1.9%                             4.9%
Agricultural development                                                               14.4%                            14.2%
Job creation/employment                                                                42.8%                            38.3%
Trade and exports                                                                      7.2%                             9.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       119
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Macedonia (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Macedonia? (Choose no more than 3)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Energy                                                                                 19.8%                            21.4%
Gender equity                                                                          1.4%                             1.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                                3.9%                             7.4%
Social protection                                                                      4.8%                             4.5%
EU integration                                                                         24.6%                            28.7%
Climate change and green growth                                                        1.4%                             1.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                        5.8%                             9.8%
Disaster management                                                                    0.0%                             0.3%
Rural development                                                                      7.7%                             10.7%
Foreign direct investment*                                                             36.7%                            28.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                   0.0%                             0.8%
Education                                                                              10.1%                            10.3%
Information and communications technology                                              6.3%                             7.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                   9.2%                             7.3%
Trade and exports                                                                      26.1%                            27.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                                        20.3%                            15.5%
Business environment and private sector development                                    33.3%                            29.8%
Job creation/employment*                                                               36.7%                            28.3%
Agricultural development                                                               19.3%                            18.6%
Transport                                                                              16.4%                            20.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                           1.9%                             2.9%
Health                                                                                 1.9%                             3.2%
Law and justice                                                                        7.2%                             7.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Better employment opportunities for young people                                       41.7%                            38.7%
Better employment opportunities for women                                              5.3%                             3.8%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                           9.7%                             9.5%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                                        9.7%                            13.3%
greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                     5.3%                             4.8%
Greater access to economic opportunities for ethnic
                                                                                        5.8%                             3.0%
minorities*
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and
                                                                                       22.8%                            22.8%
medium sized businesses)
A growing middle class*                                                                20.4%                            29.2%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                8.3%                             7.4%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                2.9%                             2.2%
Consistent economic growth                                                             35.9%                            31.5%
More reliable social safety net*                                                       5.3%                             2.2%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                        4.4%                             4.6%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                              17.0%                            15.9%
Better quality public services                                                         1.5%                             4.3%
Other                                                                                  1.5%                             3.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



                                                                       120
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Macedonia, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its attention and resources in Macedonia? (Choose
no more than THREE)
                                                                                Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                            World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                            Yes                               No
Social protection                                                                       6.7%                             5.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                                         22.1%                            20.5%
Transport                                                                               29.3%                            23.7%
Poverty reduction                                                                       20.2%                            19.4%
EU integration*                                                                         10.6%                            17.4%
Gender equity                                                                           1.0%                             1.9%
Business environment and private sector development                                     20.2%                            17.9%
Rural development                                                                       13.0%                            9.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                               13.5%                            12.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                    2.4%                             1.4%
Energy                                                                                  13.5%                            18.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                 20.2%                            21.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                            3.8%                             4.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                                 6.7%                             8.5%
Health                                                                                  15.4%                            15.1%
Education                                                                               21.2%                            18.6%
Climate change and green growth                                                         4.3%                             3.9%
Agricultural development                                                                14.9%                            13.8%
Trade and exports                                                                       10.6%                            9.1%
Economic growth                                                                         26.0%                            28.3%
Law and justice                                                                         5.8%                             8.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                    4.3%                             2.9%
Anti-corruption*                                                                        2.4%                             7.4%
Information and communications technology                                               3.8%                             4.1%
Disaster management                                                                     0.0%                             0.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



                                                                       121
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
 second greatest value in Macedonia?
                                                                                Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                            World Bank Group in your country?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Yes                               No
Convening/facilitating                                                                  6.3%                             6.3%
Data                                                                                    7.7%                             6.4%
*Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                       18.4%                            12.0%
Financial resources                                                                     40.6%                            37.6%
Capacity development of staff at state institutions                                     3.4%                             4.9%
Technical assistance                                                                    5.3%                             5.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources*                                             12.6%                            18.9%
Coordination with development partners                                                  1.9%                             3.8%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                           2.4%                             3.5%
Other                                                                                   1.4%                             1.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

                                                                                Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
 nd                                                                                         World Bank Group in your country?
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Yes                               No
Convening/facilitating                                                                  4.4%                             5.5%
Data                                                                                    5.8%                             5.1%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                        19.9%                            15.2%
Financial resources                                                                     15.5%                            19.7%
Capacity development of staff at state institutions                                     11.2%                            7.6%
Technical assistance                                                                    13.6%                            9.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                              18.0%                            18.6%
Coordination with development partners                                                  7.8%                             11.2%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                           3.4%                             6.7%
Other                                                                                   0.5%                             0.9%

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Macedonia’s efforts to achieve development results?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       122
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                                                   Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Macedonia. To what degree would
Macedonia benefit, if capacity building were to support…?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Macedonia?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Macedonia to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?




(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       123
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Macedonia?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Staff too inaccessible*                                                                 3.4%                             7.8%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                7.7%                             6.3%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                                       22.7%                            18.7%
Macedonia
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                               17.9%                            20.2%
Arrogant in its approach                                                               5.3%                             2.7%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                    10.1%                            11.4%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                  1.9%                             1.8%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                               8.7%                             7.2%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in
                                                                                       11.6%                            17.5%
the country*
Too influenced by developed countries                                                  13.5%                            14.6%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                                       10.6%                             7.2%
realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                                                 7.2%                             3.5%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                            7.7%                             6.6%
Not aligned with other development partners’ work                                      4.3%                             2.6%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                         13.5%                            16.8%
Not client focused                                                                     1.4%                             3.2%
Other                                                                                  1.4%                             1.6%
Don’t know                                                                             16.9%                            20.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in promoting economic development
in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Capacity development of staff at state institutions*                                   22.0%                            15.4%
Policy based lending/budget support to the Government                                  18.0%                            15.1%
Knowledge products/services                                                            21.0%                            19.9%
Investment lending                                                                     51.2%                            48.7%
Technical assistance                                                                   33.7%                            29.3%
Grant funding                                                                          34.1%                            39.8%
Other                                                                                  0.0%                             1.4%
Don’t know*                                                                            3.4%                             9.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       124
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Academia/think tanks/research institutes                                               24.8%                            29.0%
Community of development partners                                                      6.8%                             8.8%
Media                                                                                  9.7%                             12.0%
NGOs                                                                                   20.4%                            20.8%
Local Government*                                                                      33.0%                            22.1%
Private sector                                                                         46.6%                            52.5%
Parliament                                                                             7.8%                             6.6%
Community Based Organizations                                                          6.3%                             3.9%
Beneficiaries                                                                          16.5%                            16.4%
Foundations                                                                            5.8%                             5.9%
Faith based organizations                                                              2.4%                             2.7%
Other                                                                                  2.9%                             2.5%
Don’t know                                                                             1.9%                             4.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Macedonia?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       125
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Macedonia, in terms of each of the following?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To be a more effective development partner in Macedonia, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
More local presence                                                                    63.8%                            68.5%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                        24.2%                            19.0%
Less local presence                                                                    4.8%                             2.4%
Don't know                                                                             7.2%                             10.1%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                                        9.9%                            11.0%
through/follow-up
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                                       16.7%                            25.4%
participation*
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                                       28.6%                            25.4%
political/social realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                    25.6%                            22.1%
Poor coordination with development partners                                            22.2%                            20.6%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                  8.9%                             5.6%
The Government works inefficiently*                                                    10.8%                            16.6%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                      24.6%                            24.0%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                        26.1%                            23.8%
Other                                                                                  3.9%                             2.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



                                                                       126
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                              Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Macedonia? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       127
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How effective do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Macedonia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       128
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Macedonia?*
                                                                                Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                            World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Yes                               No
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                49.5%                            36.1%
In the country                                                                          24.8%                            18.9%
Don't know                                                                              25.7%                            45.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Macedonia?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
                                                                                Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                            World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Yes                               No
Weekly                                                                                  4.3%                             1.6%
Monthly                                                                                 17.8%                            3.1%
A few times a year                                                                      37.0%                            18.0%
Rarely                                                                                  32.2%                            32.8%
Never                                                                                   8.7%                             44.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       129
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

When thinking about the development challenges in Macedonia, where do you believe it would be most valuable for the
World Bank Group to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few years? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                                Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                            World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                            Yes                               No
Social protection                                                                       7.8%                             5.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                                         17.5%                            17.2%
Transport                                                                               23.3%                            19.2%
Poverty reduction                                                                       18.9%                            18.1%
EU integration*                                                                         12.6%                            21.2%
Gender equity                                                                           1.9%                             2.2%
Business environment and private sector development                                     17.0%                            14.2%
Rural development                                                                       8.7%                             12.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                               10.7%                            13.2%
Water and sanitation                                                                    1.9%                             2.5%
Energy                                                                                  18.0%                            16.5%
Job creation/employment                                                                 19.4%                            17.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                            4.4%                             5.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                                 4.4%                             6.4%
Health                                                                                  14.1%                            15.4%
Education                                                                               19.4%                            20.0%
Climate change and green growth                                                         4.4%                             5.2%
Agricultural development                                                                15.0%                            11.6%
Trade and exports                                                                       13.6%                            12.1%
Economic growth                                                                         35.9%                            30.2%
Law and justice*                                                                        5.3%                             10.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                    3.9%                             2.4%
Anti-corruption                                                                         4.9%                             8.1%
Information and communications technology                                               3.4%                             4.0%
Disaster management                                                                     0.0%                             0.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

In Macedonia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       130
The World Bank                                                         Macedonia                                                Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s delivery work contribute to solving
Macedonia’s development challenges?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         131
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Macedonia?
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Macedonia                                  3.4%                             3.0%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Macedonia                            22.0%                            29.6%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                 42.4%                            22.0%
Don't know                                                                             22.4%                            32.6%
Prefer not to answer                                                                   9.8%                             12.8%




                                                                       132
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Macedonia
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Macedonia?
(Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                                        9.9%                            18.5%
Macedonia’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g.,
                                                                                       20.8%                            10.3%
state, local)*
Offer more innovative financial products                                               32.2%                            30.7%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                                       13.9%                            11.3%
markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government*                                        31.2%                            43.5%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Macedonia’s
                                                                                       11.4%                            11.7%
specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                               11.4%                            13.8%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                 4.5%                             4.4%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                              23.8%                            20.4%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                                       19.8%                            14.7%
financing
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                             4.5%                             4.6%
Work faster                                                                             2.5%                             2.4%
Other                                                                                   1.0%                             2.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Macedonia, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in
Macedonia?*
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
Financial services                                                                     44.7%                            40.9%
Knowledge products                                                                     25.2%                            20.7%
Convening services                                                                     5.8%                             6.0%
None of the above                                                                      3.4%                             6.5%
The combination is appropriate for Macedonia                                           11.7%                            13.2%
Don't know                                                                             9.2%                             12.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Please identify the TWO areas related to economic diversification in Macedonia where greater support from the World Bank
Group would be most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Skills development and innovation                                                      27.1%                            24.9%
Transport infrastructure                                                               35.7%                            33.8%
Investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy                                  33.8%                            35.9%
Business environment reforms to increase country’s
                                                                                       30.4%                            31.3%
competitiveness
Increasing the efficiency of the social protection system                              9.7%                             9.9%
Conducting analysis of the profile of poverty and trends*                              18.8%                            13.5%
Information and communication technology                                               11.1%                            7.9%
Climate change                                                                         4.3%                             4.0%
Public sector reform                                                                   13.5%                            17.6%
Other                                                                                  1.9%                             2.4%
Don’t know                                                                             0.0%                             0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



                                                                       133
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing

How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Macedonia?
(Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Local newspapers                                                                       33.8%                            35.4%
International newspapers                                                               11.1%                            11.8%
Local radio                                                                            4.8%                             3.6%
Local television                                                                       40.6%                            40.3%
International television                                                               13.0%                            13.1%
Periodicals                                                                            16.4%                            20.6%
World Bank Group website                                                               23.7%                            18.8%
Social media                                                                           19.8%                            23.6%
Blogs                                                                                  2.4%                             4.8%
Other*                                                                                 11.1%                            6.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Blogs                                                                                  10.1%                            9.7%
Direct contact with World Bank Group*                                                  30.3%                            19.4%
e-Newsletters                                                                          34.6%                            42.0%
Instant messaging                                                                      7.7%                             7.7%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences*                                     40.4%                            28.5%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                            23.6%                            23.0%
Social media                                                                           19.2%                            23.9%
World Bank Group’s website                                                             16.3%                            22.0%
Other                                                                                  1.9%                             1.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
Yes                                                                                    24.0%                            11.8%
No                                                                                     76.0%                            88.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
Yes                                                                                    45.1%                            15.6%
No                                                                                     54.9%                            84.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
Yes                                                                                    91.6%                            76.3%
No                                                                                     8.4%                             23.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       134
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
Yes                                                                                    99.5%                            98.6%
No                                                                                      .5%                             1.4%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
Yes                                                                                    85.6%                            51.9%
No                                                                                     14.4%                            48.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which do you primarily use?
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
The World Bank Group’s country website                                                 56.1%                            52.3%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                                    43.9%                            47.7%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank website?*
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents                                                                Yes                               No
High speed                                                                             94.4%                            87.2%
Low speed (below 256 Kbps)                                                             5.6%                             12.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       135
The World Bank                                                     Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013




H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Macedonia? (Select all that apply)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
The World Bank (IBRD)*                                                                 79.0%                            7.4%
International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                                               25.5%                            4.3%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                    2.5%                             1.1%
None*                                                                                  10.0%                            89.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Macedonia? (Choose no more than 2)
                                                                               Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the
                                                                                           World Bank Group in your country?

Percentage of Respondents (Responses Combined)                                           Yes                               No
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                                                       14.9%                            61.5%
conversations, etc.)*
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                      22.1%                            20.4%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                                       33.7%                             7.1%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                         55.8%                             9.7%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research,
                                                                                       13.5%                            30.4%
etc.*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       136
The World Bank                                                      Macedonia                                      Country Survey 2013




Appendix E: Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys1
FY06 N=281            FY10 N=240            FY14 N=208

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) ^Significantly different between FY06 and FY14 surveys.




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Macedonia?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
^Significantly different between FY06 and FY14 surveys. *Significantly different between FY10 and FY14 surveys.

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Macedonia, in terms of each of the following?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) ^Significantly different between FY06 and FY14 surveys.




1
    Only those questions with similar response options/scales could be included in these comparisons.



                                                                       137
The World Bank                                                    Macedonia                                       Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Macedonia? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




^Significantly different between FY06 and FY14 surveys. *Significantly different between FY10 and FY14 surveys.

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Macedonia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




^Significantly different between FY06 and FY14 surveys. *Significantly different between FY10 and FY14 surveys.



                                                                     138
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                          Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
In Macedonia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




^Significantly different between FY06 and FY14 surveys.

G. Communication and Information Sharing
Do you have access to the Internet?
Percentage of Respondents                                               FY06                FY10               FY14
Yes                                                                       -                99.5%               99.5%
No                                                                        -                 .5%                 .5%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
Percentage of Respondents                                               FY06                FY10               FY14
Yes                                                                     84.6%              80.3%               85.6%
No                                                                      15.4%              19.7%               14.4%

Which do you primarily use?
Percentage of Respondents                                               FY06                FY10               FY14
The World Bank Group’s country website                                  55.5%              55.5%               56.1%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                     44.5%              44.5%               43.9%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between FY10 and FY14 surveys.




                                                              139
The World Bank                                                                        Macedonia                                                                      Country Survey 2013



Appendix F: Responses to Sector Specific Questions by Specialization

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Macedonia? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




                                                                                         140
The World Bank                                                                          Macedonia                                                                        Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Macedonia? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                                            141
The World Bank                                                                                    Macedonia                                                 Country Survey 2013



Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank




 Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean. *Mean ratings only represent Collaborators (those who indicated “Yes? to H3).
                                                                                                     142
The World Bank                                         Macedonia     Country Survey 2013



Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                         143
The World Bank                                      Macedonia                                    Country Survey 2013



Appendix I: Macedonia FY 2013 Questionnaire




                        World Bank Group Country Survey FY14 – Macedonia

The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Macedonia or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The
following survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Macedonia, greater insight into how the
Bank’s work is perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and
to develop more effective strategies that support development in Macedonia.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING MACEDONIA

 A1. In general would you say that Macedonia is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                      144
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                             Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Macedonia.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
 Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                            14       Health
       assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)        15       Education
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public      16       Poverty reduction
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4    EU integration                                          17       Energy
                                                                        Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation) and
  5    Gender equity                                           18
                                                                        green growth
       Business environment and private sector
  6                                                            19       Agricultural development
       development
  7    Foreign direct investment                               20       Trade and exports
  8    Water and sanitation                                    21       Economic growth
  9    Anti corruption                                         22       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10    Job creation/employment                                 23       Regulatory framework
 11    Rural development                                       24       Disaster management
 12    Environmental sustainability
                                                               25       Information and communications technology
 13    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)


 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                                    13       Anti corruption
                                                                        Business environment and private sector
  2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                  14
                                                                        development
  3    Economic growth                                         15       Foreign direct investment
       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation) and
  4                                                            16       Education
       green growth
  5    EU integration                                          17       Energy
                                                                        Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  6    Gender equity                                           18       effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                        expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  7    Rural development                                       19       Environmental sustainability
  8    Regulatory framework                                    20       Disaster management
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  9                                                            21       Health
       assistance)
 10    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                 22       Agricultural development
 11    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)        23       Job creation/employment
 12    Information and communications technology               24       Trade and exports




                                                              145
The World Bank                                               Macedonia                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy                                             13      Information and communications technology
 2    Gender equity                                      14      Regulatory framework
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             15      Trade and exports
                                                                 Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 4                                                       16      effectiveness, public financial management, public
      social assistance)
                                                                 expenditure, fiscal system reform)
                                                                 Business environment and private sector
 5    EU integration                                     17
                                                                 development
      Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6                                                       18      Job creation/employment
      and green growth
 7    Anti corruption                                    19      Agricultural development
 8    Disaster management                                20      Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 9    Rural development                                  21      Environmental sustainability
 10   Foreign direct investment                          22      Health
 11   Water and sanitation
                                                         23      Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 12   Education


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following
 TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Better employment opportunities for young people
  2    Better employment opportunities for women
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  6    Greater access to economic opportunities for ethnic minorities
  7    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  8    A growing middle class
  9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
 10    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 11    Consistent economic growth
 12    More reliable social safety net
 13    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 14    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 15    Better quality public services
 16    Other (please specify):_____________________________________




                                                               146
The World Bank                                               Macedonia                                                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Macedonia?
          1             2        3       4       5       6           7            8           9                10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                      Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Macedonia.
          1             2    3       4       5       6   7        8         9                  10                   

 Not effective at all                                                                       Very effective     Don't know



 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Macedonia solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2    3       4       5       6   7        8         9                  10                   
                                                                                      To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                           Don't know
                                                                                                   degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in Macedonia, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
 resources in Macedonia? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                              14       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
      assistance)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 2    effectiveness, public financial management, public        15       Health
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)          16       Education
                                                                         Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation) and
 4    Poverty reduction                                         17
                                                                         green growth
 5    EU integration                                            18       Agricultural development
 6    Gender equity                                             19       Trade and exports
      Business environment and private sector
 7                                                              20       Economic growth
      development
 8    Rural development                                         21       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 9    Foreign direct investment                                 22       Regulatory framework
 10   Water and sanitation                                      23       Anti corruption
 11   Energy                                                    24       Information and communications technology
 12   Job creation/employment
                                                                25       Disaster management
 13   Environmental sustainability




                                                               147
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                              Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Macedonia?
                                                                         Greatest Value           Second Greatest Value
                                                                 (Choose only ONE)                (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/Facilitating                                                                               
 2     Data                                                                                                 
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                     
 4     Financial resources                                                                                  
       Capacity development of staff at state institutions
 5                                                                                                          
       (cadaster, social services, etc.)
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                 
       Mobilizing third party financial resources (e.g.,
 7     financial markets, commercial lenders, private sector                                                
       investors)
 8     Coordination with development partners                                                               
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 9                                                                                                          
       knowledge sharing)
 10    Other (please specify): _____________________                                                        


 How effectively do the World Bank Group’s activities below support Macedonia’s efforts to achieve
 development results?
                                                                 Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                       effective   know
  B6    Convening/Facilitating                                       1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  B7    Data                                                         1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  B8    Policy advice, studies, analyses                             1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  B9    Financial resources                                          1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 B10    Technical assistance                                         1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Mobilizing third party financial resources (e.g.,
 B11    financial markets, commercial lenders, private               1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        sector investors)
 B12    Coordination with development partners                       1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 B13                                                                 1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        knowledge sharing)

 The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Macedonia. To
 what degree would Macedonia benefit, if capacity building were to support...?
                                                                 To no                                     To a very
                                                                                                                          Don't
                                                                 degree                                   significant
                                                                                                                          know
                                                                 at all                                      degree
        Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
 B14    media) to help them more effectively engage and              1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        participate in development efforts
        The public sector, related to implementation of
 B15                                                                 1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        specific development projects on the ground
        The public sector, related to changing institutions
 B16                                                                 1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        (organizations or sociopolitical conditions)




                                                               148
The World Bank                                               Macedonia                                              Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
 each of the following areas in Macedonia? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                   Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                   at all                                      effective   know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B17                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B18                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B19                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
         achieve development goals)

 When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Macedonia to help ensure better
 development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in
 the following aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                   Not important                               Very        Don't
                                                                   at all                                  important       know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B20                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B21                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B22                                                                 1    2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
         achieve development goals)

 B23. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Staff too inaccessible
 2     Not exploring alternative policy options
 3     Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Macedonia
 4     Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5     Arrogant in its approach
 6     Not aligned with country priorities
 7     The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8     World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 9     Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 10    Too influenced by developed countries
 11    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 12    World Bank Group’s processes too slow
 13    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 14    Not aligned with other development partners’ work
 15    Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 16    Not client focused
 17    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 18    Don’t know




                                                               149
The World Bank                                               Macedonia                                             Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B24. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in promoting
 economic development in Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Capacity development of staff at state institutions (cadaster, social services, etc.)
 2     Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 3     Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 4     Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 5     Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6     Grant funding
 7     Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8     Don’t know


 B25. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which
 TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 2     Community of development partners
 3     Media
 4     NGOs
 5     Local Government
 6     Private sector
 7     Parliament
 8     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 9     Beneficiaries
 10    Foundations
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    Other (please specify): __________________________
 13    Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
 Macedonia?
                                                                   Strongly                                    Strongly   Don't
                                                                   disagree                                       agree   know
         Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B26                                                                  1   2    3      4   5    6   7   8   9       10      
         relevant role in development in Macedonia
         The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B27                                                                  1   2    3      4   5    6   7   8   9       10      
         consider the development priorities for Macedonia
         The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B28                                                                  1   2    3      4   5    6   7   8   9       10      
         strategies that are realistic for Macedonia
         The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B29                                                                  1   2    3      4   5    6   7   8   9       10      
         stakeholders in Macedonia with respect




                                                                150
The World Bank                                               Macedonia                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Macedonia in terms of
 each of the following?
                                                                   To no                                    To a very
                                                                                                                         Don't
                                                                   degree at                               significant
                                                                                                                         know
                                                                   all                                        degree
 B30     Responsiveness                                               1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
 B31                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         products and services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B32                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         circumstances)
 B33     Being inclusive                                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       

 B34     Openness (sharing data and other information)                1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       

 B35     Staff accessibility                                          1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       

 B36     Straightforwardness and honesty                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B37     Group who are making decisions important to my               1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         work
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B38                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B39     Collaboration with the Government                            1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       

 B40     Collaboration with other development partners                1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B41                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         the ground
 B42     Being a long-term partner                                    1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       



 B43. To be a more effective development partner in Macedonia, do you believe that the World Bank
 Group should have … ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                     Less local presence       Don't know
                                           presence is adequate


 B44. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 3     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5     Poor coordination with development partners
 6     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7     The Government works inefficiently
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                151
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                     Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Macedonia?
                                                                 Not important                           Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                              important   know
  1    Anti corruption                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  2    Information and communications technology                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  4    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  5    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  6    Regulatory framework                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  7    Poverty reduction                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  8    Gender equity                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
       Business environment and private sector
  9                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
       development
 10    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 11    Water and sanitation                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 12    Trade and exports                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 13    Economic growth                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 14    Energy                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 15    Disaster management                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 16    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 17    Job creation/employment                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 18    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 19    Health                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 20    Rural development                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 21    EU integration                                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 22    Education                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 23                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
       assistance)
       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation) and
 24                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
       green growth
 25    Agricultural development                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      




                                                              152
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                                             Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Macedonia? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the
 sectors listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                      effective   know
  1    Anti corruption                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  2    Information and communications technology                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  4    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  5    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  6    Regulatory framework                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  7    Poverty reduction                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  8    Gender equity                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       Business environment and private sector
  9                                                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       development
 10    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 11    Water and sanitation                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 12    Trade and exports                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 13    Economic growth                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 14    Energy                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 15    Disaster management                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 16    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 17    Job creation/employment                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 18    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 19    Health                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 20    Rural development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 21    EU integration                                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 22    Education                                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 23                                                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       assistance)
       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation) and
 24                                                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       green growth
 25    Agricultural development                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                              153
The World Bank                                                   Macedonia                                                            Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in
 Macedonia? (Select only ONE response)
 1    At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
 2    In the country
 3    Don’t know


 C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
 Macedonia?
         1             2       3       4       5       6           7         8       9                   10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                          To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't know
 all                                                                                             significant degree



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in
 Macedonia?
                                                               Strongly                                                    Strongly      Don't
                                                               disagree                                                       agree      know
       The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
       (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
 C5                                                            1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10         
       Loan, trust funds/grants, Program 4 Result,
       etc.) meet the needs of Macedonia
       The World Bank Group meets Macedonia’s
 C6    needs for knowledge services (e.g., research,           1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10         
       analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold the
 institution accountable for achieving results in Macedonia?
             1             2       3       4       5       6           7         8       9                    10                      
                                                                                                   To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                           Don't know
                                                                                                                degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                       154
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you
 do?
 1    Weekly
 2    Monthly
 3    A few times a year
 4    Rarely
 5    Never


 D2. When thinking about the development challenges in Macedonia, where do you believe it would be
 most valuable for the World Bank Group to focus its knowledge work and activities in the next few
 years? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                            14   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
      assistance)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 2    effectiveness, public financial management, public      15   Health
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)        16   Education
                                                                   Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation) and
 4    Poverty reduction                                       17
                                                                   green growth
 5    EU integration                                          18   Agricultural development
 6    Gender equity                                           19   Trade and exports
      Business environment and private sector
 7                                                            20   Economic growth
      development
 8    Rural development                                       21   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 9    Foreign direct investment                               22   Regulatory framework
 10   Water and sanitation                                    23   Anti corruption
 11   Energy                                                  24   Information and communications technology
 12   Job creation/employment
                                                              25   Disaster management
 13   Environmental sustainability




                                                             155
The World Bank                                                 Macedonia                                                        Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 In Macedonia, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and
 activities:
                                                             To no                                                       To a very
                                                                                                                                      Don't
                                                             degree at                                                  significant
                                                                                                                                      know
                                                             all                                                           degree
  D3     Are timely                                           1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D4                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Macedonia’s development
  D5                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         priorities
  D6     Lead to practical solutions                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D7                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D8                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         good practices
  D9     Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                 1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

 D10     Are adequately disseminated                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

 D11     Are translated enough into local language            1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are adaptable to Macedonia’s specific
 D12     development challenges and country                   1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         circumstances


 D13. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3   4     5        6            7           8       9                  10                        
 Not significant at all                                                                              Very significant       Don't know



 D14. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities?
         1                2       3    4        5        6            7           8       9               10                       
 Very low                                                                                         Very high technical
                                                                                                                            Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                            quality




                                                                      156
The World Bank                                           Macedonia                                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent does each of the following aspect of the World Bank Group’s delivery work contribute
 to solving Macedonia’s development challenges?
                                                         To no                                To a very
                                                                                                            Don't
                                                         degree at                           significant
                                                                                                            know
                                                         all                                    degree
         Conceptualization (understanding and
  E1                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         framing the problem)
         Design (appraising and planning the
  E2                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         solutions)
         Implementation (Executing, carrying out,
  E3     monitoring and making appropriate               1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         adjustments)
  E4     Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)   1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      


 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                         Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                         disagree                                   agree   know
         The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E5                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         promptly
         The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E6     and evaluates the projects and programs it      1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         supports
         The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E7                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         reviews are done in a timely fashion
         The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
  E8                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         requirements are reasonable
         The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
  E9                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         lending are reasonable
         The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
 E10                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         in Macedonia
         Working with the World Bank Group
 E11                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         increases Macedonia’s institutional capacity
         The World Bank Group ensures consistency
 E12                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         and continuity through staff changes
         Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
         financial management, etc.) are adequate,
 E13                                                     1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
         of them
         The World Bank Group provides effective
 E14     implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
         projects)

 E15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Macedonia?
 (Select only one response)
 1     The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Macedonia
 2     The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Macedonia
 3     The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
 4     Don’t know
 5     Prefer not to answer




                                                             157
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                                        Country Survey 2013



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN MACEDONIA
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Macedonia’s economy
  2    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., state, local)
  3    Offer more innovative financial products
  4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
  5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
  6    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Macedonia’s specific challenges
  7    Offer more innovative knowledge services
  8    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
  9    Increase the level of capacity development in the country
 10    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 11    Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 12    Work faster
 13    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Macedonia,
 and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
 World Bank Group should offer more of in Macedonia? (Select only ONE response)
  1    Financial services
  2    Knowledge products
  3    Convening services
  4    None of the above
  5    The combination is appropriate for Macedonia
  6    Don’t know


 F3. Please identify TWO areas related to economic diversification in Macedonia where greater support
 from the World Bank Group would be most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Skills development and innovation
  2    Transport infrastructure
  3    Investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy
  4    Business environment reforms to increase country’s competitiveness
  5    Increasing the efficiency of the social protection system
  6    Conducting analysis of the profile of poverty and trends
  7    Information and communication technology
  8    Climate change
  9    Public sector reform
 10    Other (please specify): _________________________________________________
 11    Don’t know




                                                              158
The World Bank                                             Macedonia                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    Local television
 5    International television
 6    Periodicals
 7    World Bank Group web site
 8    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 9    Blogs
 10   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?                    (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1    Blogs
 2    Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials
 7    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 8    World Bank Group’s website
 9    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 G3                                                                                                    Yes        No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G4                                                                                                    Yes        No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                       Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                             Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                          Yes        No




                                                                159
The World Bank                                            Macedonia                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use? (Select only ONE response)
 1     The World Bank Group’s country website (www.worldbank.org.mk)
 2     The World Bank Group’s main website (www.worldbank.org)


 G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 1     High speed
 2     Low speed (below 256 Kbps)


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                      Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                      disagree                              agree   know
         I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than
 G10                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         I did a few years ago
         I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G11     navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank         1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         Group website)
         I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 G12     websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World       1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         Bank Group website)
         The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G13     Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) are valuable sources     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         of information about the institution
         When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G14     know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach      1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         them, etc.)
         The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             160
The World Bank                                           Macedonia                                       Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Youth organizations
 21   Judiciary Branch
 22   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security    10    Law and justice / regulatory framework
                                                              Natural resource management / environmental
 2    Climate change / disaster management              11
                                                              sustainability
                                                              Private sector development / foreign direct
 3    Education                                         12
                                                              investment
                                                              Public sector governance / public financial
 4    Energy                                            13
                                                              management / anti corruption
 5    Financial markets / banking                       14    Social protection
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity           15    Transport
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                      16    Urban development
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology         17    Water and sanitation
 9    Job creation/employment                           18    Other (please specify): _______________________




                                                             161
The World Bank                                              Macedonia                       Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Macedonia?
 (Select all that apply)
 1    The World Bank (IBRD/IDA) 
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    None


 H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in
 Macedonia? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H6. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Skopje
 2    Outside Skopje




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               162
