                              96136




       Tanzania
  The World Bank Group
Country Opinion Survey FY14
      Report of Findings
         July 2014
The World Bank Group                       Tanzania                    Country Opinion Survey 2014



Acknowledgements
The Tanzania Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of
the World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group
(PORG) team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica
Cameron, Svetlana Markova, Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data
support. The report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal
(Director, ECRGP). PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Tanzania country
team and the local fielding agency Ipsos Synovate. In particular, PORG is grateful to Monthe
Bienvenu Biyoudi (Senior Operations Officer) and Loy Nabeta (Communications Officer) for
their ongoing support throughout the Country Opinion Survey process.




                                              1
The World Bank Group                                  Tanzania                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5

         IV. General Issues Facing Tanzania .................................................11

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................16

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ......................................25

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................32

       VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................39

         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania ..............48

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................54

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................62




                                                          2
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
    Assist the World Bank Group in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
       Tanzania perceive the World Bank Group;
    Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Tanzania regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Tanzania;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank Group in Tanzania;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and results,
              project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
              communication and information sharing in Tanzania; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank Group’s future role in Tanzania.
    Use data to help inform Tanzania country team’s strategy.


II. Methodology
From March to May 2014, 318 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Tanzania were invited
to provide their opinions on the WBG’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime
Minister; the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry,
ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World
Bank Group-supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of a project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral
agencies; private sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks;
NGOs; community-based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government
institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; and the
judiciary branch. A total of 277 stakeholders participated in the survey (87% response rate).
Respondents received the questionnaire via courier or post, and returned it accordingly.
Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Tanzania; their overall attitudes toward the
WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities; working
with the WBG; the WBG’s future role in Tanzania; and the WBG’s communication and
information sharing in Tanzania. In addition, every country that engages in the Country Survey
must include specific indicator questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual
Corporate Scorecard. These questions are identified throughout the survey report.
In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 348 respondents (43% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY ’11. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were
possible. It should be noted that respondents’ stakeholder group distributions were fairly similar
between FY ’11 and FY ’14; however, the FY ’14 country survey did not include respondents
from local government, trade unions, or the judiciary whereas the FY ’11 country survey did not
include consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and the category of employees of
ministries also included regional administrators. The geographic location distribution is also
fairly similar. Detailed comparisons can be found in the Appendix (see page 143).




                                                 3
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
A. General Issues Facing Tanzania: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Tanzania is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the most important development
   priorities, which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty, which areas would
   contribute most to generating economic growth, and what would achieve “shared prosperity?.
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their
   familiarity with the WBG, its effectiveness in Tanzania, WBG staff preparedness, the
   effectiveness of its activities, to what extent it should provide capacity building support to
   certain groups, the importance and effectiveness of the WBG’s current capacity building
   work, their agreement with various statements regarding the WBG’s work, and the extent to
   which it is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the
   sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the WBG to focus its resources, the
   WBG’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses, its most effective instruments, with which
   stakeholder groups the WBG should collaborate more, if the WBG should have more or less
   of a local presence in Tanzania, and to what they attributed slowed or failed reform efforts.
C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to
   which the WBG’s work helps achieve development results in Tanzania, the extent to which
   the WBG meets Tanzania’s needs for knowledge services and financial instruments, the
   extent to which the WBG’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold it accountable for achieving
   results, and the importance of the WBG’s involvement and the WBG’s level of effectiveness
   across thirty-one development areas. Respondents were also asked to indicate if WBG
   decisions regarding its Tanzania program were made primarily in country or at Headquarters.
D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult WBG knowledge work and to rate the quality of the
   WBG’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant of a contribution it makes
   to development results and its technical quality.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which various
   aspects of the WBG’s delivery work contribute to solving Tanzania’s development
   challenges and their agreement with a series of statements regarding working with the WBG.
   Respondents were asked to indicate if the WBG operates with too much risk.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania: Respondents were asked to indicate
   what the WBG should do to make itself of greater value in Tanzania, which of its services the
   WBG should offer more of in Tanzania, and whether the WBG exerts too much or too little
   pressure on the Government. Respondents were also asked to indicate the extent to which the
   WBG should have greater visibility and ensure stronger reform efforts are tied to its lending.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the WBG, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   WBG’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the WBG’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the WBG, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank Group as a result of the WBG’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked to evaluate the WBG’s information accessibility and
   responsiveness to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they currently collaborate with the WBG, with which WBG agencies
   they work, their exposure to the WBG in Tanzania, and their geographic location.


                                                4
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
       For further analyses, the few respondents from the office of Minister were combined with
        the respondents from the office of the President, the few consultants on WBG-supported
        projects were combined with respondents from PMUs, respondents from multilateral
        agencies were combined with those from bilateral agencies, respondents from the
        financial sector/private banks were combined with those from the private sector,
        respondents from CBOs and private foundations were combined with those from NGOs,
        and the few respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian, local government, and trade
        unions were included in the “Other? category.




                                                5
The World Bank Group                        Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Key comparisons across respondents’ specializations can be found in the Appendix (see
        page 147).




                                               6
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The majority of respondents were from the Dar es Salaam region. The few respondents
        from Zanzibar, other urban areas, and rural areas were combined into one “Other Areas?
        category for all further analyses. Only significant geographic location differences in
        ratings of indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this report. All geographic
        locations comparisons can be found in the Appendix (see page 109).




                                                 7
The World Bank Group                        Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the World Bank Group

       Differences in responding, based on collaboration with the World Bank Group in
        Tanzania, can be found in the Appendix (see page 126).




                                               8
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Exposure to the World Bank Group

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on exposure to the World Bank
        Group in Tanzania, can be found in the Appendix (see page 155). Please note that where
        these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall views of the
        WBG, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                                9
The World Bank Group                           Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of familiarity
        with the World Bank Group in Tanzania compared to respondents from the FY ’11
        country survey (6.6).
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies had the highest levels of familiarity with
        the World Bank Group in Tanzania whereas respondents from the media had significantly
        lower levels of familiarity.
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group were significantly,
        strongly correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in
        Tanzania, and significantly, moderately correlated with their perceptions of the WBG’s
        work achieving development results in Tanzania and the WBG’s relevance to
        development in Tanzania.




                                                 10
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Tanzania

Tanzania Heading in the Right Direction

       Although the majority of respondents across all stakeholder groups indicate that Tanzania
        is headed in the right direction, employees of ministries and respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies and the media were significantly more likely to do so
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG in Tanzania were significantly more likely
        to indicate that Tanzania is headed in the right direction compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG, who were more likely to indicate that they are not sure
        whether Tanzania was headed in the right or wrong direction (however, the majority of
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG still indicated that Tanzania is headed
        in the right direction).




                                                11
The World Bank Group           Tanzania          Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Development Priority




                                 12
The World Bank Group                       Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction

   Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs were significantly more likely to indicate
    that natural resources management would contribute most to poverty reduction compared to
    respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                              13
The World Bank Group               Tanzania      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth




                                     14
The World Bank Group            Tanzania         Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity?




                                  15
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.

Focusing World Bank Group Resources
       Although response options were different in the FY 11 Country survey, it is worth noting
        that respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that it would be most productive
        for the Bank to focus most of its resources on improving basic infrastructure for average
        Tanzanians (48%), improving government effectiveness/governance and public financial
        management (47%), and improving access to and quality of education (40%).




                                                16
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from this year’s country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness in Tanzania compared to respondents from the FY ‘11 country
        survey (6.5).
       Employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs, and
        respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness in Tanzania whereas respondents from other organizations gave
        significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries and respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the WBG’s
        work achieves development results in Tanzania whereas respondents from the private
        sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, and independent
        government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness in Tanzania and for the extent to which the WBG’s work achieves
        development results in Tanzania compared to respondents who do not collaborate with
        the WBG.
       Respondents across geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for the extent to
        which the WBG’s work achieves development results in Tanzania and for the WBG’s
        effectiveness in Tanzania.




                                                 17
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister gave the highest ratings for the
        extent to which the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Tanzania solve its
        most complicated development challenges whereas respondents from independent
        government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        extent to which the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Tanzania solve its
        most complicated development challenges compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for the extent to
        which the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Tanzania solve its most
        complicated development challenges.




                                                 18
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions

       Employees of ministries gave the highest ratings across all of the country survey
        indicator questions whereas respondents from the media gave significantly lower ratings.
        Responses for individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be found in the
        Appendix (see page 156).




                                               19
The World Bank Group             Tanzania        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value




                                   20
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
WBG Activities: Effectiveness
       Employees of ministries and respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the
        highest ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s financial resources whereas
        respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and independent government
        institutions gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries and respondents
        from the media and other organizations gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of
        the WBG’s technical assistance whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries and respondents
        from other organizations gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s
        mobilizing third party financial resources whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries and respondents
        from the office of the President/Minister gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of
        the WBG’s donor coordination whereas respondents from academia gave significantly
        lower ratings. Respondents from the media gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness
        of the WBG’s linkage to non-Bank expertise whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/
        private foundations gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s convening/facilitating, policy advice/studies/analyses,
        financial resources, and donor coordination compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                21
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Capacity Building

       Employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents
        from other organizations gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at and for
        the importance of the WBG being involved project implementation (or other
        organizational strengthening) whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness at project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               22
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Greatest Weakness
   Respondents from the media were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s
    greatest weakness is that it does not collaborate enough with non-state actors compared to
    respondents from other stakeholder groups.
   Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that
    the WBG’s greatest weaknessess are that its processes are too complex and not adequately
    sensitive to political/social realities whereas respondents who do not collaborate with the
    WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that its greatest weaknesses are not enough
    public disclosure of its work and being too influenced by developed countries.




                                               23
The World Bank Group                           Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts

       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they attributed failed or slow reform efforts to a lack of/inadequate levels of capacity
        in Government compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups. Respondents
        from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more likely to indicate that they
        attributed failed or slow reform efforts to political pressures and obstacles compared to
        respondents from other stakeholder groups.

       Respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to
        indicate that they attribute failed or slow reform efforts to there not being an adequate
        level of citizen/civil society participation compared to respondents who collaborate with
        the WBG.




                                                 24
The World Bank Group           Tanzania     Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                 25
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among six of these
        thirty-one areas of development. Those areas with significant stakeholder group
        differences were:
             Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the
              importance of the WBG being involved in “Anti-corruption? whereas respondents
              from the office of the President/Minister and employees of ministries gave
              significantly lower importance ratings.
             Respondents from other organizations gave the highest ratings for the importance
              of the WBG being involved in “Information and communications technology?
              whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister and the private
              sector/financial sector/private banks gave significantly lower importance ratings.
             Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and the media gave the highest
              ratings for the importance of the WBG being involved in “Regulatory framework?
              whereas respondents from academia gave significantly lower importance ratings.
             Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs gave the highest ratings for the
              importance of the WBG being involved in “Communicable/non-communicable
              diseases? whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave
              significantly lower importance ratings.
             Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the
              importance of the WBG being involved in “Economic growth? whereas
              respondents from the office of the President/Minister, NGOs/CBOs/private
              foundations, and independent government institutions gave significantly lower
              importance ratings.
             Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the
              importance of the WBG being involved in “Financial markets? whereas
              respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and academia gave
              significantly lower importance ratings.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings of
        importance for “Foreign direct investment? and “Financial markets?, but significantly
        lower importance ratings for “Food security? compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                26
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had lower ratings of importance across all
        areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey. Those
        differences that reached statistical significance are noted in the graph.




                                                27
The World Bank Group              Tanzania         Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas




                                    28
The World Bank Group                           Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Please note the complete breakdown of respondents’ effectiveness ratings for the WBG’s
        work in these development areas can be found in the Appendix. In addition to the
        aggregate mean ratings for each area, respondents who indicated that they “Don’t Know?
        are reported in Appendix A (see page 65), suggesting that primarily informed
        stakeholders responded to these questions. A complete breakdown by stakeholder groups
        can be found in Appendix B (see page 83), by geographic locations in Appendix C (see
        page 109), by WBG-collaborators in Appendix D (see page 126), and by respondents’
        specializations/sectors in Appendix F (see page 147).

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among fourteen of these
        thirty-one areas of development. For the most part, respondents from the media and other
        organizations tended to give the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness across these
        areas whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations tended to give
        significantly lower effectiveness ratings. Those areas with statistically similar stakeholder
        group ratings were:
             “Anti-corruption?;                               “Disaster management?;
             “Information and                                 “Public sector
                communications technology?;                       governance/reform?;
             “Crime and violence?;                            “Financial markets?;
             “Law and justice?;                               “Equality of opportunity?;
             “Poverty reduction?;                             “Health?;
             “Domestic private sector                         “Rural development?; and
                development?;                                  “Food security?.
             “Energy?;

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave higher ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness across all areas compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the
        WBG, significantly so for:
             “Crime and violence?;                          “Disaster management?;
             “Regulatory framework?;                        “Public sector
             “Poverty reduction?;                              governance/reform?;
             “Gender equity?;                               “Job creation/employment?;
             “Domestic private sector                       “Financial markets?;
                development?;                                “Equality of opportunity?;
             “Foreign direct investment?;                   “Rural development?; and
             “Trade and exports?;                           “Global/regional integration?.
             “Economic growth?;




                                                 29
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave higher ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness across all areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’11
        country survey. Those differences that reached statistical significance are noted in
        the graph.




                                               30
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Tanzania, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-one specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results increase.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Tanzania. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The WBG’s effectiveness at public sector governance/reform; and
             The WBG’s effectiveness at social protection.

       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Tanzania, suggesting that ratings of
        effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
        help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
        analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at education;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at poverty reduction;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at agricultural development; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at environmental sustainability.




                                                 31
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Tanzania

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the WBG is aligned with their development priorities and that the WBG supports
        realistic programs for Tanzania compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country
        survey.
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies had the highest levels of agreement that
        the WBG plays a relevant role in development and that the WBG is aligned with their
        development priorities whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement. Employees of ministries and
        respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies had the highest levels of agreement that
        the WBG supports realistic programs and strategies for Tanzania whereas respondents
        from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations,
        and the media had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for all three
        of these aspects of the WBG’s work in Tanzania compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                32
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that “The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Tanzania with respect?
        and that “The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly? compared to respondents
        from the FY ’11 country survey (6.5 and 6.0, respectively).




                                                33
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions (continued)

       There were several instances in which there were significant stakeholder group differnces
        in their levels of agreement regarding these aspects of how the WBG operates in
        Tanzania:
             Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies had the highest levels of
                 agreement that “The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in
                 Tanzania with respect? whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
                 foundations had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Employees of ministries and consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs had
                 the highest levels of agreement that “The World Bank Group disburses funds
                 promptly? whereas respondents from independent government institutions had
                 significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from academia
                 and other organizations had the highest levels of agreement that “The World Bank
                 Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports?
                 whereas respondents from the office of the President/Minister, the private
                 sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, and
                 independent government institutions had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs, and
                 respondents from other organizations had the highest levels of agreement that
                 “The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable? whereas
                 respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media, and independent
                 government institutions had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs had the highest levels of
                 agreement that “The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Tanzania?
                 whereas respondents from the media had significantly lower levels of agreement.
             Employees of ministries had the highest levels of agreement that “Working with
                 the World Bank Group increases Tanzania’s institutional capacity? whereas
                 respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, the private sector/financial
                 sector/private banks, and NGOs/CBOs/private foundations had significantly lower
                 levels of agreement.
             Employees of ministries and consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs had
                 the highest levels of agreement that “The World Bank Group provides effective
                 implementation support? whereas respondents from private sector/financial
                 sector/private banks and NGOs/CBOs/private foundations had significantly lower
                 levels of agreement.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        across all of these aspects of how the WBG operates in Tanzania compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.



                                               34
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner
       Respondents from this year’s country survey gave statistically similar ratings for the
        WBG’s “Staff accessibility? and “Straightforwardness and honesty? compared to
        respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (6.8 and 6.8, respectively).
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among six of these
        aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner. For the most part,
        employees of ministries and consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs tended to
        have the highest ratings across these aspects whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/
        private foundations tended to have significantly lower ratings. Those aspects with
        significant differences were: “Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)?,
        “Being inclusive?, “Staff accessibility?, “Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
        Group who are making decisions important to my work?, “Collaboration with groups
        outside of the Government?, and “Being a long-term partner?.




                                                35
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       Respondents who indicated that they collaborated with the WBG gave higher ratings
        across all aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner compared to
        respondents who indicated that they did not collaborate. Those differences that reached
        statistical significance are noted in the graph.




                                                36
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Risk-Taking

       A plurality of employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/
        Minister and independent government institutions indicated that the WBG’s approach is
        appropriate whereas a plurality of consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and
        respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations, academia, and other organizations indicated that the WBG does not take
        enough risk in Tanzania. The majority of respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies
        and a plurality of respondents from the media indicated that they didn’t know.
       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG indicated either that the WBG’s approach
        is appropriate or that the WBG does not take enough risk in Tanzania whereas
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG were more likely to indicate that the
        WBG’s approach is appropriate or that they didn’t know.




                                                37
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Where Decisions are Made

       A plurality of employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs,
        and respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and academia indicated that the
        WBG’s decisions are made at Headquarters whereas a plurality of respondents from the
        office of the President/Minister, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, and
        independent government institutions indicated that the WBG’s decisions are made in
        Tanzania. A plurality of respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, the media, and
        other organizations indicated that they didn’t know.
       Among those respondents who collaborated with the WBG, slightly more indicated that
        decisions were made at Headquarters than in Tanzania whereas a clear plurality of
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG indicated that they didn’t know.




                                                38
The World Bank Group                        Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities

       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from bilateral/
        multilateral agencies reported the most frequent usage of WBG knowledge work and
        activities (more than half indicated weekly/monthly usage) whereas respondents from
        NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and the media reported significantly less frequent usage
        (more than half indicated rarely or never using).
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborated with the WBG reported significantly
        more frequent usage of WBG knowledge work and activities (nearly half indicated
        weekly/monthly usage) compared to respondents who indicated that they did not
        collaborate (more than half indicated rarely or never using).




                                              39
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Tanzania’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the World Bank Group meets Tanzania’s needs for knowledge services compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations had statistically
        similar levels of agreement that the World Bank Group meets Tanzania’s needs for
        knowledge services.




                                                40
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave statistically similar ratings for the extent
        to which the WBG’s knowledge work and activities “Are adaptable to Tanzania’s
        specific development challenges and country circumstances? and “Are source of relevant
        information on global good practices? compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country
        survey (6.7 and 7.1, respectively).
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but two of
        these qualities of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities. For the most part,
        employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents
        from the office of the President/Minister and bilateral/multilateral agencies tended to
        have the highest ratings across these qualities whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/
        private foundations, the media, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, and
        independent government institutions tended to have significantly lower ratings. The two
        qualities with statistically similar stakeholder group ratings were “Are accessible? and
        “Are source of relevant information on global good practices?.




                                                 41
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Minister had
        the highest ratings regarding the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s
        knowledge work whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and
        independent government institutions had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher ratings regarding
        the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across geographic locations had statistically similar ratings regarding the
        significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work.




                                                42
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher ratings regarding
        the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across stakeholder groups and geographic locations had statistically similar
        ratings regarding the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities.




                                                43
The World Bank Group         Tanzania           Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Most Effective Instruments




                               44
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Tanzania’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and employees of ministries had the
        highest levels of agreement that the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the
        needs of Tanzania whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private
        bank, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media, and independent government
        institutions had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Tanzania compared
        to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across geographic locations had statistically similar levels of agreement that
        the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Tanzania.




                                                45
The World Bank Group                        Tanzania                    Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Internal Evaluation Mechanisms

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher ratings that the
        World Bank Group’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold it accountable for achieving
        results compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                              46
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Delivery Work

       Employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs, and
        respondents from other organizations gave the highest ratings that the WBG’s delivery
        work contributes to evaluation whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations, the private sector/financial sector/private banks, and independent
        government institutions gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries gave
        the highest ratings that the WBG’s delivery work contributes to design whereas
        respondents from independent government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.
        Respondents from other organizations gave the highest ratings that the WBG’s delivery
        work contributes to implementation whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations gave significantly lower ratings. Employees of ministries and respondents
        from bilateral/ multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings that the WBG’s delivery
        work contributes to conceptualization whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations and independent government institutions gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings that the
        WBG’s delivery work contributes to evaluation, design, implementation, and
        conceptualization compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               47
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
       Respondents from academia and other organizations were the most likely to indicate that
        the WBG should collaborate more effectively with Government clients whereas
        respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and the media were significantly less
        likely. Respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations were the most likely to
        indicate that the WBG should reach out more to groups outside of Government whereas
        respondents from the office of the President/Minister and consultants on WBG-supported
        projects/PMUs were significantly less likely. Respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private
        foundations, academia, and other organizations were significantly less likely to indicate
        that the WBG should improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                48
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (cont.)

Capacity Building

       Employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs, and
        respondents from other organizations gave the highest ratings for the extent to which
        Tanzania would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the public sector, related
        to implementation of specific development projects, whereas respondents from
        NGOs/CBOs/private foundations gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies and the private sector/financial sector/private banks gave
        the highest ratings for the extent to which Tanzania would benefit from WBG capacity
        building support to the public sector, related to changing institutions, whereas
        respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media, and academia gave
        significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        extent to which Tanzania would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the
        public sector, related to implementation of specific development projects, and the public
        sector, related to changing institutions, compared to respondents who do not collaborate
        with the WBG.




                                                49
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (cont.)

Local Presence in Tanzania

       Respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to
        indicate that to be a more effective development partner to Tanzania, the WBG should
        have more local presence (80%) compared to respondents who collaborate with the
        WBG, who still had a majority indicate that the WBG should have more local presence
        (58%), but also a sizeable number who indicated that the current level of local presence
        in adequate (34%).




                                                50
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (cont.)

Focusing Services

       A majority of respondents from the office of the President/Minister and employees of
        ministries indicated that the WBG should offer more financial services in Tanzania.
        Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from bilateral/
        multilateral agencies and academia indicated that the combination of services is
        appropriate. Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs/
        CBOs/private foundations, the media, independent government institutions, and other
        organizations were split between indicating that the WBG should offer more financial
        services, knowledge products, and that the combination of services is appropriate.




                                               51
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (cont.)
Collaborating with Stakeholders in Tanzania
   Respondents from academia were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should
    collaborate more with academia/research institutes/think tanks, whereas employees of
    ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs, and respondents from the office
    of the President/Minister and bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more likely to
    indicate that the WBG should collaborate more with donor communities, respondents from
    the media were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should collaborate more
    with the media, respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and other organizations
    were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should collaborate more with NGOs,
    and respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, bilateral/multilateral
    agencies, and independent government institutions were significantly more likely to indicate
    that the WBG should collaborate more with the private sector, compared to respondents from
    other stakeholder groups.
   Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that
    the WBG should collaborate more with donor communities, local government, and
    Parliament compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were
    significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should collaborate more with the media,
    NGOs, and CBOs.




                                                52
The World Bank Group         Tanzania            Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (cont.)

Reform Efforts




                               53
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       The vast majority of respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that they got
        most of their information about economic and social development issues in Tanzania
        from local newspapers in Kiswahili (70%).
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and academia were significantly more
        likely to indicate that they got most of their information from the Internet compared to
        respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they got most of their information from the Internet compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG, who were significantly more likely to utilize local
        television.




                                                54
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks were the most likely to
        indicate that they preferred to get their information from e-Newsletters whereas
        respondents from independent government institutions were significantly less likely.




                                                55
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were the most likely to be aware of
        the WBG’s Access to Information Policy whereas respondents from the media and
        academia were significantly less likely.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to be aware
        of the WBG’s Access to Information Policy compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




       Respondents from the office of the President/Minister were significantly more likely to
        have requested information from the WBG in the past year whereas respondents from
        independent government institutions were significantly less likely.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        requested information from the WBG in the past year compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                56
The World Bank Group                        Tanzania                    Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)




       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they consult the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                              57
The World Bank Group                          Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Respondents from this year’s country survey had statistically similar rates of Internet
        access compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        Internet access compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




Website Usage
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher rates of usage of the
        WBG’s website compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.
       Respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media, and academia were
        significantly less likely to have used the WBG’s website compared to respondents from
        other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have used
        the WBG’s website compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 58
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar usage of the WBG’s
        country and main websites compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.
       Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Minister, the
        private sector/financial sector/private banks, NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media,
        and other organizations were significantly more likely to have used the WBG’s country
        website compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




       Respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations were significantly less likely to use
        high speed connections when visiting the WBG’s website compared to respondents from
        other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to use high
        speed connections when visiting the WBG’s website compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                59
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website/Social Media Evaluation

       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and independent government institutions
        had significantly higher levels of agreement that they find the information on the WBG’s
        websites useful whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations and the
        media had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they find the WBG’s websites easy to navigate and that they find the information on
        the websites useful compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               60
The World Bank Group                         Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of agreement
        that the WBG is responsive to their information requests compared to respondents from
        the FY ’11 country survey.
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from academia had
        significantly higher levels of agreement that the WBG is responsive to their information
        requests whereas respondents from NGOs/CBOs/private foundations, the media, and
        other organizations had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it and that the
        WBG is responsive to their information requests compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                61
The World Bank Group                               Tanzania                          Country Opinion Survey 2014



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 63

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 81

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations........... 107

          D. Responses to All Questions among WBG Collaborators
             and Non-Collaborators ............................................................... 124

          E. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ................... 141

          F. Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’
             Specializations/Sectors ............................................................... 145

          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ....... 153

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 154

          I. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2014 Tanzania Questionnaire .................................................... 155


                                                 TANZANIA




                                                      62
The World Bank Group                                Tanzania                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=277)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Tanzania is headed in...?                                  (N=271)
The right direction                                                                          76.8%
The wrong direction                                                                          11.4%
Not sure                                                                                     11.8%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Tanzania.
   Please identify which of the following you consider the most important         Percentage of Respondents
   development priorities in Tanzania. (Choose no more than THREE)                (Responses Combined; N=272)
Education                                                                                    52.9%
Transport                                                                                    30.9%
Energy                                                                                       27.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                                              19.1%
Agricultural development                                                                     18.4%
Poverty reduction                                                                            16.2%
Economic growth                                                                              15.1%
Health                                                                                       12.5%
Natural resource management                                                                  12.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                              10.7%
Gender equity                                                                                9.9%
Job creation/employment                                                                      9.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                          8.5%
Rural development                                                                            7.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                         5.9%
Law and justice                                                                              4.8%
Food security                                                                                4.4%
Urban development                                                                            3.3%
Crime and violence                                                                           3.3%
Global/regional integration                                                                  2.9%
Trade and exports                                                                            2.9%
Information and communications technology                                                    2.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                                    2.6%
Climate change                                                                               2.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                                 1.8%
Regulatory framework                                                                         1.8%
Social protection                                                                            1.5%
Disaster management                                                                          1.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                                      0.7%
Financial markets                                                                            0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                       0.0%




                                                       63
The World Bank Group                              Tanzania                        Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Tanzania?                      Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=276)
Education                                                                                42.0%
Agricultural development                                                                 27.2%
Economic growth                                                                          26.4%
Rural development                                                                        23.9%
Transport                                                                                19.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          19.2%
Health                                                                                   15.2%
Natural resource management                                                              13.8%
Job creation/employment                                                                  13.8%
Energy                                                                                   12.7%
Domestic private sector development                                                      10.5%
Gender equity                                                                            8.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                          8.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                                  7.6%
Law and justice                                                                          6.5%
Social protection                                                                        6.2%
Water and sanitation                                                                     5.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                             3.6%
Global/regional integration                                                              3.3%
Information and communications technology                                                3.3%
Trade and exports                                                                        2.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                                2.5%
Food security                                                                            2.5%
Urban development                                                                        2.2%
Disaster management                                                                      1.8%
Crime and violence                                                                       1.4%
Climate change                                                                           1.1%
Financial markets                                                                        1.1%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                   0.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                     0.4%




                                                     64
The World Bank Group                             Tanzania                        Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth   Percentage of Respondents
   in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)                                   (Responses Combined; N=274)
Energy                                                                                  29.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                                         25.2%
Education                                                                               24.8%
Natural resource management                                                             24.5%
Domestic private sector development                                                     22.3%
Agricultural development                                                                22.3%
Transport                                                                               21.9%
Job creation/employment                                                                 14.2%
Trade and exports                                                                       13.9%
Anti-corruption                                                                         12.0%
Health                                                                                  11.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                                 10.2%
Rural development                                                                       10.2%
Financial markets                                                                       5.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                               5.5%
Gender equity                                                                           5.1%
Climate change                                                                          5.1%
Information and communications technology                                               4.4%
Food security                                                                           4.0%
Social protection                                                                       3.6%
Global/regional integration                                                             3.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                            3.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                    2.6%
Disaster management                                                                     2.2%
Urban development                                                                       1.8%
Water and sanitation                                                                    1.1%
Law and justice                                                                         1.1%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  0.7%
Crime and violence                                                                      0.7%




                                                    65
The World Bank Group                                           Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

5. When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country,
   which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved                   Percentage of Respondents
   in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                  (Responses Combined; N=248)
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                   27.8%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                            18.5%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                         17.7%
Consistent economic growth                                                                           17.7%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                     16.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                              16.9%
Better quality public services                                                                       14.9%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                     12.9%
businesses)
Better employment opportunities for women                                                            11.7%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                                  10.9%
A growing middle class                                                                               10.1%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                      7.3%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                              5.6%
More reliable social safety net                                                                      5.2%
Other                                                                                                0.8%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                          N         DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                                     273        0       6.34     2.08
   Tanzania? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Overall Effectiveness                                                                N         DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                     260        12      6.88     2.01
   effectiveness in Tanzania.* (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                   N         DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Tanzania solve its most
                                                                                     248        19      7.26     2.00
    complicated development challenges?*
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 66
The World Bank Group                               Tanzania                        Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
   on development results in Tanzania, in which sectoral areas do you believe
   the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and       Percentage of Respondents
   knowledge services) in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)                 (Responses Combined; N=277)
Education                                                                                 43.3%
Transport                                                                                 32.5%
Health                                                                                    27.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                                           25.6%
Energy                                                                                    19.5%
Poverty reduction                                                                         18.1%
Agricultural development                                                                  17.7%
Domestic private sector development                                                       11.6%
Economic growth                                                                           10.8%
Rural development                                                                         10.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                   9.4%
Gender equity                                                                             9.0%
Natural resource management                                                               7.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                      5.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                           5.8%
Trade and exports                                                                         5.4%
Social protection                                                                         4.3%
Law and justice                                                                           4.0%
Global/regional integration                                                               3.6%
Food security                                                                             3.6%
Climate change                                                                            2.5%
Regulatory framework                                                                      2.2%
Crime and violence                                                                        2.2%
Information and communications technology                                                 1.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                                 1.8%
Financial markets                                                                         1.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                                   1.8%
Environmental sustainability                                                              1.8%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                    1.8%
Urban development                                                                         1.4%
Disaster management                                                                       1.1%




                                                      67
The World Bank Group                                       Tanzania                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                Percentage of Respondents (N=256)
                                                                                       nd
   activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity     Greatest       2 Greatest
   is of second greatest value in Tanzania?                             Value           Value              Combined
Capacity development                                                    27.0%           23.8%                50.8%
Financial resources                                                     34.4%           15.9%                50.2%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                        14.5%           15.9%                30.3%
Technical assistance                                                    3.9%            18.7%                22.6%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                              7.0%            8.7%                 15.8%
Data                                                                    5.9%            6.0%                 11.8%
Donor coordination                                                      2.0%            5.2%                 7.1%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                           2.0%            2.4%                 4.3%
Convening/Facilitating                                                  2.0%            1.6%                 3.5%
Other                                                                   1.2%            1.6%                 2.8%

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support                          Effectiveness
Tanzania’s efforts to achieve development results?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                       N          DK       Mean      SD
6.   Convening/Facilitating                                                   213            24        6.44    2.01
7.   Data                                                                     229            17        6.88    1.97
8.   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                         233             9        7.18    2.05
9.   Financial resources                                                      237            11        7.78    1.70
10. Technical assistance                                                      228            15        7.09    1.96
11. Mobilizing third party financial resources                                212            33        6.96    1.93
12. Donor coordination                                                        218            27        6.96    1.90
13. Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                             190            55        6.17    2.06

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number                            Degree
of ways in Tanzania. To what degree would Tanzania benefit, if capacity
building were to support…?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                          N          DK       Mean      SD
14. Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                              250             5        7.35    2.27
    more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
15. The public sector, related to implementation of specific development
                                                                              258             2        7.90    2.09
    projects on the ground
16. The public sector, related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                              248             1        7.55    2.19
    sociopolitical conditions)
17. The private sector, related to institutional and policy change            248             3        7.52    2.25




                                                             68
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania                        Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the                       Effectiveness
capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Tanzania?
(If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below, please
respond “Don’t know?) (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                 N         DK     Mean       SD
18. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                228       36      7.32     2.03
19. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)          213       52      6.57     2.24
20. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                  224       38      7.03     2.14
    goals)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Tanzania to help                    Importance
ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it
for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of
capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                       N         DK     Mean       SD
21. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                234       30      7.84     2.20
22. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)          233       32      7.58     2.23
23. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                  226       38      7.78     2.30
    goals)

24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest           Percentage of Respondents
    WEAKNESSES in its work in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=264)
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                          27.3%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                          24.6%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                             19.3%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                       16.7%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Tanzania                                15.5%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                             11.0%
Not willing to raise concerns related to policy and reform efforts in Tanzania                    9.5%
Not doing enough to ensure sustainability of reforms                                              7.2%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                    7.2%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                          6.8%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                          6.8%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                             6.8%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                               5.7%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                            4.9%
Other                                                                                             4.5%
Don't know                                                                                        4.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                             3.4%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                               2.7%
Not client focused                                                                                1.9%




                                                             69
The World Bank Group                                 Tanzania                           Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

25. Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the                Percentage of Respondents
    MOST effective in reducing poverty in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)         (Responses Combined; N=268)
Capacity development                                                                            52.6%
Investment lending                                                                              44.4%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                         29.9%
Technical assistance                                                                            23.9%
Knowledge products/services                                                                     18.3%
Trust Fund management                                                                           13.8%
Other                                                                                           2.6%
Don't know                                                                                      2.2%

26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development          Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                          (Responses Combined; N=274)
Private Sector                                                                                  35.8%
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                        27.7%
Local Government                                                                                27.7%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                            23.4%
NGOs                                                                                            20.1%
Donor Community                                                                                 17.2%
Beneficiaries                                                                                   13.1%
Media                                                                                           11.7%
Parliament                                                                                      6.9%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                       4.0%
Foundations                                                                                     3.3%
Don't know                                                                                      1.8%
Other                                                                                           0.0%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the                   Level of Agreement
World Bank Group’s work in Tanzania?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N         DK     Mean       SD
27. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                256       13      7.13     2.22
    development in Tanzania*
28. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                250       14      7.01     1.99
    development priorities for Tanzania*
29. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                                252       11      6.95     2.14
    realistic for Tanzania
30. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Tanzania with
                                                                                236       25      7.14     2.15
    respect




                                                       70
The World Bank Group                                       Tanzania                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner                         Degree
in Tanzania, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                             N        DK      Mean       SD
31. Responsiveness*                                                                 229       39      6.48      1.99
32. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services) *        225       37       6.26     1.98
33. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       230       29       6.27     2.04
34. Being inclusive*                                                                229       29       6.57     2.00
35. Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                  235       22       7.17     2.11
36. Staff accessibility*                                                            232       24       6.78     2.09
37. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                232       27       7.08     2.19
38. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                    236       26       6.50     2.24
    decisions important to my work
39. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government*                            214       49       6.50     2.20
40. Collaboration with the Government*                                              247       18       8.06     1.76
41. Collaboration with other donors*                                                219       41       7.65     1.93
42. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                   237       25       6.39     2.03
43. Being a long-term partner                                                       234       28       7.79     2.04

44. To be a more effective development partner in Tanzania, do you believe                Percentage of Respondents
    that the World Bank Group should have…?                                                        (N=250)
More local presence                                                                                 68.0%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                     25.2%
Less local presence                                                                                 3.2%
Don't know                                                                                          3.6%

45. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
    place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                            Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                             (Responses Combined; N=268)
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                34.7%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                     24.6%
ground
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                      23.5%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                  22.8%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                   19.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                    19.4%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                   13.4%
Poor donor coordination                                                                              13.1%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                                11.9%
Other                                                                                                3.4%




                                                             71
The World Bank Group                                Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results

1.    In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be          Importance
      involved in the following areas of development in Tanzania?
      (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                            N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                       253    10      7.14      2.69
2.    Information and communications technology                             253     3      7.46      2.30
3.    Transport                                                             256     3      7.96      2.20
4.    Crime and violence                                                    239    20       5.81     2.37
5.    Law and justice                                                       245    11       6.51     2.50
6.    Urban development                                                     250     5       7.40     2.27
7.    Environmental sustainability                                          251     4       7.79     2.07
8.    Regulatory framework                                                  248     7       7.09     2.33
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                240    14       7.08     2.30
10.   Poverty reduction                                                     261     3       8.11     2.22
11.   Gender equity                                                         249     7       6.94     2.44
12.   Domestic private sector development                                   255     3       7.55     2.12
13.   Foreign direct investment                                             254     3       7.07     2.36
14.   Water and sanitation                                                  252     2       7.83     2.19
15.   Trade and exports                                                     252     7       7.14     2.33
16.   Economic growth                                                       260     2       8.17     2.00
17.   Energy                                                                253     5       8.21     1.93
18.   Disaster management                                                   242     9       7.19     2.41
19.   Public sector governance/reform                                       253     4       7.70     2.24
20.   Job creation/employment                                               250     9       7.53     2.18
21.   Financial markets                                                     247    10       7.21     2.26
22.   Equality of opportunity                                               242    13       7.39     2.20
23.   Health                                                                254     3       7.96     2.08
24.   Rural development                                                     257     4       7.96     2.21
25.   Global/regional integration                                           247     6       6.78     2.16
26.   Food security                                                         245     9       7.47     2.24
27.   Education                                                             259     3       8.34     1.97
28.   Social protection                                                     251     6       7.07     2.35
29.   Climate change                                                        254     9       7.50     2.21
30.   Agricultural development                                              258     4       8.27     2.14
31.   Natural resource management                                           258     5       7.62     2.43




                                                       72
The World Bank Group                                 Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2.    How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of            Effectiveness
      the work it does in the following areas of development in Tanzania?
      (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                            N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                       174    81      5.70      2.57
2.    Information and communications technology                             186    66      6.74      2.32
3.    Transport                                                             221    32      7.47      2.06
4.    Crime and violence                                                    159    94       6.31     2.27
5.    Law and justice                                                       168    82       6.40     2.33
6.    Urban development                                                     205    48       7.13     2.09
7.    Environmental sustainability                                          206    53       7.07     2.17
8.    Regulatory framework                                                  194    60       6.86     2.12
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                187    68       6.71     2.21
10.   Poverty reduction                                                     225    35       7.52     2.11
11.   Gender equity                                                         198    60       6.63     2.00
12.   Domestic private sector development                                   199    57       6.75     2.16
13.   Foreign direct investment                                             191    61       6.80     2.26
14.   Water and sanitation                                                  212    44       7.27     2.30
15.   Trade and exports                                                     184    67       6.71     2.17
16.   Economic growth                                                       233    27       7.49     2.07
17.   Energy                                                                212    48       7.54     1.94
18.   Disaster management                                                   171    81       6.77     2.22
19.   Public sector governance/reform                                       215    38       7.26     2.24
20.   Job creation/employment                                               200    55       6.85     2.31
21.   Financial markets                                                     173    75       6.83     2.05
22.   Equality of opportunity                                               186    61       6.78     2.19
23.   Health                                                                207    51       7.40     2.07
24.   Rural development                                                     213    45       7.15     2.35
25.   Global/regional integration                                           187    61       6.67     2.26
26.   Food security                                                         197    56       6.96     2.28
27.   Education                                                             217    39       7.40     2.22
28.   Social protection                                                     186    69       6.66     2.22
29.   Climate change                                                        187    60       6.93     2.25
30.   Agricultural development                                              217    40       7.35     2.20
31.   Natural resource management                                           200    54       6.98     2.33




                                                        73
The World Bank Group                                            Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

3.   Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support                Percentage of Respondents
     the program in Tanzania?                                                                        (N=264)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                              39.8%
In the country                                                                                        34.8%
Don't know                                                                                            25.4%


Achieving Development Results                                                        N         DK      Mean       SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
    development results in Tanzania?*                                                260       12       7.12     1.91
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Tanzania? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)               N         DK      Mean       SD
5. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
    Development Policy Loan, trust funds/grants, Program 4 Result, etc.)             246       24       6.29     2.10
    meet the needs of Tanzania*
6. The World Bank Group meets Tanzania’s needs for knowledge services
                                                                                     246       20       6.38     2.05
    (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*


Internal Evaluation Mechanisms                                                       N         DK      Mean       SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal
     evaluation mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving            210       62       6.87     1.95
     results in Tanzania? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work                   Percentage of Respondents
    and activities in the work you do?                                                           (N=267)
Weekly                                                                                              10.9%
Monthly                                                                                             19.5%
A few times a year                                                                                  39.3%
Rarely                                                                                              17.2%
Never                                                                                               13.1%




                                                                  74
The World Bank Group                                          Tanzania            Country Opinion Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Tanzania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s               Degree
knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                     N     DK      Mean       SD
2.    Are timely                                                            231    34      6.52      1.96
3.    Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                            223    41       6.57     2.02
      preparation
4.    Are relevant to Tanzania's development priorities                     246    20       6.89     2.01
5.    Lead to practical solutions                                           233    31       6.72     1.87
6.    Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                  234    32       6.96     1.92
7.    Are source of relevant information on global good practices           238    30       7.37     1.92
8.    Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                  238    25       7.23     2.03
9.    Are adequately disseminated                                           230    33       6.70     2.02
10.   Are translated enough into local language                             214    53       5.76     2.22
11.   Are adaptable to Tanzania’s specific development challenges and
                                                                            234    34       6.54     1.99
      country circumstances*


Overall Evaluations                                                          N     DK      Mean       SD
12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results in    257    15       7.43     1.85
    your country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities?*                                 253    20       7.57     1.71
      (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank                  Degree
Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving
Tanzania’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very
significant degree)                                                          N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)             228    31      6.96      1.94
2.    Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                        232    25       7.14     2.01
3.    Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making
                                                                            238    23       7.10     1.89
      appropriate adjustments)
4.    Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                         233    26       7.21     1.90




                                                                  75
The World Bank Group                                 Tanzania                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                                                     Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                      N         DK       Mean      SD
5.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                           219        43       6.53     2.33
6.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects
                                                                             238         26       7.39    1.94
     and programs it supports
7.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                             226         37       6.60    2.04
     fashion
8.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                             205         56       6.76    2.07
     reasonable
9.   The World Bank Group’s requirements on its lending are reasonable       216         46       6.56    2.15
10. The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Tanzania                 225         37       6.35    2.20
11. Working with the World Bank Group increases Tanzania’s institutional
                                                                             235         29       7.21    2.01
    capacity
12. The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                             190         69       6.91    1.81
    changes
13. Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                             218         42       7.05    2.05
    appropriate use of them*
14. The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support           232         28       7.28    2.05

15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group            Percentage of Respondents
    operates in Tanzania?                                                                  (N=259)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Tanzania                                           8.9%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Tanzania                                    24.3%
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is appropriate                                        27.0%
Don't know                                                                                    22.0%
Prefer not to answer                                                                          17.8%



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania

1.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of         Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)                            (Responses Combined; N=271)
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                            32.5%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                  25.8%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                       25.5%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                   24.7%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Tanzania’s economy                   16.6%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                        15.1%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Tanzania’s specific challenges                 12.9%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                12.5%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                          12.5%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                        10.0%
Work faster                                                                                     4.8%
Other                                                                                           1.8%




                                                       76
The World Bank Group                                 Tanzania                             Country Opinion Survey 2014


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (continued)

2.  When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
    offers in Tanzania, and taking into account its limited level of resources,
    which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should               Percentage of Respondents
    offer more of in Tanzania? (Select only ONE response)                                        (N=265)
Financial services                                                                                37.0%
The combination is appropriate for Tanzania                                                       35.5%
Knowledge products                                                                                17.7%
Convening services                                                                                5.3%
Don't know                                                                                        2.6%
None of the above                                                                                 1.9%

                                                                                        Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                          N         DK     Mean       SD
3.   The World Bank Group should ensure stronger reform efforts linked to
                                                                                  261        6      7.63     2.22
     its lending in Tanzania
4.   The World Bank Group should have greater visibility throughout the
                                                                                  258        8      7.47     2.28
     country to ensure greater support for reform

5.   Please indicate which of the following best represents your views.                 Percentage of Respondents
     (Select only ONE response)                                                                  (N=267)
The WBG exerts the correct amount of pressure on the Government on matters
                                                                                                  28.5%
related to economic and social reforms
The WBG exerts too little pressure on the Government of Tanzania on matters
                                                                                                  28.1%
related to economic and social reforms
The WBG exerts too much pressure on the Government of Tanzania on matters
                                                                                                  21.7%
related to economic and social reforms
No opinion                                                                                        12.0%
Don't know                                                                                        9.7%

G. Communication and Information Sharing

1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social                   Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)                           (Responses Combined; N=271)
Internet                                                                                          56.8%
Local newspapers                                                                                  50.6%
Local television                                                                                  27.3%
Local radio                                                                                       12.5%
International television                                                                          9.6%
Periodicals                                                                                       8.5%
Blogs                                                                                             7.0%
International newspapers                                                                          5.9%
International radio                                                                               5.5%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                           4.8%
Other                                                                                             3.0%
Mobile phones                                                                                     1.5%
Instant messaging                                                                                 1.1%




                                                        77
The World Bank Group                                 Tanzania                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

2.    How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?       Percentage of Respondents
      (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (Responses Combined; N=270)
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences                                             37.0%
World Bank Group's website                                                                    35.6%
World Bank Group's publications and other written materials                                   30.7%
e-Newsletters                                                                                 25.9%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                          21.1%
Blogs                                                                                         17.4%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       13.0%
Mobile phones                                                                                 8.1%
Instant messaging                                                                             4.1%
Other                                                                                         0.7%

3.    Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy
      under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                                      (N=256)
Yes                                                                                          36.3%
No                                                                                           63.7%

4.    Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities   Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                                      (N=254)
Yes                                                                                          53.1%
No                                                                                           46.9%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                 (N=136)
Yes                                                                                          92.6%
No                                                                                           7.4%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                       (N=243)
Yes                                                                                          89.3%
No                                                                                           10.7%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?                                        (N=260)
Yes                                                                                          79.2%
No                                                                                           20.8%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                               (N=243)
The World Bank Group's country website (www.worldbank.org/tanzania)                          55.6%
The World Bank Group's main website (www.worldbank.org)                                      44.4%

9.    Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank    Percentage of Respondents
      Group website?                                                                         (N=236)
High speed                                                                                   77.5%
Dial-up                                                                                      22.5%




                                                        78
The World Bank Group                                Tanzania                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                    Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                   N         DK     Mean       SD
10. I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few
                                                                           238       16      6.34     2.55
    years ago
11. I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.               228       19      7.14     2.06
12. I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.      220       22      7.70     1.95
13. The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                           172       78      6.65     2.69
    information about the institution.
14. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                           226       24      7.19     2.37
    find it.
15. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                           209       38      6.76     2.36
    inquiries.



H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                       (N=269)
Employee of a Ministry/Implementation Agency                                               20.8%
NGO                                                                                        14.9%
Private Sector Organization                                                                9.7%
Office of the President                                                                    8.9%
Independent Government Institution                                                         7.1%
Media                                                                                      6.3%
PMU overseeing implementation of project                                                   5.9%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                     5.6%
Other                                                                                      4.5%
Bilateral Agency                                                                           3.0%
Community-Based Organization                                                               3.0%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                              2.6%
Multilateral Agency                                                                        2.2%
Private Foundation                                                                         2.2%
Consultant working on WBG-supported Project                                                1.5%
Office of Minister                                                                          .7%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                   .4%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                            .4%
Trade Union                                                                                 .4%




                                                       79
The World Bank Group                                 Tanzania                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                       (N=264)
Other                                                                                      15.5%
Public sector governance / public financial management / anti-corruption                   10.6%
Information and communications technology                                                  9.8%
Education                                                                                  9.1%
Agriculture/ rural development / food security                                             7.6%
Private sector development / foreign direct investment                                     6.8%
Social protection                                                                          5.7%
Transport                                                                                  5.7%
Energy                                                                                     4.5%
Health / communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            4.2%
Natural resource management / environmental sustainability                                 4.2%
Law and justice / regulatory framework                                                     3.4%
Urban development                                                                          3.4%
Generalist                                                                                 2.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                       2.3%
Financial markets / banking                                                                1.9%
Climate change / disaster management                                                       1.1%
Gender equity / equality of opportunity                                                    1.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                     .4%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group   Percentage of Respondents
   in your country?                                                                       (N=267)
Yes                                                                                        39.4%
No                                                                                         60.6%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in   Percentage of Respondents
  Tanzania? (Select all that apply)                                                       (N=258)
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)                                                                  47.3%
None                                                                                       38.4%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                18.2%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                        8.9%

5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank      Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)                                            (N=254)
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                          42.1%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                             39.8%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                         29.5%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                              29.1%
Observer                                                                                   16.1%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
6. Which best represents your geographic location?                                        (N=268)
Dar es Salaam region                                                                       78.7%
Other urban centers                                                                        12.3%
Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba)                                                                6.0%
Rural areas                                                                                3.0%




                                                        80
The World Bank Group                                                                   Tanzania                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

Office of the President/Minister N=26  Employee of a Ministry N=56  Consultant on WBG-supported Project/PMU N=20
Bilateral/ Multilateral Agency N=14  Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=33  NGO/CBO/Private Foundation N=54
Media N=17  Independent Government Institution N=19  Academia N=15  Other N=15

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania

In general, how would you say that Tanzania is headed in...?*
                                    Office of the Employee      Consultant on    Bilateral/        Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/             Independent
                                     President/        of a     WBG-supported   Multilateral      Financial Sector/     Private            Government
Percentage of Respondents             Minister      Ministry     Project/PMU      Agency            Private Bank      Foundation   Media    Institution   Academia        Other
The right direction                    76.9%          89.3%         70.0%         100.0%                66.7%           67.3%      93.8%      68.4%        73.3%          69.2%
The wrong direction                    19.2%           3.6%          5.0%             -                 15.2%           21.2%      6.3%        5.3%         6.7%          23.1%
Not sure                                3.8%           7.1%         25.0%             -                 18.2%           11.5%        -        26.3%        20.0%          7.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                        81
The World Bank Group                                                                             Tanzania                                                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Tanzania. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Tanzania. (Choose no more than THREE)
                                          Office of the   Employee    Consultant on       Bilateral/         Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/                   Independent
Percentage of Respondents                  President/        of a     WBG-supported      Multilateral       Financial Sector/     Private                  Government
(Responses Combined)                        Minister       Ministry    Project/PMU         Agency             Private Bank      Foundation     Media        Institution     Academia         Other
Social protection*                            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%              7.1%                 0.0%             1.9%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%           14.3%
Transport                                    26.9%          30.4%         25.0%             14.3%                 24.2%           24.1%        50.0%          42.1%          35.7%           64.3%
Public sector governance/reform*             11.5%          23.2%          5.0%             42.9%                 15.2%           29.6%        6.3%           21.1%          21.4%           0.0%
Global/regional integration                   7.7%          1.8%           0.0%              0.0%                 0.0%             3.7%        12.5%           0.0%           0.0%           7.1%
Gender equity                                 3.8%          12.5%          5.0%              0.0%                 9.1%             9.3%        31.3%           0.0%          14.3%           7.1%
Domestic private sector
                                               7.7%         3.6%           0.0%              7.1%                21.2%            9.3%          0.0%          15.8%           21.4%           0.0%
development*
Foreign direct investment*                    3.8%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%                 6.1%             1.9%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           21.4%
Water and sanitation*                         0.0%         16.1%          10.0%             7.1%                 6.1%             0.0%         6.3%           0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
Anti-corruption*                              7.7%         5.4%           0.0%              0.0%                 33.3%            7.4%         6.3%           15.8%           35.7%          0.0%
Job creation/employment*                      7.7%         1.8%           15.0%             28.6%                9.1%             16.7%        12.5%          5.3%            0.0%           0.0%
Rural development*                            15.4%        3.6%           25.0%             14.3%                0.0%             13.0%        0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
Financial markets                             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%                 0.0%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Urban development*                            7.7%         3.6%           20.0%             0.0%                 0.0%             1.9%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Environmental sustainability                  0.0%         1.8%           5.0%              0.0%                 0.0%             5.6%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Equality of opportunity                       0.0%         1.8%           0.0%              7.1%                 0.0%             0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Health                                        7.7%         14.3%          15.0%             0.0%                 18.2%            11.1%        6.3%           26.3%           7.1%           14.3%
Education                                     53.8%        64.3%          20.0%             42.9%                51.5%            51.9%        50.0%          57.9%           50.0%          78.6%
Poverty reduction                             11.5%        19.6%          10.0%             35.7%                15.2%            22.2%        25.0%          0.0%            7.1%           7.1%
Energy*                                       38.5%        28.6%          45.0%             14.3%                33.3%            11.1%        18.8%          31.6%           57.1%          21.4%
Food security                                 11.5%        0.0%           0.0%              7.1%                 6.1%             5.6%         0.0%           0.0%            7.1%           7.1%
Climate change*                               0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%                 3.0%             11.1%        0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
Agricultural development                      34.6%        14.3%          20.0%             21.4%                12.1%            22.2%        6.3%           5.3%            28.6%          21.4%
Trade and exports                             11.5%        0.0%           5.0%              0.0%                 3.0%             3.7%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
Crime and violence                            0.0%         3.6%           10.0%             0.0%                 0.0%             5.6%         0.0%           5.3%            0.0%           0.0%
Economic growth*                              7.7%         17.9%          20.0%             35.7%                3.0%             9.3%         37.5%          31.6%           7.1%           0.0%
Law and justice*                              19.2%        5.4%           0.0%              0.0%                 3.0%             1.9%         6.3%           0.0%            0.0%           7.1%
Regulatory framework                          0.0%         1.8%           0.0%              0.0%                 0.0%             3.7%         0.0%           10.5%           0.0%           0.0%
Communicable/non-
                                               0.0%         0.0%           0.0%              0.0%                 0.0%            0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
communicable diseases
Natural resource management*                   3.8%         7.1%          45.0%             14.3%                 9.1%            9.3%          6.3%          31.6%            7.1%           7.1%
Disaster management                            0.0%         0.0%          0.0%              0.0%                  3.0%            3.7%          0.0%          0.0%             0.0%           0.0%
Information and communications
                                               0.0%         7.1%           0.0%              0.0%                 3.0%            1.9%         12.5%           0.0%            0.0%           0.0%
technology
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                    82
The World Bank Group                                                                     Tanzania                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                     Office of the Employee     Consultant on       Bilateral/    Private Sector/     NGO/CBO/                 Independent
Percentage of Respondents             President/      of a     WBG-supported Multilateral        Financial Sector/     Private                 Government
(Responses Combined)                    Minister    Ministry     Project/PMU         Agency         Private Bank     Foundation     Media       Institution    Academia      Other
Water and sanitation*                    3.8%        1.8%            10.0%             7.1%             0.0%            11.1%       0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        20.0%
Equality of opportunity*                 19.2%       5.4%            0.0%              7.1%             6.1%            16.7%       6.3%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Economic growth                          23.1%       35.7%           15.0%            35.7%             27.3%           25.9%       25.0%         15.8%         20.0%        33.3%
Climate change                           0.0%        3.6%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         6.7%
Global/regional integration*             15.4%       7.1%            0.0%              0.0%             3.0%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Gender equity                            7.7%        5.4%            0.0%              0.0%             6.1%            11.1%       18.8%         15.8%         26.7%         6.7%
Rural development                        26.9%       21.4%           35.0%            14.3%             30.3%           27.8%       25.0%         31.6%         20.0%         0.0%
Urban development                        11.5%       1.8%            0.0%              0.0%             6.1%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Regulatory framework                     3.8%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Social protection                        7.7%        5.4%            10.0%             0.0%             9.1%            7.4%        0.0%          10.5%          0.0%         0.0%
Law and justice                          15.4%       0.0%            10.0%             0.0%             6.1%            9.3%        12.5%          0.0%          0.0%        13.3%
Transport                                11.5%       23.2%           25.0%             0.0%             9.1%            20.4%       18.8%         26.3%         20.0%        40.0%
Crime and violence                       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             3.0%            5.6%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Communicable/
                                         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%        6.3%           0.0%          6.7%         0.0%
non-communicable diseases
Information and communications
                                         3.8%        3.6%            0.0%              0.0%             3.0%            1.9%        12.5%          0.0%          0.0%        13.3%
technology
Anti-corruption                          7.7%        5.4%            10.0%             0.0%             12.1%           13.0%       0.0%          10.5%         13.3%         0.0%
Domestic private sector
                                         7.7%        12.5%           15.0%            14.3%             6.1%            11.1%       6.3%          21.1%          6.7%         6.7%
development
Foreign direct investment*               0.0%        0.0%            0.0%              7.1%             0.0%            7.4%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        13.3%
Education                                50.0%       53.6%           20.0%            28.6%             48.5%           35.2%       25.0%         47.4%         53.3%        33.3%
Energy                                   15.4%       10.7%           15.0%            21.4%             9.1%            7.4%        12.5%         31.6%         26.7%         0.0%
Public sector governance/reform          7.7%        16.1%           15.0%            35.7%             24.2%           24.1%       12.5%          5.3%         26.7%        20.0%
Natural resource management*             3.8%        10.7%           40.0%            14.3%             18.2%           14.8%       0.0%          10.5%          0.0%        13.3%
Environmental sustainability             7.7%        5.4%            5.0%              0.0%             6.1%            3.7%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Disaster management                      3.8%        3.6%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          6.7%         0.0%
Health                                   15.4%       21.4%           10.0%             0.0%             21.2%           14.8%       6.3%          21.1%          6.7%        13.3%
Agricultural development*                26.9%       25.0%           15.0%            71.4%             9.1%            13.0%       50.0%         36.8%         40.0%        53.3%
Job creation/employment                  3.8%        14.3%           35.0%            28.6%             9.1%            7.4%        12.5%         15.8%         13.3%        13.3%
Financial markets*                       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             9.1%            0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Trade and exports                        0.0%        3.6%            5.0%              0.0%             9.1%            3.7%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%         0.0%
Food security*                           0.0%        1.8%            0.0%             14.3%             0.0%            0.0%        12.5%          0.0%         13.3%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          83
The World Bank Group                                                                         Tanzania                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Tanzania? (Choose no more than
THREE)
                                          Office of the   Employee    Consultant on    Bilateral/        Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents                  President/        of a     WBG-supported   Multilateral      Financial Sector/     Private            Government
(Responses Combined)                        Minister       Ministry    Project/PMU      Agency            Private Bank      Foundation   Media    Institution   Academia        Other
Energy*                                      11.5%          23.6%         40.0%          42.9%                18.2%           25.9%      40.0%      63.2%        20.0%          53.3%
Gender equity                                 3.8%          3.6%           0.0%           0.0%                6.1%             5.6%      13.3%      10.5%         6.7%          6.7%
Equality of opportunity                       7.7%          10.9%         15.0%           7.1%                18.2%           14.8%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          6.7%
Social protection                             0.0%          5.5%           0.0%           0.0%                3.0%             9.3%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          6.7%
Global/regional integration                  11.5%          5.5%           0.0%           0.0%                6.1%             0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         6.7%          0.0%
Climate change                                7.7%          7.3%           0.0%           0.0%                0.0%             5.6%      6.7%        0.0%        13.3%          6.7%
Anti-corruption                               7.7%          12.7%         20.0%           0.0%                9.1%             9.3%      13.3%      21.1%        33.3%          0.0%
Disaster management                           7.7%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%                3.0%             1.9%      0.0%        0.0%         6.7%          0.0%
Rural development                             7.7%          7.3%          15.0%           0.0%                9.1%            14.8%      33.3%       5.3%         6.7%          6.7%
Foreign direct investment                    11.5%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%                6.1%             5.6%      0.0%       10.5%         6.7%          20.0%
Urban development*                           11.5%          0.0%          10.0%           0.0%                0.0%             0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Water and sanitation                          0.0%          0.0%           5.0%           0.0%                6.1%             0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Education                                    19.2%          25.5%         25.0%           7.1%                24.2%           20.4%      46.7%      42.1%        26.7%          20.0%
Information and communications
                                               0.0%         5.5%          5.0%           0.0%                15.2%            3.7%       0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           6.7%
technology
Regulatory framework                           0.0%         3.6%          0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%            1.9%       6.7%       10.5%         0.0%           0.0%
Communicable/non-
                                               3.8%         0.0%          0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%            1.9%       0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
communicable diseases
Trade and exports*                            11.5%        10.9%          40.0%         42.9%                12.1%            7.4%       13.3%      5.3%         0.0%           20.0%
Public sector governance/reform               23.1%        32.7%          5.0%          28.6%                24.2%            29.6%      20.0%      10.5%        26.7%          33.3%
Domestic private sector
                                              34.6%        16.4%          20.0%         57.1%                30.3%            18.5%      6.7%       21.1%        26.7%           6.7%
development*
Job creation/employment                       11.5%        7.3%           10.0%         28.6%                9.1%             16.7%      26.7%      21.1%        20.0%          6.7%
Agricultural development*                     11.5%        27.3%          10.0%         28.6%                9.1%             31.5%      6.7%       10.5%        26.7%          46.7%
Food security                                 11.5%        3.6%           0.0%          0.0%                 6.1%             0.0%       13.3%      0.0%         13.3%          0.0%
Transport                                     19.2%        32.7%          15.0%         21.4%                12.1%            20.4%      20.0%      26.3%        33.3%          20.0%
Natural resource management                   23.1%        34.5%          45.0%         28.6%                15.2%            22.2%      13.3%      26.3%        6.7%           20.0%
Environmental sustainability                  3.8%         5.5%           0.0%          0.0%                 6.1%             5.6%       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
Health                                        15.4%        14.5%          5.0%          7.1%                 18.2%            7.4%       6.7%       15.8%        6.7%           6.7%
Law and justice                               3.8%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%                 3.0%             1.9%       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
Crime and violence                            0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%                 0.0%             3.7%       0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
Financial markets                             3.8%         3.6%           5.0%          0.0%                 18.2%            3.7%       6.7%       0.0%         6.7%           6.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                84
The World Bank Group                                                                        Tanzania                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                    Office of the Employee         Consultant on       Bilateral/     Private Sector/     NGO/CBO/                 Independent
Percentage of Respondents            President/         of a      WBG-supported Multilateral        Financial Sector/       Private                Government
(Responses Combined)                  Minister        Ministry     Project/PMU          Agency          Private Bank      Foundation    Media       Institution     Academia        Other
Better employment opportunities
                                       12.5%           15.7%           0.0%              33.3%              22.6%           19.6%       26.7%          6.7%           7.1%          26.7%
for young people
Better employment opportunities
                                        8.3%            9.8%           0.0%               0.0%              29.0%            4.3%       20.0%          6.7%           21.4%         26.7%
for women*
Greater access to micro-finance
                                       29.2%           15.7%           21.1%              0.0%              19.4%           23.9%       20.0%          0.0%           28.6%          6.7%
for the poor
Greater voice and participation for
citizens to help ensure greater        37.5%           23.5%           26.3%              0.0%              12.9%           39.1%       40.0%          33.3%          28.6%         33.3%
accountability
Greater access to health and
                                        8.3%           19.6%           0.0%              16.7%              0.0%            15.2%        6.7%          6.7%           7.1%          20.0%
nutrition for citizens
Better entrepreneurial
                                        8.3%           13.7%           36.8%             16.7%              6.5%             0.0%        6.7%          26.7%          7.1%          26.7%
opportunities*
A growing middle class                 16.7%            3.9%           26.3%              8.3%              12.9%            6.5%        0.0%          20.0%          14.3%          0.0%
Better opportunity for the poor
                                       12.5%           15.7%           10.5%             58.3%              6.5%            32.6%        6.7%          6.7%           14.3%          0.0%
who live in rural areas*
Better opportunity for the poor
                                        8.3%            5.9%           5.3%               0.0%              16.1%            4.3%        0.0%          0.0%           7.1%           0.0%
who live in urban areas
Consistent economic growth*            12.5%           31.4%           5.3%               0.0%              19.4%           15.2%       40.0%          0.0%           21.4%         13.3%
More reliable social safety net*        0.0%            3.9%           0.0%              33.3%              6.5%             6.5%        0.0%          6.7%           0.0%          0.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy*        4.2%            0.0%           26.3%              0.0%              6.5%             8.7%       13.3%          13.3%          0.0%          0.0%
Education and training that better
                                       25.0%           13.7%           21.1%             16.7%              25.8%           13.0%        0.0%          33.3%          28.6%         20.0%
ensure job opportunity
Better quality public services*         8.3%           27.5%           21.1%             16.7%              12.9%            2.2%        6.7%          40.0%          7.1%          13.3%
Other                                   0.0%            0.0%           0.0%               0.0%              0.0%             2.2%        0.0%          0.0%           7.1%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                             85
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
                                                                              Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work
of the World Bank Group in             26    6.58   1.86   56   7.00   1.77   20   7.05   1.19    14    7.50   1.29     33    5.85   2.24    52    5.65   2.51   16   5.13    2.36   19   6.26   1.70   15     6.20     2.08    15   5.80    2.01
Tanzania?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                              Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank
                                       26    7.15   1.52   55   7.64   1.73   20   7.40   1.19    14    7.64   1.45     31    6.48   2.26    50    6.26   2.47   14   6.50    1.79   19   6.21   2.20   12     6.92     1.24    12   5.83    1.90
Group’s effectiveness in
Tanzania.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                              Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Tanzania solve its    24    8.08   1.44   52   7.94   1.26   20   7.85   1.18    14    7.71   1.38     27    6.37   2.53    47    6.66   2.51   12   6.83    1.99   19   5.95   2.09   12     6.92     1.78    14   7.79    1.72
most complicated development
challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        86
The World Bank Group                                                                    Tanzania                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Tanzania, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus
most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                       Office of the Employee       Consultant on     Bilateral/   Private Sector/  NGO/CBO/                  Independent
Percentage of Respondents               President/       of a      WBG-supported Multilateral     Financial Sector/   Private                 Government
(Responses Combined)                     Minister     Ministry      Project/PMU        Agency       Private Bank    Foundation     Media       Institution    Academia     Other
Social protection*                        11.5%         1.8%            0.0%             7.1%           0.0%           1.9%         5.9%          5.3%          0.0%       20.0%
Public sector governance/reform*          11.5%        25.0%            35.0%           50.0%           24.2%         18.5%        17.6%          57.9%        13.3%       26.7%
Transport*                                26.9%        37.5%            35.0%           71.4%           18.2%         25.9%        17.6%          31.6%        46.7%       46.7%
Poverty reduction                          3.8%        17.9%            30.0%           28.6%           21.2%         25.9%        23.5%          5.3%         13.3%        0.0%
Global/regional integration                7.7%         7.1%            5.0%             0.0%           6.1%           0.0%         5.9%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Gender equity                             19.2%        10.7%            10.0%            0.0%           6.1%          14.8%         0.0%          5.3%          0.0%        6.7%
Crime and violence                         7.7%         0.0%            0.0%             0.0%           9.1%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        6.7%
Domestic private sector
                                           7.7%         7.1%            0.0%             7.1%           18.2%         13.0%         5.9%          36.8%        13.3%        0.0%
development*
Rural development                         11.5%         5.4%            15.0%            7.1%           12.1%         13.0%        11.8%          0.0%         13.3%       20.0%
Foreign direct investment                  0.0%         5.4%            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          10.5%         0.0%        0.0%
Water and sanitation                       0.0%         7.1%            10.0%            7.1%           6.1%          11.1%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        6.7%
Energy                                     3.8%        16.1%            40.0%           21.4%           9.1%          25.9%        29.4%          21.1%        26.7%       13.3%
Job creation/employment*                   3.8%         0.0%            10.0%           35.7%           9.1%          11.1%        17.6%          5.3%         13.3%        6.7%
Financial markets*                         0.0%         5.4%            0.0%            14.3%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Urban development                          0.0%         3.6%            10.0%            0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Environmental sustainability               3.8%         0.0%            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%           7.4%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Equality of opportunity                    7.7%         3.6%            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         5.9%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Health                                    46.2%        32.1%            30.0%            0.0%           36.4%         16.7%        35.3%          21.1%        26.7%       20.0%
Education*                                50.0%        37.5%            15.0%           21.4%           51.5%         40.7%        58.8%          63.2%        60.0%       46.7%
Food security                              3.8%         5.4%            10.0%            0.0%           9.1%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          6.7%        0.0%
Climate change                             0.0%         3.6%            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%           7.4%         0.0%          5.3%          0.0%        0.0%
Agricultural development                  23.1%        10.7%            5.0%             0.0%           21.2%         16.7%        17.6%          15.8%        40.0%       33.3%
Trade and exports*                        19.2%        10.7%            0.0%             0.0%           6.1%           0.0%         0.0%          5.3%          0.0%        0.0%
Economic growth                            3.8%        21.4%            15.0%           14.3%           6.1%          13.0%         5.9%          5.3%          0.0%        0.0%
Law and justice                            3.8%         3.6%            5.0%             0.0%           3.0%           3.7%         5.9%          5.3%          0.0%       13.3%
Regulatory framework                       0.0%         3.6%            0.0%             0.0%           3.0%           3.7%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        6.7%
Communicable/non-
                                          11.5%         0.0%            0.0%             0.0%           3.0%           1.9%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
communicable diseases
Natural resource management                7.7%         7.1%            10.0%           14.3%           6.1%           7.4%        11.8%          0.0%          6.7%       13.3%
Anti-corruption*                           0.0%         3.6%            10.0%            0.0%           3.0%          14.8%         0.0%          0.0%         20.0%        0.0%
Information and communications
                                           0.0%         3.6%            0.0%             0.0%           3.0%           1.9%         5.9%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
technology
Disaster management                        0.0%         3.6%            0.0%             0.0%           0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        6.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                         87
The World Bank Group                                                                         Tanzania                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Tanzania?
                                  Office of the Employee         Consultant on        Bilateral/     Private Sector/     NGO/CBO/                   Independent
Greatest Value                     President/        of a       WBG-supported Multilateral          Financial Sector/      Private                   Government
Percentage of Respondents           Minister       Ministry       Project/PMU          Agency         Private Bank       Foundation     Media         Institution   Academia        Other
Convening/Facilitating                0.0%           0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%               4.3%        6.7%            5.3%         0.0%          0.0%
Data*                                 0.0%           5.9%             0.0%               0.0%             15.6%              4.3%        20.0%           0.0%         0.0%          14.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*     7.7%           0.0%             0.0%              21.4%             34.4%             27.7%        13.3%          10.5%         6.7%          14.3%
Financial resources*                 57.7%          45.1%            46.7%              78.6%             18.8%             25.5%        13.3%          31.6%        13.3%          14.3%
Capacity development*                23.1%          43.1%            33.3%               0.0%             12.5%             17.0%        26.7%          15.8%        60.0%          42.9%
Technical assistance                  3.8%           3.9%             6.7%               0.0%             0.0%               4.3%        0.0%           15.8%         6.7%          0.0%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                      7.7%           0.0%            13.3%               0.0%             3.1%               8.5%        20.0%          10.5%         6.7%          14.3%
resources
Donor coordination                    0.0%           0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             9.4%               4.3%        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise         0.0%           0.0%             0.0%               0.0%             0.0%               4.3%        0.0%           10.5%         6.7%           0.0%
Other                                 0.0%           2.0%             0.0%               0.0%             6.3%               0.0%        0.0%            0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


 nd                                       Office of the   Employee    Consultant on    Bilateral/        Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/                Independent
2 Greatest Value                           President/        of a     WBG-supported   Multilateral      Financial Sector/     Private               Government
Percentage of Respondents                   Minister       Ministry    Project/PMU      Agency            Private Bank      Foundation   Media       Institution    Academia        Other
Convening/Facilitating*                       8.0%          0.0%           0.0%          14.3%                0.0%             0.0%      0.0%           0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Data                                          4.0%          3.9%           0.0%           0.0%                3.1%            13.3%      6.7%           5.3%          0.0%          15.4%
Policy advice, studies, analyses              4.0%          15.7%         26.7%          28.6%                6.3%            20.0%      33.3%         10.5%         20.0%          7.7%
Financial resources                          12.0%          19.6%         20.0%          14.3%                15.6%            6.7%      20.0%         21.1%         13.3%          38.5%
Capacity development                         20.0%          27.5%         20.0%           7.1%                37.5%           26.7%      13.3%         15.8%          6.7%          30.8%
Technical assistance                         28.0%          19.6%         33.3%          21.4%                15.6%           22.2%      13.3%          5.3%         13.3%          0.0%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                              16.0%         3.9%          0.0%          14.3%                15.6%            2.2%       6.7%          26.3%         13.3%           0.0%
resources*
Donor coordination*                            8.0%         3.9%          0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%            8.9%       0.0%          5.3%          26.7%           0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                  0.0%         2.0%          0.0%           0.0%                 0.0%            0.0%       6.7%          10.5%         6.7%            7.7%
Other                                          0.0%         3.9%          0.0%           0.0%                 6.3%            0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                88
The World Bank Group                                                                                                    Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Tanzania’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                                                               Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                          Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                       President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                         N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Convening/Facilitating                  24    6.71   2.03   47   6.89   2.07   16   6.50   0.89    12    6.25   1.71     27    6.59   1.62    32    6.09   2.35   12   6.00    2.45   17   5.71   1.65   12     5.50     1.78    9    6.11    2.89
Data                                    24    6.58   1.53   49   6.98   1.82   18   6.67   1.28    14    6.71   1.14     29    7.17   2.00    38    6.74   2.27   11   6.73    2.57   19   6.42   2.59   13     6.38     1.98    9    8.11    1.97
Policy advice, studies, analyses        25    6.68   1.93   49   7.82   1.69   16   7.31   1.20    14    7.14   1.23     29    7.52   1.64    37    6.62   2.79   12   7.08    2.68   18   6.83   1.98   14     6.21     2.29    12   7.42    1.78
Financial resources*                    26    7.19   2.02   50   8.56   1.33   18   8.00   1.33    14    8.43   1.09     27    7.93   1.27    41    7.05   1.95   12   7.58    1.98   19   7.00   2.03   14     7.29     1.20    11   8.18    1.40
Technical assistance*                   24    7.25   1.89   49   7.57   1.47   17   7.00   1.41    13    7.23   1.54     28    7.61   1.73    38    5.89   2.60   12   7.83    2.41   19   6.58   2.06   13     6.38     1.50    10   7.70    1.16
Mobilizing third party financial
                                        24    7.00   1.77   41   7.80   1.47   16   6.50   1.75    10    6.60   1.35     24    7.04   1.78    37    6.24   2.30   13   7.00    2.04   19   6.37   1.89   13     6.46     1.71    9    7.67    2.65
resources*
Donor coordination*                     25    7.48   1.92   45   7.51   1.62   17   6.41   1.18    12    6.33   1.83     25    7.28   1.62    37    6.22   2.49   12   7.33    1.30   19   6.84   2.22   12     6.08     1.31    8    7.25    1.83
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*          22    6.64   1.71   45   6.62   1.92   13   5.38   0.87     6    6.00   2.68     23    6.96   2.12    37    5.00   2.12   7    7.86    0.90   12   5.17   2.13   10     6.40     1.51    10   6.30    2.21
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Tanzania. To what degree would Tanzania benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                                                               Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                          Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                       President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                         N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD

Groups outside of government
(e.g., civil society, media) to help
                                        23    7.13   2.40   55   7.04   2.52   20   7.20   2.26    12    7.00   1.76     30    7.77   1.79    45    7.33   2.37   13   8.46    2.60   19   7.32   2.31   15     6.67     2.09    11   8.09    1.92
them more effectively engage and
participate in development efforts

The public sector , related to
implementation of specific
                                        25    7.40   2.16   55   8.65   1.70   20   8.65   1.18    13    7.85   1.99     29    8.17   1.81    49    6.76   2.80   12   7.67    2.02   19   7.89   2.31   15     7.67     1.11    15   8.40    1.45
development projects on the
ground*
The public sector , related to
changing institutions
                                        24    7.63   1.74   54   7.94   2.39   20   7.85   1.23    14    8.07   1.82     28    8.25   1.48    43    6.60   2.86   10   6.50    2.12   18   7.44   2.06   15     6.40     2.23    15   7.80    1.70
(organizations or sociopolitical
conditions)*
The private sector , related to
                                        24    6.96   2.20   54   7.24   2.24   19   7.00   2.19    14    7.64   1.95     28    8.18   2.09    43    6.95   2.65   11   7.64    2.11   19   8.16   2.43   15     8.07     1.39    14   8.29    2.09
institutional and policy change
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                         89
The World Bank Group                                                                                                     Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Tanzania?
                                                                                Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                           Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                        President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                          N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                         25    6.84   1.84   55   8.05   1.68   20   7.80   1.47    13    6.54   1.33     23    7.22   2.19    39    6.36   2.60   10   6.70    1.89   14   7.07   2.37   10     7.50     1.58    13   8.31    1.55
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                         25    7.12   1.59   49   6.69   1.93   14   6.50   1.91    11    6.18   1.60     22    5.91   2.43    42    6.21   3.02   9    7.00    1.94   16   6.19   1.94   8      6.88     2.48    11   7.82    1.78
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development        25    7.04   1.67   52   7.62   2.02   18   6.44   2.31    14    7.57   1.22     24    6.42   2.47    38    6.84   2.47   9    6.67    2.24   16   6.75   1.88   11     6.73     2.20    11   7.73    2.37
goals)
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Tanzania to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved
in the following aspects of capacity building?
                                                                                Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                           Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                        President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                          N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                         25    7.44   2.31   52   8.56   1.67   20   8.45   1.10    13    7.85   2.38     26    7.50   2.29    41    6.51   2.98   10   8.20    1.40   17   7.76   1.92   11     7.45     1.97    13   9.15    0.99
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                         25    7.52   1.92   50   7.62   2.23   17   7.18   1.38    13    7.92   2.36     26    6.77   2.61    45    7.22   2.61   9    8.78    1.48   17   7.41   2.15   11     7.64     2.16    14   9.07    1.14
citizens' voices into development)
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development        25    7.60   2.02   48   8.13   2.08   20   7.70   1.38    14    9.14   1.56     25    7.52   2.65    38    7.11   2.98   9    7.67    2.00   17   7.24   2.41   11     7.09     2.47    13   8.69    2.06
goals)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                          90
The World Bank Group                                                                    Tanzania                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                       Office of the Employee     Consultant on    Bilateral/       Private Sector/   NGO/CBO/              Independent
Percentage of Respondents               President/      of a     WBG-supported Multilateral        Financial Sector/    Private             Government
(Responses Combined)                     Minister     Ministry    Project/PMU       Agency           Private Bank     Foundation    Media    Institution   Academia        Other
Staff too inaccessible                     0.0%        5.9%           0.0%            7.1%               9.7%            5.8%       12.5%       5.3%         0.0%          0.0%
Not exploring alternative policy
                                           0.0%        5.9%           5.0%            7.1%               6.5%            0.0%       12.5%      21.1%        26.7%           7.1%
options*
Not adequately sensitive to
                                          29.2%        17.6%          30.0%          28.6%               9.7%           15.4%        6.3%      5.3%          6.7%           7.1%
political/social realities in Tanzania
Not enough public disclosure of its
                                          20.8%        21.6%          10.0%           7.1%               29.0%          44.2%       37.5%      15.8%        33.3%          35.7%
work*
Arrogant in its approach                   4.2%        11.8%          5.0%           21.4%               9.7%            5.8%        0.0%      5.3%          0.0%           0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities        8.3%        13.7%          0.0%            0.0%               0.0%            7.7%        6.3%      0.0%          6.7%           0.0%
The credibility of its
                                          16.7%        2.0%           0.0%            0.0%               25.8%           5.8%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           7.1%
knowledge/data*
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                          33.3%        25.5%          60.0%          21.4%               16.1%          15.4%       12.5%      36.8%        20.0%          21.4%
complex*
Not willing to raise concerns
related to policy and reform               8.3%        13.7%          0.0%            0.0%               19.4%           7.7%        0.0%      5.3%          0.0%          28.6%
efforts in Tanzania*
Too influenced by developed
                                          12.5%        13.7%          10.0%          21.4%               16.1%          25.0%       31.3%      26.3%        26.7%          14.3%
countries
Not doing enough to ensure
                                           8.3%        3.9%           10.0%           7.1%               9.7%            5.8%        0.0%      21.1%         6.7%           7.1%
sustainability of reforms
Imposing technocratic solutions
                                           4.2%        7.8%           5.0%            0.0%               3.2%            3.8%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
without regard to political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                          12.5%        11.8%          25.0%          14.3%               12.9%           3.8%        0.0%      0.0%          0.0%          28.6%
slow*
Too bureaucratic in its operational
                                          16.7%        13.7%          35.0%          21.4%               12.9%           9.6%       12.5%      31.6%        13.3%          28.6%
policies and procedures
Not aligned with other donors’
                                           0.0%        3.9%           0.0%           21.4%               0.0%            0.0%        6.3%      0.0%          6.7%           0.0%
work*
Not collaborating enough with
                                           4.2%        2.0%           0.0%            0.0%               9.7%            7.7%       43.8%      0.0%          6.7%           0.0%
non-state actors*
Not client focused*                        0.0%        0.0%           0.0%            0.0%               0.0%            1.9%        0.0%      15.8%        6.7%            0.0%
Other                                      0.0%        7.8%           5.0%           21.4%               3.2%            1.9%        0.0%      0.0%         6.7%            0.0%
Don't know                                 4.2%        3.9%           0.0%            0.0%               0.0%            9.6%        0.0%      5.3%         13.3%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                         91
The World Bank Group                                                                       Tanzania                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                  Office of the Employee      Consultant on        Bilateral/      Private Sector/   NGO/CBO/                     Independent
Percentage of Respondents          President/        of a     WBG-supported Multilateral          Financial Sector/    Private                    Government
(Responses Combined)                Minister      Ministry     Project/PMU          Agency          Private Bank     Foundation    Media           Institution    Academia         Other
Capacity development                 36.0%         62.3%           70.0%             28.6%              53.3%          42.6%       50.0%             68.4%         66.7%           60.0%
Policy based lending / budget
                                     56.0%         22.6%           25.0%             50.0%              33.3%          24.1%       18.8%             31.6%          33.3%          20.0%
support to the Government
Knowledge products/services          20.0%         13.2%           15.0%             28.6%              13.3%          27.8%       12.5%             21.1%          6.7%           26.7%
Investment lending*                  36.0%         56.6%           30.0%             78.6%              36.7%          33.3%       50.0%             47.4%          53.3%          33.3%
Technical assistance                 20.0%         17.0%           25.0%              0.0%              40.0%          22.2%       37.5%             26.3%          33.3%          13.3%
Trust Fund management                 0.0%         13.2%           15.0%             14.3%              20.0%          20.4%       12.5%             5.3%           6.7%           26.7%
Other                                 4.0%          3.8%           10.0%              0.0%              3.3%            1.9%       0.0%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
Don't know*                           0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%              0.0%           11.1%       0.0%              0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your
country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                       Office of the Employee       Consultant on       Bilateral/    Private Sector/     NGO/CBO/                 Independent
Percentage of Respondents               President/        of a     WBG-supported Multilateral        Financial Sector/      Private                Government
(Responses Combined)                     Minister       Ministry    Project/PMU          Agency        Private Bank       Foundation     Media      Institution    Academia      Other
Academia/Think Tanks/Research
                                           34.6%         37.5%           20.0%             7.7%            18.2%            14.8%        37.5%        21.1%          60.0%       33.3%
Institutes*
Donor Community*                           23.1%         30.4%           35.0%            46.2%            15.2%             1.9%         6.3%         5.3%           6.7%        6.7%
Media*                                     11.5%         0.0%            0.0%              7.7%            27.3%             7.4%        43.8%        26.3%           6.7%        6.7%
NGOs*                                      19.2%         10.7%           20.0%            15.4%            18.2%            40.7%         0.0%         5.3%          13.3%       46.7%
Local Government*                          34.6%         35.7%           60.0%            23.1%            12.1%            18.5%         0.0%        36.8%          33.3%       26.7%
Private Sector*                            15.4%         30.4%           20.0%            61.5%            63.6%            35.2%        37.5%        52.6%          20.0%       20.0%
Parliament                                 11.5%         12.5%           0.0%             15.4%             3.0%             3.7%         0.0%         5.3%           6.7%       13.3%
Community-Based Organizations
                                           19.2%         19.6%           20.0%            15.4%            12.1%            38.9%        12.5%        26.3%          26.7%       40.0%
(CBOs)
Beneficiaries                              3.8%          16.1%           20.0%             0.0%            15.2%            14.8%        12.5%        21.1%           6.7%        0.0%
Foundations                                7.7%          0.0%            5.0%              0.0%             0.0%             5.6%        12.5%         0.0%           6.7%        0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations                  0.0%          5.4%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%            11.1%        12.5%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%
Other                                      0.0%          0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%           0.0%        0.0%
Don't know                                 0.0%          0.0%            0.0%              0.0%             3.0%             1.9%        12.5%         0.0%           6.7%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            92
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Tanzania? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                              Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in     26    7.15   1.87   56   7.91   1.95   20   6.85   1.42    14    8.43   1.87     32    6.03   2.28    44    6.45   2.90   13   6.15    2.04   17   7.35   1.62   15     7.33     2.09    12   7.25    1.91
development in Tanzania*
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the
                                       24    7.25   1.54   55   7.71   1.74   20   7.40   1.27    14    8.07   1.90     32    5.97   2.24    43    6.49   2.32   13   6.31    1.44   16   7.06   1.48   14     6.36     2.17    13   6.85    1.91
development priorities for
Tanzania*
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are       25    7.52   1.61   56   7.93   1.62   20   7.30   1.49    14    8.00   1.30     30    5.87   2.27    45    5.91   2.65   12   5.92    1.73   16   6.94   1.39   15     6.80     2.08    13   7.54    2.37
realistic for Tanzania*
The World Bank Group treats
clients and stakeholders in            24    7.08   2.00   53   7.79   1.70   20   7.75   1.45    13    8.08   1.89     28    6.86   2.32    42    6.19   2.92   13   7.08    1.44   15   6.67   1.80   11     7.09     1.51    11   6.91    2.51
Tanzania with respect*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Tanzania, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                              Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness                         23    6.17   1.83   53   6.98   1.77   20   6.75   1.33    10    7.10   1.10     28    6.11   2.03    40    6.18   2.58   11   6.36    1.43   16   5.56   1.63   10     6.90     2.42    11   7.09    2.17
Flexibility (in terms of the World
Bank Group’s products and              23    6.57   1.88   55   6.60   1.82   18   5.89   1.45    10    6.30   1.49     28    5.93   1.63    37    6.11   2.76   9    7.11    1.62   16   5.19   1.38   10     7.10     1.20    12   6.33    2.54
services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                       23    6.78   2.13   53   6.87   1.84   17   5.88   1.17    12    6.08   2.11     28    5.96   1.71    41    5.41   2.56   8    6.75    1.58   17   5.71   1.96   10     6.30     1.49    15   7.20    2.08
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                       23    7.09   1.70   52   7.23   1.58   18   6.83   1.25    12    5.83   1.64     32    5.84   1.82    37    5.49   2.57   9    7.00    1.87   19   6.53   2.14   10     7.40     1.43    10   7.20    2.15
Openness (sharing data and other
                                       23    7.13   1.89   52   7.40   1.99   20   7.45   1.28    14    6.93   2.30     31    6.94   1.93    37    6.68   2.64   8    6.75    2.55   18   6.67   2.47   12     7.92     1.68    14   8.14    2.07
information)
Staff accessibility*                   23    7.00   1.17   55   7.36   2.14   19   7.84   1.43    13    7.15   1.86     29    6.00   2.04    37    6.22   2.45   8    6.75    0.71   17   5.76   2.17   9      7.11     1.45    15   6.87    2.33
Straightforwardness and honesty        24    6.96   2.26   55   7.49   1.93   19   8.21   1.23    13    7.08   1.26     29    7.24   2.23    36    6.53   2.68   9    5.89    2.89   18   6.33   2.20   11     7.00     1.95    11   6.91    2.30
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making        23    6.87   1.49   54   7.17   2.31   19   7.58   1.92    13    7.38   1.45     29    6.34   2.02    40    4.70   2.07   11   5.73    2.28   17   5.76   2.11   10     7.30     2.00    14   7.14    2.18
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with groups outside
                                       21    6.76   1.64   43   7.28   1.76   12   7.25   1.96     5    6.40   1.34     31    6.55   2.19    44    5.23   2.60   11   7.00    2.41   17   6.12   2.21   12     6.75     1.36    12   6.92    2.19
of the Government*
Collaboration with the Government      25    7.96   1.70   54   8.57   1.35   20   8.10   1.25    13    8.15   1.35     29    7.66   2.13    46    7.72   2.11   11   8.18    1.83   18   7.17   2.38   12     8.25     1.22    13   8.38    1.33
Collaboration with other donors        23    7.57   1.59   50   8.28   1.33   16   7.56   1.41    14    7.36   1.65     27    7.30   2.32    39    7.03   2.46   10   7.80    2.04   16   7.56   2.37   9      7.22     1.86    9    8.44    1.81
The speed in which it gets things
                                       23    6.87   1.58   53   6.72   1.92   20   6.65   1.31    11    6.09   1.30     29    5.86   2.13    40    5.60   2.53   11   7.36    1.29   18   6.22   1.90   11     7.27     1.42    15   6.20    2.70
accomplished on the ground
Being a long-term partner*             24    7.67   1.81   54   8.43   1.70   19   8.11   1.49    12    8.58   1.08     30    6.93   2.23    37    7.00   2.51   11   7.64    2.42   17   7.41   2.18   12     8.00     2.05    12   8.08    1.83
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                                                        93
The World Bank Group                                                                       Tanzania                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To be a more effective development partner in Tanzania, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
                                    Office of the Employee       Consultant on       Bilateral/    Private Sector/     NGO/CBO/                   Independent
                                     President/       of a      WBG-supported Multilateral        Financial Sector/      Private                  Government
Percentage of Respondents             Minister      Ministry      Project/PMU         Agency        Private Bank       Foundation      Media       Institution    Academia        Other
More local presence                    42.9%         63.3%           78.9%             71.4%            58.6%            72.9%         81.3%         76.5%         66.7%          73.3%
The current level of local presence
                                       52.4%         30.6%           21.1%             28.6%            20.7%             18.8%        12.5%         23.5%         26.7%          26.7%
is adequate
Less local presence                       -           4.1%              -                 -             6.9%               6.3%           -             -             -              -
Don't know                              4.8%          2.0%              -                 -             13.8%              2.1%         6.3%            -           6.7%             -

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                     Office of the Employee       Consultant on       Bilateral/      Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/                  Independent
Percentage of Respondents             President/       of a      WBG-supported       Multilateral    Financial Sector/     Private                 Government
(Responses Combined)                   Minister     Ministry       Project/PMU          Agency         Private Bank      Foundation      Media      Institution   Academia        Other
The World Bank Group does not
do adequate follow                      13.0%         23.2%           10.0%              7.1%              6.1%             15.4%        18.8%        15.8%         0.0%           0.0%
through/follow-up
There is not an adequate level of
                                        43.5%         26.8%           20.0%             21.4%              27.3%            50.0%        56.3%        42.1%        28.6%          28.6%
citizen/civil society participation
The World Bank Group is not
sensitive enough to political/social    21.7%         25.0%           10.0%             28.6%              21.2%            32.7%        18.8%        36.8%         0.0%          21.4%
realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of
                                        21.7%         17.9%           55.0%              7.1%              33.3%             7.7%        12.5%        36.8%        42.9%          28.6%
capacity in Government*
Poor donor coordination                 34.8%         10.7%            0.0%              7.1%              18.2%            15.4%        12.5%         0.0%        14.3%          14.3%
The World Bank Group works too
                                        17.4%         12.5%           10.0%              0.0%              9.1%              9.6%        12.5%         5.3%        14.3%          42.9%
slowly
The Government works
                                         8.7%         16.1%           30.0%             35.7%              21.2%            25.0%        18.8%        15.8%        21.4%           7.1%
inefficiently
Political pressures and obstacles*       4.3%         16.1%           30.0%             50.0%              27.3%            23.1%        12.5%         5.3%        21.4%          14.3%
Reforms are not well thought out
                                        21.7%         28.6%           25.0%             21.4%              30.3%             7.7%        18.8%        31.6%        42.9%          14.3%
in light of country challenges
Other                                    0.0%         7.1%             0.0%              0.0%              3.0%              1.9%         0.0%         5.3%         7.1%           7.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            94
The World Bank Group                                                                                               Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Tanzania? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                          Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                     Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                  President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                    N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Anti-corruption*                   24    6.29   2.31   54   6.13   2.96   20   7.75   1.45    13    8.92   1.94     33    7.61   2.42    45    6.96   3.13   13   7.85    2.58   17   7.29   2.73   14     7.21     2.58    13   7.54    2.47
Information and communications
                                   24    6.71   1.71   55   7.76   2.19   19   7.95   1.18    14    7.79   2.19     33    6.79   2.75    42    7.00   2.66   13   7.23    2.32   16   7.31   2.89   15     7.73     1.98    15   9.20    0.86
technology*
Transport                          26    7.15   2.09   56   8.21   2.17   18   8.06   1.80    14    8.71   1.14     33    8.27   2.16    44    7.36   2.58   11   7.27    2.41   18   7.72   2.45   15     8.27     1.79    14   8.64    2.27
Crime and violence                 24    6.25   2.17   51   5.69   2.46   20   5.50   1.50    10    5.10   2.18     31    6.39   2.46    41    5.59   2.39   10   6.80    2.15   18   5.00   2.25   15     5.27     2.52    13   5.92    3.04
Law and justice                    24    6.75   1.94   48   6.31   2.85   19   6.74   1.49    12    6.00   1.71     32    7.03   2.36    44    6.52   2.70   13   7.85    1.73   19   5.16   2.54   15     5.33     2.35    14   7.14    3.21
Urban development                  22    7.32   1.81   54   7.70   2.22   20   8.35   1.50    14    7.57   1.91     33    7.79   2.15    45    6.69   2.67   10   6.70    2.36   18   6.94   2.58   14     6.43     2.38    14   7.71    2.40
Environmental sustainability       24    7.38   1.50   53   7.81   2.10   20   8.20   1.44    14    8.86   1.56     33    8.00   2.36    45    7.49   2.25   12   7.08    2.43   18   7.00   2.17   13     7.31     1.97    13   9.00    1.87
Regulatory framework*              24    6.54   1.96   51   7.10   2.61   16   7.31   1.54    14    8.14   1.83     31    7.94   1.65    45    6.49   2.40   13   8.08    1.75   19   7.16   2.46   15     5.07     2.55    14   7.14    2.57
Communicable/non-communicable
                                   24    7.04   1.88   48   7.08   1.96   18   8.11   1.94    13    4.54   2.44     31    6.87   2.63    42    7.02   2.37   12   6.25    2.18   16   7.75   2.18   15     7.33     1.84    15   7.40    2.64
diseases*
Poverty reduction                  26    7.54   2.14   54   8.19   1.59   20   8.80   1.44    14    8.57   1.99     31    8.19   2.27    48    7.46   3.08   13   8.46    1.45   18   8.11   2.52   15     8.53     1.64    15   7.93    2.74
Gender equity                      24    6.88   1.99   52   7.00   2.50   19   6.68   1.86    14    8.50   1.95     32    6.97   2.65    43    6.49   2.65   13   6.31    2.69   16   6.50   2.34   15     6.93     2.69    15   7.27    2.55
Domestic private sector
                                   23    6.87   1.87   53   7.32   2.14   20   7.15   1.46    14    8.50   1.35     32    7.69   2.60    44    7.34   2.01   13   8.62    1.71   19   8.11   2.40   15     7.00     2.36    15   7.53    2.23
development
Foreign direct investment          24    6.75   2.05   53   7.32   2.05   19   7.21   1.58    14    8.14   1.23     33    7.79   2.15    45    6.27   2.80   12   6.33    2.15   18   7.39   2.36   15     6.60     2.50    14   6.36    3.84
Water and sanitation               24    7.71   2.16   54   7.76   1.99   18   8.28   2.30    14    8.36   1.08     33    7.64   2.50    45    7.24   2.52   12   7.00    2.59   16   7.94   2.05   15     8.00     1.81    15   9.07    1.62
Trade and exports                  24    7.08   1.93   53   7.23   1.97   19   7.00   2.08    14    8.36   1.15     33    7.30   2.53    43    6.65   2.72   11   6.27    1.95   18   6.83   2.96   15     6.80     2.60    15   7.40    2.61
Economic growth*                   25    7.40   1.80   54   8.48   1.56   20   8.80   1.15    14    9.29   0.99     33    8.06   2.44    46    7.39   2.41   13   8.08    2.29   18   7.50   2.46   15     8.27     1.79    15   9.27    0.80
Energy                             24    7.46   1.91   53   8.42   1.50   18   8.94   1.16    14    8.64   1.22     32    7.88   2.54    45    7.80   2.21   13   7.62    2.14   18   8.28   2.47   15     8.20     1.27    14   9.14    1.41
Disaster management                22    6.27   2.21   53   7.15   2.35   19   7.84   1.83    14    6.86   2.07     31    7.45   2.47    38    6.66   2.88   13   6.85    2.08   18   7.22   2.69   15     7.07     2.34    12   8.33    1.97
Public sector governance/reform    23    6.83   2.02   54   7.91   2.19   20   7.80   1.88    14    8.86   1.23     33    8.06   2.08    41    6.78   2.64   13   7.92    2.10   19   7.63   2.41   14     7.86     2.41    15   7.67    2.26
Job creation/employment            24    6.96   2.35   51   7.53   1.87   19   7.74   1.97    14    9.00   1.47     33    7.48   2.15    43    7.02   2.33   12   6.83    2.37   18   7.28   2.59   15     8.13     2.13    14   7.93    2.09
Financial markets*                 24    7.83   2.01   48   7.67   2.06   19   7.21   1.87    14    8.14   1.17     33    7.45   1.99    43    6.23   2.26   13   6.54    2.60   18   7.17   2.96   14     6.00     2.45    14   7.29    2.87
Equality of opportunity            24    7.38   1.88   47   7.34   2.28   18   7.39   1.15    14    8.71   1.27     33    7.42   2.32    44    7.36   2.30   12   6.75    2.38   17   6.18   3.15   15     6.93     1.62    11   8.00    2.15
Health                             24    7.83   2.10   54   8.22   1.76   19   8.26   1.79    12    6.75   1.82     33    7.67   2.48    45    7.78   2.11   13   6.54    3.05   18   8.39   2.12   15     8.33     1.45    14   8.57    1.60
Rural development                  25    7.96   1.74   55   8.11   2.22   19   8.63   1.57    14    8.07   1.33     33    7.76   2.26    45    7.51   2.79   13   7.46    2.40   17   7.47   2.48   15     8.27     2.02    14   8.21    2.05
Global/regional integration        22    7.41   1.68   51   6.86   2.15   20   6.55   1.79    14    7.79   1.67     33    6.94   1.82    43    6.33   2.28   13   6.77    2.17   15   6.40   2.13   15     5.93     2.02    14   5.93    3.45
Food security                      24    7.54   1.64   51   7.47   2.29   19   7.89   1.70    14    6.71   2.53     31    7.19   2.32    43    7.14   2.59   12   7.58    2.39   18   6.61   2.23   15     8.47     1.85    11   8.64    1.69
Education                          24    7.88   1.96   56   8.66   1.47   19   8.89   1.29    14    7.71   1.90     33    7.79   2.60    44    8.11   2.30   13   8.46    1.94   19   7.95   2.30   15     9.20     1.37    15   8.73    1.71
Social protection                  24    7.54   1.64   51   6.55   2.56   19   6.89   1.70    14    8.36   1.82     33    7.06   2.36    46    6.76   2.49   13   7.23    2.49   17   6.94   2.36   15     5.93     2.52    12   8.42    2.07
Climate change                     25    7.36   2.27   55   7.09   2.34   20   8.30   1.38    14    7.71   1.77     31    7.32   2.34    43    7.51   2.34   13   6.69    2.59   18   6.94   2.36   14     7.36     2.10    14   9.00    1.11
Agricultural development           26    8.12   2.29   56   8.38   2.06   18   8.78   1.17    14    8.07   1.86     33    7.76   2.44    43    8.00   2.43   13   8.31    2.10   18   8.06   2.31   15     8.53     2.10    15   8.93    2.05
Natural resource management        24    7.67   1.79   55   7.13   2.84   19   8.68   1.57    14    8.29   1.44     33    7.48   2.09    44    7.07   3.02   15   7.80    2.21   18   7.22   2.29   14     7.79     2.33    15   8.87    1.55
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                    95
The World Bank Group                                                                                                Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Tanzania? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                           Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                      Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                   President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                     N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Anti-corruption*                    22    6.86   2.36   35   5.89   2.56   8    6.88   1.73     9    4.78   1.48     24    4.83   2.44    35    4.40   2.35   8    7.00    3.21   11   5.82   2.71   10     5.80     2.66    6    7.67    2.25
Information and communications
                                    23    6.87   2.24   41   6.71   2.37   10   7.00   1.16     7    7.14   1.07     24    6.71   2.39    33    5.27   2.21   9    8.11    2.47   14   7.07   2.76   9      6.89     1.76    10   7.90    1.79
technology*
Transport                           24    7.42   2.10   48   7.98   1.90   19   7.79   1.48    12    7.08   1.00     27    6.52   2.33    39    6.90   2.34   11   7.91    2.02   17   7.88   2.40   7      6.57     1.72    11   8.00    1.48
Crime and violence*                 20    7.60   1.39   34   6.65   2.07   8    7.13   1.25     4    5.00   3.46     23    5.83   2.39    29    5.07   2.03   6    7.50    2.17   13   5.69   2.29   7      5.86     2.12    9    6.89    2.98
Law and justice*                    22    7.59   1.65   36   6.58   2.17   7    7.29   0.76     4    5.50   2.89     24    6.08   2.69    31    5.00   2.05   7    7.43    2.94   14   6.36   2.59   9      6.11     2.42    8    7.25    2.19
Urban development                   22    7.55   1.57   44   7.36   2.07   17   7.65   1.06     7    7.29   1.38     28    6.54   2.20    38    6.63   2.57   11   6.82    2.32   15   6.73   2.34   8      7.13     1.13    9    8.11    1.45
Environmental sustainability        22    7.59   1.82   45   7.42   1.98   18   7.61   1.72     4    6.50   1.73     28    6.50   2.29    38    6.34   2.57   9    7.33    2.18   16   6.69   2.52   11     6.82     1.83    9    7.89    1.45
Regulatory framework                21    7.43   1.75   42   7.12   2.14   16   7.31   1.08    10    7.20   1.32     27    6.41   2.22    34    6.06   2.28   6    8.50    1.05   15   6.60   2.53   8      6.38     2.83    9    7.22    1.99
Communicable/non-communicable
                                    22    7.05   1.79   43   7.16   2.25   13   7.62   1.50     5    5.80   0.84     22    6.64   1.65    40    5.63   2.26   7    7.43    2.23   13   6.54   2.67   8      6.13     2.03    8    6.88    3.18
diseases
Poverty reduction*                  24    7.71   1.76   50   8.28   1.62   20   7.65   1.73    12    7.00   1.35     29    6.76   2.26    43    6.93   2.43   10   8.10    1.97   14   7.00   2.57   9      7.22     2.73    8    8.38    1.77
Gender equity                       22    6.86   1.55   46   7.17   1.78   14   6.93   1.14     9    5.89   0.93     24    6.13   1.80    39    6.18   2.35   7    6.86    2.80   13   6.69   2.59   10     6.70     1.42    8    5.88    2.75
Domestic private sector
                                    20    6.90   1.62   45   7.42   2.05   11   7.18   0.98    12    6.33   1.30     28    6.18   2.06    39    5.51   2.26   8    6.88    3.23   15   7.20   2.37   6      8.50     1.23    9    6.78    1.99
development*
Foreign direct investment           22    6.86   2.01   42   7.40   2.12   13   7.08   1.32     9    6.33   1.80     25    6.64   2.14    36    5.78   2.33   6    8.00    2.10   14   6.57   2.59   8      5.88     2.64    9    7.22    3.03
Water and sanitation                24    7.29   1.83   45   7.84   2.10   19   7.42   2.17    12    7.00   1.48     27    6.44   2.56    42    6.57   2.52   6    8.17    2.23   13   6.92   2.72   7      7.57     2.99    11   8.27    1.56
Trade and exports                   22    7.18   1.89   40   6.90   2.10   10   6.90   0.88     9    6.89   0.93     25    6.48   2.45    34    5.88   1.89   6    7.83    2.04   14   6.71   3.27   9      5.56     2.19    9    6.56    2.19
Economic growth                     23    7.57   1.90   54   7.93   1.79   20   7.80   1.70    13    7.38   1.26     29    6.69   2.22    43    7.16   2.44   10   8.20    1.93   14   6.93   3.08   9      7.56     2.24    11   7.73    1.56
Energy*                             23    7.52   1.83   47   8.09   1.77   17   8.35   1.37    12    8.08   1.24     25    7.04   1.43    41    6.56   2.21   8    8.50    2.00   16   7.31   2.24   8      6.75     1.91    9    8.56    1.67
Disaster management*                22    7.45   1.95   38   7.11   1.74   10   7.70   1.95     5    6.40   0.55     22    6.86   2.62    35    5.51   1.58   7    8.29    2.63   11   5.82   2.93   7      6.00     2.94    8    7.00    2.00
Public sector governance/reform*    22    7.82   1.79   47   7.96   2.14   17   7.94   1.52    12    6.25   2.34     30    7.00   2.07    43    6.05   2.34   5    8.20    1.79   14   7.43   2.38   10     7.30     2.50    9    7.89    2.03
Job creation/employment             23    6.87   1.96   44   7.50   1.75   14   7.36   1.69     9    7.11   1.45     28    6.46   2.22    39    5.72   2.68   7    6.57    3.41   14   7.29   2.49   8      7.00     2.67    8    7.00    2.20
Financial markets*                  21    7.05   2.04   38   7.05   1.69   9    8.00   1.00     6    7.83   0.41     24    6.92   1.89    32    5.66   2.15   6    7.50    2.35   15   6.87   2.97   8      6.25     1.67    8    6.88    1.73
Equality of opportunity*            22    7.32   1.17   43   7.35   2.00   12   7.33   1.07     6    6.17   2.48     25    7.04   2.09    37    5.65   2.52   6    7.67    2.25   13   5.92   2.87   7      6.00     1.73    9    7.00    1.87
Health*                             24    7.67   1.55   48   7.94   1.87   16   7.88   1.50     9    6.56   1.13     24    7.38   2.08    39    6.31   2.21   8    7.75    2.49   15   7.33   2.72   9      6.56     2.19    10   8.70    1.64
Rural development*                  24    7.71   1.71   45   7.87   1.75   17   7.59   1.70    11    7.36   1.50     29    6.76   2.28    40    5.83   2.87   9    7.67    2.18   14   6.14   3.13   9      6.89     2.76    9    8.11    1.97
Global/regional integration         21    6.90   1.92   40   6.93   2.06   14   6.86   0.95     9    7.33   0.71     26    6.62   2.59    36    5.75   2.18   7    6.29    2.98   13   6.38   3.23   6      6.67     2.66    9    6.78    2.68
Food security*                      22    7.41   1.89   39   7.15   2.06   17   7.41   1.50     9    7.11   1.17     27    6.93   2.40    41    5.90   2.50   6    8.50    1.52   13   6.31   2.98   9      6.56     2.60    8    8.25    1.91
Education                           23    7.39   1.90   48   7.77   1.87   18   7.78   1.31    12    7.58   1.00     27    7.30   2.80    38    6.82   2.64   9    7.44    2.13   16   7.00   2.90   9      7.22     2.17    11   8.09    1.76
Social protection                   22    7.32   1.84   39   6.77   2.07   11   6.91   1.51    13    7.15   1.77     23    6.78   1.98    36    5.53   2.34   7    6.29    3.30   13   6.38   2.63   8      6.50     1.77    8    7.88    2.03
Climate change                      23    7.39   1.67   40   7.60   1.96   18   7.50   2.26     6    7.17   2.64     23    6.52   2.19    37    6.32   2.12   7    6.00    2.89   13   6.23   2.65   7      5.57     2.23    7    6.71    2.06
Agricultural development            24    7.83   1.55   43   7.56   2.14   18   7.22   2.29    10    8.10   1.60     27    7.00   2.08    45    6.53   2.56   9    7.78    2.11   14   7.64   2.02   11     7.27     2.41    10   8.10    2.03
Natural resource management         23    7.13   2.05   45   7.29   2.40   17   7.59   2.55     7    7.57   1.99     27    6.78   2.28    42    6.31   2.27   6    7.00    2.53   12   6.67   2.57   7      7.29     2.93    8    7.25    1.75
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                     96
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Tanzania                                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Tanzania?
                                  Office of the Employee        Consultant on      Bilateral/    Private Sector/                                        NGO/CBO/                            Independent
                                   President/       of a       WBG-supported Multilateral       Financial Sector/                                         Private                           Government
Percentage of Respondents           Minister      Ministry       Project/PMU        Agency        Private Bank                                          Foundation             Media         Institution         Academia              Other
At the Headquarters (in
                                      20.0%        47.3%            70.0%            28.6%            34.4%                                                    39.6%           33.3%              21.1%             60.0%              21.4%
Washington D.C.)
In the country                        64.0%        41.8%            25.0%            28.6%            43.8%                                                    25.0%           13.3%              47.4%             13.3%              28.6%
Don't know                            16.0%        10.9%             5.0%            42.9%            21.9%                                                    35.4%           53.3%              31.6%             26.7%              50.0%

                                                                            Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                                  Independent
                                       Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                                  Government
                                    President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation           Media             Institution           Academia                Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N     Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve    26    7.27   1.46   56   7.96   1.44   20   7.10   1.12    14    7.86   1.23     31    6.45   2.01    49    6.57   2.65     12    6.83    1.90   17   6.47    1.59   13     7.00     1.47   15    7.53    1.96
development results in Tanzania?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Tanzania? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                            Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                                  Independent
                                       Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                                  Government
                                    President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation           Media             Institution           Academia                Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N     Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group's financial
instruments meet the needs of        26    6.23   1.90   56   7.04   1.61   20   6.50   1.28    14    7.71   1.73     30    5.67   1.99    42    5.64   2.66     12    5.58    1.98   16   5.56    1.83   11     6.45     2.02    12    6.42   2.75
Tanzania*
The World Bank Group meets
Tanzania’s needs for knowledge       25    6.28   1.62   56   6.86   1.84   20   6.10   1.41    14    7.21   1.42     30    6.50   2.36    43    6.12   2.37     12    5.33    2.64   18   5.56    1.95   12     6.58     1.73    9     6.44   2.70
services
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                            Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                                  Independent
                                       Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                                  Government
                                    President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation           Media             Institution           Academia                Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N     Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group’s internal
evaluation mechanisms hold the       23    7.09   1.62   46   7.48   1.47   20   7.25   1.41     7    6.43   1.40     26    6.73   2.57    39    6.41   2.27     12     6.25   2.18   15   6.13    1.36   8      7.50     1.31    8     6.13   2.90
institution accountable for
achieving results in Tanzania?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                                                                      97
The World Bank Group                                                                                                  Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
                                   Office of the Employee     Consultant on         Bilateral/    Private Sector/                                        NGO/CBO/                        Independent
                                    President/       of a    WBG-supported Multilateral          Financial Sector/                                         Private                       Government
Percentage of Respondents            Minister      Ministry   Project/PMU            Agency        Private Bank                                          Foundation          Media        Institution         Academia              Other
Weekly                                 7.7%         14.3%         35.0%               35.7%            3.0%                                                 7.8%               -             5.6%                 -                 7.1%
Monthly                               26.9%         39.3%         25.0%               28.6%            18.2%                                                2.0%             5.9%               -              30.8%                14.3%
A few times a year                    50.0%         32.1%         30.0%               21.4%            48.5%                                               33.3%             29.4%          55.6%              30.8%                64.3%
Rarely                                11.5%         10.7%         10.0%               14.3%            12.1%                                               25.5%             29.4%          33.3%              23.1%                14.3%
Never                                  3.8%         3.6%            -                    -             18.2%                                               31.4%             35.3%           5.6%              15.4%                  -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Tanzania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                             Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                               Independent
                                        Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                               Government
                                     President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media             Institution          Academia                Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD         N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Are timely*                           24    6.33   1.27   52   7.27   1.84   20   6.40   1.31    14    7.36   1.28     30    6.57   2.21    40    5.70   2.44   9    5.56    1.94   17   6.12   1.69   10     7.00     1.33    9     5.89   1.76
Include appropriate level of
stakeholder involvement during        25    7.40   1.94   52   7.27   1.90   19   6.74   0.65    12    5.83   1.19     28    5.79   2.25    34    5.44   2.03   10   5.90    2.38   16   6.69   1.30   10     7.20     1.32    11    6.73   2.41
preparation*
Are relevant to Tanzania’s
                                      24    6.75   1.80   54   7.56   2.05   20   6.85   1.04    14    8.07   1.69     32    6.28   2.20    44    6.39   2.16   13   6.46    1.81   17   6.35   1.66   10     7.50     1.78    12    6.92   2.23
development priorities*
Lead to practical solutions*          23    6.96   1.75   54   7.22   1.99   20   7.35   0.88    12    6.67   0.99     30    5.83   1.88    38    6.18   2.07   11   6.73    1.90   17   5.76   1.89   10     7.20     1.14    12    7.25   2.18
Are accessible (well written and
                                      24    7.21   1.64   52   7.52   1.78   20   7.30   1.66    14    7.21   1.81     31    6.77   2.49    37    6.32   1.81   11   6.00    2.00   18   6.56   1.54   9      6.78     1.39    12    7.17   2.13
easy to understand)
Are source of relevant information
                                      25    7.52   1.64   52   7.85   1.91   18   7.50   1.38    14    7.86   1.46     32    7.53   2.11    40    6.53   2.23   11   6.82    2.23   17   6.88   1.50   11     7.45     1.29    12    7.50   2.15
on global good practices
Enhance your knowledge and/or
                                      24    7.29   1.65   53   7.96   1.52   18   8.17   0.86    14    7.86   1.10     32    6.91   2.21    42    6.21   2.48   11   5.82    2.56   16   6.94   1.34   10     7.60     1.96    12    8.00   2.09
skills*
Are adequately disseminated*          24    7.67   1.37   52   7.42   1.41   20   6.95   1.96    14    7.21   1.48     30    6.03   2.50    41    5.59   2.28   9    5.78    1.86   14   6.43   1.60   8      6.75     1.28    12    7.25   1.77
Are translated enough into local
                                      22    6.95   1.29   48   6.15   2.22   19   5.74   1.24     7    5.57   3.10     27    5.89   2.49    41    4.80   2.27   10   5.90    2.47   17   5.12   1.87   8      5.88     1.73    9     6.11   2.42
language*
Are adaptable to Tanzania’s
specific development challenges       24    7.13   1.83   52   6.52   1.75   19   7.37   0.90    13    7.77   1.83     29    5.97   2.29    38    6.00   2.22   13   6.46    2.22   16   5.69   1.20   11     6.91     1.76    13    7.15   1.82
and country circumstances*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                       98
The World Bank Group                                                                                                   Tanzania                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                                              Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
World Bank Group's knowledge
                                       26    7.88   1.37   54   8.35   1.08   20   7.25   1.21    13    7.15   1.07     32    7.13   2.21    50    6.90   2.23   12   7.42    1.83   19   6.79   2.15   13     7.23     1.83    12   7.42    1.98
work and activities make to
development results in your
country?*
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World Bank
                                       26    7.62   1.44   55   8.18   1.22   20   7.70   0.73    14    7.79   0.89     32    7.19   2.01    46    7.13   2.26   12   7.58    1.78   18   6.94   1.96   11     7.73     1.74    13   7.77    1.92
Group's knowledge work and
activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Tanzania’s development challenges?
                                                                              Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                              Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
Conceptualization (understanding
                                       26    6.96   2.05   48   7.79   1.62   20   6.95   0.95    12    7.58   0.90     29    6.69   2.44    41    5.98   2.16   8    7.25    1.04   16   6.13   2.09   11     6.82     1.08    12   7.67    2.02
and framing the problem)*
Design (appraising and planning
                                       23    7.22   1.91   47   8.09   1.60   20   7.80   0.77    12    7.33   1.37     30    6.83   2.25    43    6.30   2.46   12   6.58    1.78   16   6.06   2.05   10     6.80     1.32    13   7.62    2.22
the solutions)*
Implementation (executing,
carrying out, monitoring, and          26    7.38   1.84   49   7.65   1.61   18   7.61   1.29    13    7.00   1.08     31    6.74   2.16    44    6.23   2.30   13   6.77    1.79   15   6.53   2.00   11     7.18     1.40    12   7.92    1.51
making appropriate adjustments)*
Evaluation (assessing the impact
                                       26    7.08   1.67   49   7.88   1.30   18   7.83   1.47    12    7.25   1.29     31    6.55   2.17    41    6.49   2.31   13   7.31    1.84   15   6.53   2.03   10     7.20     1.55    13   8.08    1.98
and results)*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                        99
The World Bank Group                                                                                                  Tanzania                                                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                             Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                                   Independent
                                        Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                                   Government
                                     President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation           Media              Institution            Academia                Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N     Mean    SD       N Mean SD           N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses
                                      25    6.56   2.29   51   7.35   2.01   20   7.50   1.32    12    6.67   1.44     25    6.16   2.32    34    5.65   3.07     9     5.89    3.30     15   5.27    1.87   9      7.00     1.00    13    6.08   2.22
funds promptly*
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the            23    6.96   2.12   54   7.83   1.67   20   8.20   1.28    13    7.23   0.93     28    6.71   2.07    44    6.89   2.48     9     7.11    1.83     16   6.88    1.89   11     8.09     1.45    15    8.07   1.62
projects and programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals
and reviews are done in a timely      25    6.24   1.88   52   7.15   1.96   20   6.95   1.15    13    7.00   1.16     28    6.36   2.39    35    6.43   2.32     9     5.67    2.92     15   6.20    2.08   11     6.64     1.36    12    5.75   2.18
fashion
The World Bank Group’s
“Safeguard Policy? requirements       25    6.36   2.34   46   7.11   1.83   17   7.53   1.23     9    6.89   1.90     26    6.50   2.57    34    6.71   1.96     10    6.40    2.41     15   6.07    1.75   6      7.33     1.37    12    6.50   2.20
are reasonable
The World Bank Group’s conditions
                                      25    6.64   1.63   47   7.34   1.88   17   7.29   1.45     9    7.00   0.71     28    6.21   2.50    37    5.78   2.49     9     5.78    2.11     15   5.67    2.06   9      6.44     1.59    14    7.21   2.42
on its lending are reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes
                                      24    6.71   1.99   50   6.92   1.85   19   7.21   1.55    12    6.42   1.38     29    6.21   2.37    37    5.54   2.89     12    4.67    2.57     15   6.07    1.91   10     7.10     0.74    12    6.17   1.80
decisions quickly in Tanzania*
Working with the World Bank
Group increases Tanzania’s            25    7.24   1.79   52   8.06   1.38   20   7.85   1.04    14    6.50   1.56     28    6.64   2.42    37    6.43   2.33     13    6.85    2.64     16   7.06    2.11   11     7.64     1.50    13    7.62   1.94
institutional capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures
consistency and continuity through    23    6.78   1.86   41   7.32   1.60   18   7.56   0.78     9    6.67   1.50     23    6.52   2.09    33    6.27   2.07     10    7.40    1.78     9    6.56    1.67   7      6.86     1.07    11    7.36   2.06
staff changes
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group        25    6.68   2.34   46   7.67   1.70   20   7.45   1.73    10    6.30   2.11     28    6.79   2.22    37    6.78   2.06     11    6.09    2.95     14   6.79    2.05   9      7.22     1.48    12    7.50   1.68
makes appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides
                                      25    7.40   2.02   50   8.04   1.74   20   7.90   1.25    11    7.27   1.35     28    6.36   2.33    42    6.48   2.63     9     7.22    1.99     16   7.31    1.99   10     7.30     1.42    15    7.73   1.34
effective implementation support*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Tanzania?*
                                     Office of the Employee      Consultant on      Bilateral/                                    Private Sector/        NGO/CBO/                             Independent
                                      President/       of a     WBG-supported Multilateral                                       Financial Sector/         Private                            Government
Percentage of Respondents              Minister     Ministry     Project/PMU         Agency                                        Private Bank          Foundation             Media          Institution          Academia              Other
The World Bank Group takes too
                                         4.2%        19.6%             -                 -                                             15.6%                    2.1%                 -               11.8%                   -            7.1%
much risk in Tanzania
The World Bank Group does not
                                        33.3%        16.1%          42.1%              7.1%                                            31.3%                    25.5%            6.7%                29.4%            33.3%               28.6%
take enough risk in Tanzania
The World Bank Group's approach
                                        37.5%        28.6%          36.8%             35.7%                                            21.9%                    19.1%           26.7%                41.2%            26.7%               14.3%
to risk is appropriate
Don't know                              12.5%        16.1%          10.5%             57.1%                                            28.1%                    23.4%           40.0%                5.9%             33.3%               14.3%
Prefer not to answer                    12.5%        19.6%          10.5%                -                                             3.1%                     29.8%           26.7%                11.8%            6.7%                35.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                                      100
The World Bank Group                                                                        Tanzania                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                   Office of the Employee     Consultant on         Bilateral/     Private Sector/   NGO/CBO/                      Independent
Percentage of Respondents           President/      of a     WBG-supported Multilateral           Financial Sector/   Private                      Government
(Responses Combined)                 Minister     Ministry     Project/PMU           Agency         Private Bank    Foundation          Media       Institution     Academia         Other
Provide more adequate data/
knowledge/statistics/figures on       11.5%        16.4%           15.0%              21.4%             30.3%          9.6%             31.3%          5.3%           13.3%           7.1%
Tanzania’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with
                                      38.5%        47.3%           40.0%              21.4%             21.2%          15.4%            12.5%          36.8%          53.3%          50.0%
Government clients*
Offer more innovative financial
                                      23.1%        14.5%           20.0%              14.3%             18.2%          19.2%            18.8%          5.3%           0.0%            0.0%
products
Improve the competitiveness of its
                                      23.1%        14.5%           30.0%               7.1%             15.2%          1.9%             18.8%          10.5%          0.0%            0.0%
financing compared to markets*
Reach out more to groups outside
                                       3.8%        14.5%            5.0%              35.7%             24.2%          50.0%            31.3%          36.8%          20.0%          35.7%
of Government*
Improve the quality of its experts
as related to Tanzania’s specific     23.1%        12.7%           10.0%               0.0%             6.1%           13.5%            18.8%          15.8%          6.7%           28.6%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge
                                      19.2%        7.3%             5.0%               7.1%             9.1%           13.5%             6.3%          5.3%           20.0%           0.0%
services
Ensure greater selectivity in its
                                      26.9%        7.3%             0.0%              14.3%             15.2%          17.3%            18.8%          0.0%           13.3%          14.3%
work
Increase the level of capacity
                                      15.4%        23.6%           30.0%              28.6%             36.4%          13.5%            18.8%          36.8%          53.3%          28.6%
development in the country
Reduce the complexity of
obtaining World Bank Group            15.4%        25.5%           30.0%              35.7%             15.2%          28.8%            12.5%          47.4%          20.0%          28.6%
financing
Work faster                            0.0%        10.9%            5.0%               7.1%             3.0%           3.8%              6.3%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Other                                  0.0%        0.0%             5.0%               7.1%             3.0%           3.8%              0.0%          0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Tanzania, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe
the World Bank Group should offer more of in Tanzania?*
                                   Office of the Employee        Consultant on      Bilateral/      Private Sector/      NGO/CBO/                   Independent
                                    President/         of a    WBG-supported Multilateral          Financial Sector/       Private                  Government
Percentage of Respondents            Minister       Ministry     Project/PMU         Agency          Private Bank        Foundation       Media      Institution     Academia      Other
Financial services                    57.7%           50.9%         22.2%             21.4%              33.3%             36.0%          18.8%         26.3%          20.0%       33.3%
Knowledge products                    19.2%           7.5%          16.7%             14.3%              24.2%             12.0%          31.3%         31.6%          20.0%       20.0%
Convening services                    11.5%             -              -                 -               6.1%              10.0%          18.8%            -              -        6.7%
None of the above                        -              -              -                 -               9.1%                 -           6.3%             -            6.7%         -
The combination is appropriate for
                                      11.5%           41.5%         61.1%             57.1%              24.2%             36.0%          25.0%         36.8%          46.7%       40.0%
Tanzania
Don't know                               -              -              -               7.1%              3.0%               6.0%            -           5.3%            6.7%         -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                             101
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Tanzania                                                                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                            Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                                    Independent
                                       Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/        NGO/CBO/                                   Government
                                    President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank       Private Foundation           Media              Institution            Academia               Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N     Mean    SD       N Mean SD           N      Mean SD          N   Mean     SD
The World Bank Group should
ensure stronger reform efforts       25    7.12   2.13   54   7.63   2.17   20   6.75   1.83    14    7.86   1.46     33    7.97   2.22     46    7.39   2.65     14    8.36    2.21     19   7.16    2.73   15     7.73     1.62   15    8.27   1.71
linked to its lending in Tanzania
The World Bank Group should have
greater visibility throughout the
                                     26    7.58   1.90   53   7.30   2.28   20   7.75   1.33    12    6.92   2.28     32    7.78   2.12     46    7.59   2.54     15    7.67    2.44     18   6.50    2.90   15     7.20     1.97   15    7.07   2.71
country to ensure greater support
for reform


Please indicate which of the following best represents your views.
                                      Office of the Employee       Consultant on                           Bilateral/            Private Sector/         NGO/CBO/                             Independent
                                       President/       of a       WBG-supported                          Multilateral          Financial Sector/          Private                            Government
Percentage of Respondents               Minister      Ministry      Project/PMU                             Agency                Private Bank           Foundation             Media          Institution          Academia             Other
The WBG exerts too much
pressure on the Government of
                                            -          28.6%           10.0%                                     -                        9.7%                  45.1%                -               33.3%             20.0%             28.6%
Tanzania on matters related to
economic and social reforms
The WBG exerts too little pressure
on the Government of Tanzania on
                                         53.8%         19.6%           25.0%                                  7.1%                    61.3%                     17.6%           37.5%                16.7%             6.7%              35.7%
matters related to economic and
social reforms
The WBG exerts the correct
amount of pressure on the
                                         34.6%         32.1%           45.0%                                 71.4%                        6.5%                  17.6%           25.0%                27.8%             46.7%              7.1%
Government on matters related to
economic and social reforms
Don't know                                3.8%          7.1%              -                                  14.3%                    12.9%                     15.7%           18.8%                5.6%              13.3%             7.1%
No opinion                                7.7%         12.5%           20.0%                                 7.1%                     9.7%                      3.9%            18.8%                16.7%             13.3%             21.4%




                                                                                                                     102
The World Bank Group                                                                   Tanzania                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                   Office of the Employee      Consultant on      Bilateral/     Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/            Independent
Percentage of Respondents           President/      of a      WBG-supported      Multilateral   Financial  Sector/   Private            Government
(Responses Combined)                 Minister     Ministry      Project/PMU        Agency          Private Bank    Foundation   Media    Institution   Academia        Other
Local newspapers                      42.3%        51.8%            50.0%           71.4%              48.5%          54.9%     68.8%      42.1%        40.0%          42.9%
International newspapers               7.7%        10.7%            5.0%             0.0%              3.0%           2.0%      0.0%        5.3%         6.7%          21.4%
Local radio                           23.1%        12.5%            10.0%            0.0%              9.1%           15.7%     18.8%      10.5%         6.7%          14.3%
International radio                    3.8%         3.6%            5.0%            14.3%              0.0%           5.9%      12.5%      10.5%         0.0%          7.1%
Local television                      15.4%        25.0%            45.0%            7.1%              33.3%          25.5%     18.8%      36.8%        20.0%          57.1%
International television              11.5%        10.7%            20.0%            0.0%              12.1%          11.8%     12.5%       0.0%         6.7%          0.0%
Periodicals                            7.7%        10.7%            0.0%             0.0%              12.1%          9.8%      0.0%       21.1%         6.7%          7.1%
Internet*                             57.7%        58.9%            50.0%           85.7%              51.5%          47.1%     43.8%      57.9%        100.0%         35.7%
Social media (e.g., Facebook,
                                       7.7%         0.0%            5.0%             0.0%              9.1%           7.8%      12.5%      0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
Blogs                                  7.7%        10.7%            0.0%             7.1%              3.0%           13.7%     0.0%       0.0%          6.7%           7.1%
Mobile phones                          0.0%         0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              6.1%           3.9%      0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
Instant messaging                      0.0%         0.0%            0.0%             0.0%              6.1%           0.0%      0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
Other                                  0.0%         3.6%            5.0%            14.3%              6.1%           0.0%      0.0%       5.3%          0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                    Office of the Employee      Consultant on     Bilateral/   Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/              Independent
Percentage of Respondents            President/       of a    WBG-supported Multilateral      Financial Sector/     Private             Government
(Responses Combined)                  Minister     Ministry     Project/PMU        Agency       Private Bank      Foundation    Media    Institution   Academia        Other
Blogs                                  30.8%         17.9%         10.0%             7.1%           15.2%           25.5%       11.8%      15.8%         7.7%          7.1%
Direct contact with World Bank
                                       19.2%         17.9%         25.0%            21.4%           15.2%           11.8%       29.4%      26.3%        30.8%          42.9%
Group
e-Newsletters*                         23.1%         21.4%         35.0%            14.3%           45.5%           25.5%       29.4%      0.0%         38.5%          21.4%
Instant messaging                       3.8%         1.8%           5.0%             0.0%           15.2%           2.0%        0.0%       5.3%         0.0%           0.0%
World Bank Group's
                                       53.8%         33.9%         30.0%            42.9%           18.2%           45.1%       52.9%      52.6%        30.8%          21.4%
seminars/workshops/conferences
World Bank Group's publications
                                       26.9%         30.4%         25.0%            64.3%           24.2%           25.5%       23.5%      31.6%        53.8%          35.7%
and other written materials
Mobile phones                          11.5%         8.9%           0.0%             0.0%           15.2%            7.8%       5.9%       15.8%         0.0%           7.1%
Social media (e.g., Facebook,
                                       11.5%         16.1%         10.0%            14.3%           12.1%           21.6%       11.8%      0.0%          7.7%           7.1%
Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)
World Bank Group's website             11.5%         44.6%         55.0%            35.7%           36.4%           27.5%       29.4%      52.6%        30.8%          28.6%
Other                                   0.0%         0.0%           5.0%             0.0%           0.0%            0.0%        0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           7.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                       103
The World Bank Group                                                                         Tanzania                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                    Office of the Employee       Consultant on      Bilateral/      Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/                     Independent
                                     President/       of a       WBG-supported Multilateral        Financial Sector/      Private                   Government
Percentage of Respondents             Minister      Ministry      Project/PMU        Agency          Private Bank      Foundation       Media        Institution      Academia       Other
Yes                                    87.5%         35.8%           35.0%            28.6%              44.8%             32.7%         5.9%            22.2%           7.1%        38.5%
No                                     12.5%         64.2%           65.0%            71.4%              55.2%             67.3%        94.1%            77.8%          92.9%        61.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                   Office of the Employee       Consultant on        Bilateral/          Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/               Independent
                                    President/      of a      WBG-supported Multilateral                Financial Sector/     Private              Government
Percentage of Respondents            Minister     Ministry      Project/PMU            Agency             Private Bank      Foundation   Media      Institution     Academia         Other
Yes                                   92.0%        62.3%            45.0%               50.0%                 65.5%           35.4%      33.3%        26.3%          40.0%           50.0%
No                                     8.0%        37.7%            55.0%               50.0%                 34.5%           64.6%      66.7%        73.7%          60.0%           50.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                    Office of the         Employee    Consultant on    Bilateral/        Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/               Independent
                                      President/             of a     WBG-supported   Multilateral      Financial Sector/     Private              Government
Percentage of Respondents              Minister            Ministry    Project/PMU      Agency            Private Bank      Foundation   Media      Institution     Academia         Other
Yes                                     95.7%               93.8%         100.0%        100.0%                83.3%           94.7%      80.0%        100.0%         100.0%          85.7%
No                                       4.3%               6.3%             -              -                 16.7%            5.3%      20.0%            -             -            14.3%

Do you have access to the Internet?
                                          Office of the   Employee    Consultant on    Bilateral/        Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/               Independent
                                           President/        of a     WBG-supported   Multilateral      Financial Sector/     Private              Government
Percentage of Respondents                   Minister       Ministry    Project/PMU      Agency            Private Bank      Foundation   Media      Institution     Academia         Other
Yes                                          76.2%          90.2%         100.0%        100.0%                92.9%           82.6%      78.6%        100.0%         92.3%           85.7%
No                                           23.8%          9.8%             -              -                 7.1%            17.4%      21.4%            -           7.7%           14.3%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                  Office of the Employee              Consultant on    Bilateral/        Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/               Independent
                                   President/       of a              WBG-supported   Multilateral      Financial Sector/     Private              Government
Percentage of Respondents           Minister     Ministry              Project/PMU      Agency            Private Bank      Foundation   Media      Institution     Academia         Other
Yes                                  91.7%        81.8%                   100.0%         92.3%                79.3%           67.3%      52.9%        89.5%          64.3%           71.4%
No                                    8.3%        18.2%                      -            7.7%                20.7%           32.7%      47.1%        10.5%          35.7%           28.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                             104
The World Bank Group                                                                                                        Tanzania                                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?*
                                                    Office of the      Employee         Consultant on             Bilateral/            Private Sector/        NGO/CBO/                           Independent
                                                     President/          of a           WBG-supported            Multilateral          Financial Sector/         Private                          Government
Percentage of Respondents                             Minister          Ministry         Project/PMU               Agency                Private Bank          Foundation             Media        Institution          Academia              Other
The World Bank Group’s country
                                                       84.0%               50.0%               20.0%                35.7%                    76.7%                    69.0%           50.0%              35.3%            33.3%               63.6%
website
The World Bank Group’s main
                                                       16.0%               50.0%               80.0%                64.3%                    23.3%                    31.0%           50.0%              64.7%            66.7%               36.4%
website
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*
                                   Office of the Employee        Consultant on     Bilateral/                                           Private Sector/        NGO/CBO/                           Independent
                                    President/        of a      WBG-supported Multilateral                                             Financial Sector/         Private                          Government
Percentage of Respondents             Minister     Ministry       Project/PMU       Agency                                               Private Bank          Foundation             Media        Institution          Academia              Other
High speed                             78.3%         86.3%            63.2%         100.0%                                                   76.7%               57.5%                81.3%          88.2%               90.9%                72.7%
Dial-up                                21.7%         13.7%            36.8%             -                                                    23.3%               42.5%                18.8%          11.8%                9.1%                27.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                   Consultant on                              Private Sector/                                                  Independent
                                         Office of the      Employee of a          WBG-supported           Bilateral/        Financial Sector/       NGO/CBO/                                  Government
                                      President/Minister      Ministry              Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency      Private Bank      Private Foundation           Media             Institution           Academia                Other
                                        N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N     Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD          N    Mean    SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's
data more often than I did a few       25    7.20    1.92   52      6.96   2.34    17   6.76   1.20    14    6.50   1.29     32    6.06   2.81    39    5.74   2.96     15    4.80    3.23   16   6.13    2.50   12     5.75     2.83    12    6.33   3.03
years ago.
I find the World Bank Group's
                                       25    7.16    1.97   49      7.59   1.53    20   7.25   1.25    14    7.00   1.66     30    7.07   2.27    37    6.57   2.71     12    6.33    2.46   16   7.00    2.22   10     7.60     1.08    11    7.64   2.54
websites easy to navigate.
I find the information on the World
                                       24    7.38    1.79   47      8.15   1.44    20   7.45   1.67    14    8.57   1.09     30    7.63   1.94    33    6.67   2.78     12    6.75    2.22   15   8.60    1.35   10     7.90     1.73    11    8.09   1.70
Bank Group's websites useful.*
The World Bank Group's social
media channels are valuable
                                       20    6.55    1.88   35      6.69   2.29    17   6.47   1.74     4    5.75   4.92     21    6.62   2.84    33    6.24   3.40     13    6.38    3.53   12   7.08    2.84   5      7.00     1.23    8     7.75   2.77
sources of information about the
institution.
When I need information from the
World Bank Group I know how to         25    7.28    1.93   50      7.20   1.70    19   7.32   2.19    13    8.08   1.44     29    7.24   2.52    32    6.72   3.05     13    5.69    2.75   17   7.47    2.24   12     7.00     3.16    12    7.67   3.00
find it.
The World Bank Group is
responsive to my information           25    6.84    1.77   48      7.19   1.76    19   8.16   1.30    13    7.62   1.39     27    6.63   2.29    31    5.71   3.40     13    4.92    2.40   13   6.23    1.92   7      8.86     0.90    9     5.89   3.06
requests and inquiries.*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            105
The World Bank Group                                                                        Tanzania                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Tanzania? (Select all that apply)
                                     Office of the Employee     Consultant on       Bilateral/       Private Sector/    NGO/CBO/             Independent
Percentage of Respondents             President/      of a     WBG-supported Multilateral           Financial Sector/     Private            Government
(Responses Combined)                   Minister     Ministry    Project/PMU          Agency           Private Bank      Foundation   Media    Institution   Academia        Other
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)*              50.0%        79.2%          95.0%             85.7%               28.1%            9.4%      6.7%       55.6%        40.0%          60.0%
The International Finance
                                        33.3%        25.0%          0.0%               7.1%               28.1%           9.4%       6.7%       44.4%         6.7%          13.3%
Corporation (IFC)*
The Multilateral Investment
                                        16.7%         8.3%          0.0%              14.3%               15.6%           3.8%       13.3%      11.1%         6.7%           6.7%
Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
None*                                    8.3%        10.4%          5.0%               0.0%               50.0%           79.2%      73.3%      33.3%        53.3%          40.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                    Office of the Employee       Consultant on      Bilateral/    Private Sector/  NGO/CBO/                  Independent
Percentage of Respondents            President/        of a     WBG-supported      Multilateral  Financial Sector/   Private                 Government
(Responses Combined)                  Minister      Ministry      Project/PMU        Agency        Private Bank    Foundation        Media    Institution   Academia        Other
Observer                                20.0%        17.6%            5.0%            14.3%            12.5%         24.0%           13.3%      11.1%        21.4%          0.0%
Use World Bank Group
                                        44.0%        39.2%           35.0%            64.3%            50.0%         36.0%           26.7%      50.0%        35.7%          61.5%
reports/data
Engage in World Bank Group
related/sponsored                       28.0%        52.9%           60.0%             7.1%            37.5%         36.0%           20.0%      61.1%        28.6%          46.2%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my
                                        40.0%        37.3%           45.0%            71.4%            21.9%         16.0%           20.0%      22.2%         7.1%          23.1%
professional duties*
Use World Bank Group website for
                                        20.0%        17.6%           20.0%            21.4%            34.4%         38.0%           60.0%      16.7%        42.9%          38.5%
information, data, research, etc.*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            106
The World Bank Group                                           Tanzania                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations
Dar es Salaam Region N=211                      Other Areas N=57

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania

In general, how would you say that Tanzania is headed in...?
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                        Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
The right direction                                                                 78.5%                      68.5%
The wrong direction                                                                 9.6%                       20.4%
Not sure                                                                            12.0%                      11.1%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Tanzania. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Tanzania. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                        Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
Social protection                                                                   1.4%                        1.8%
Transport                                                                           28.8%                      36.4%
Public sector governance/reform                                                     19.2%                      20.0%
Global/regional integration                                                         2.4%                        5.5%
Gender equity                                                                       9.1%                       10.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                 8.2%                       10.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                           2.9%                        1.8%
Water and sanitation*                                                               7.7%                        0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                     10.6%                      12.7%
Job creation/employment                                                             9.1%                       10.9%
Rural development                                                                   6.7%                       10.9%
Financial markets                                                                   0.0%                        0.0%
Urban development                                                                   2.9%                        5.5%
Environmental sustainability                                                        1.4%                        3.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                             1.0%                        0.0%
Health                                                                              13.9%                       5.5%
Education                                                                           56.3%                      41.8%
Poverty reduction*                                                                  13.9%                      27.3%
Energy                                                                              29.3%                      21.8%
Food security                                                                       4.8%                        1.8%
Climate change*                                                                     0.5%                        9.1%
Agricultural development                                                            17.8%                      20.0%
Trade and exports                                                                   2.4%                        5.5%
Crime and violence                                                                  3.8%                        1.8%
Economic growth                                                                     15.9%                      12.7%
Law and justice                                                                     6.3%                        0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                2.4%                        0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                              0.0%                        0.0%
Natural resource management                                                         13.0%                      10.9%
Disaster management                                                                 1.0%                        1.8%
Information and communications technology                                           3.4%                        1.8%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                107
The World Bank Group                                     Tanzania                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Water and sanitation                                                         5.7%                      3.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                      8.5%                      5.4%
Economic growth                                                              24.2%                    33.9%
Climate change                                                               1.4%                      0.0%
Global/regional integration                                                  4.3%                      0.0%
Gender equity                                                                9.0%                      8.9%
Rural development                                                            21.8%                    33.9%
Urban development                                                            1.9%                      3.6%
Regulatory framework                                                         0.5%                      0.0%
Social protection                                                            6.6%                      5.4%
Law and justice                                                              7.1%                      5.4%
Transport                                                                    19.4%                    16.1%
Crime and violence                                                           1.9%                      0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       0.9%                      0.0%
Information and communications technology*                                   1.9%                      7.1%
Anti-corruption                                                              7.6%                      7.1%
Domestic private sector development                                          10.9%                    10.7%
Foreign direct investment*                                                   1.4%                      7.1%
Education                                                                    44.5%                    32.1%
Energy                                                                       14.7%                     5.4%
Public sector governance/reform*                                             16.1%                    30.4%
Natural resource management                                                  14.2%                    10.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                 4.3%                      1.8%
Disaster management                                                          2.4%                      0.0%
Health                                                                       15.6%                    16.1%
Agricultural development                                                     27.0%                    28.6%
Job creation/employment                                                      14.7%                     8.9%
Financial markets                                                            1.4%                      0.0%
Trade and exports                                                            3.3%                      1.8%
Food security                                                                2.8%                      1.8%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          108
The World Bank Group                                    Tanzania                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Dar es Salaam Region          Other Areas
Energy                                                                       31.6%                   19.6%
Gender equity                                                                5.3%                     5.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                      9.6%                    14.3%
Social protection                                                            4.3%                     1.8%
Global/regional integration                                                  2.9%                     5.4%
Climate change                                                               4.8%                     7.1%
Anti-corruption                                                              12.0%                   14.3%
Disaster management                                                          2.9%                     0.0%
Rural development*                                                           8.1%                    17.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                    6.2%                     3.6%
Urban development                                                            2.4%                     0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                         1.4%                     0.0%
Education                                                                    22.5%                   33.9%
Information and communications technology                                    5.3%                     1.8%
Regulatory framework                                                         2.9%                     0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       1.0%                     0.0%
Trade and exports                                                            13.9%                   14.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                              22.0%                   32.1%
Domestic private sector development                                          23.9%                   17.9%
Job creation/employment*                                                     10.5%                   26.8%
Agricultural development                                                     21.5%                   19.6%
Food security                                                                3.8%                     5.4%
Transport                                                                    23.4%                   16.1%
Natural resource management*                                                 28.7%                   12.5%
Environmental sustainability                                                 2.4%                     7.1%
Health                                                                       12.0%                   10.7%
Law and justice                                                              1.4%                     0.0%
Crime and violence                                                           1.0%                     0.0%
Financial markets                                                            6.2%                     3.6%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                         109
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
Better employment opportunities for young people                                16.0%                     16.7%
Better employment opportunities for women                                       10.7%                     16.7%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                    16.0%                     25.9%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater
                                                                                25.7%                       31.5%
accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                             11.8%                        9.3%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium
                                                                                14.4%                        5.6%
sized businesses)
A growing middle class                                                          10.7%                       7.4%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                         16.0%                       20.4%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas*                        7.5%                        0.0%
Consistent economic growth                                                      16.6%                       24.1%
More reliable social safety net                                                 6.4%                        1.9%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                 7.5%                        5.6%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                       19.3%                       18.5%
Better quality public services                                                  17.1%                       9.3%
Other                                                                           0.5%                        1.9%
*Significantly different between locations



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                              Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                               N      Mean    SD        N      Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Tanzania?        209      6.46   2.01    56      5.88      2.34
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                              Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                               N      Mean    SD        N      Mean     SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                               202      6.89   2.04    50      6.80      2.00
effectiveness in Tanzania.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                              Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                               N      Mean    SD        N      Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared
                                                                               192      7.28   1.98    48      7.15      2.22
to help Tanzania solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                              110
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Tanzania, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
Social protection                                                               5.2%                       1.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                                 25.6%                     24.6%
Transport                                                                       32.7%                     31.6%
Poverty reduction                                                               16.6%                     26.3%
Global/regional integration                                                     3.8%                       3.5%
Gender equity*                                                                  11.4%                      1.8%
Crime and violence                                                              2.4%                       1.8%
Domestic private sector development                                             12.3%                      8.8%
Rural development*                                                              7.6%                      19.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                       2.4%                       0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                            5.2%                       8.8%
Energy                                                                          20.4%                     17.5%
Job creation/employment*                                                        6.2%                      19.3%
Financial markets                                                               2.4%                       0.0%
Urban development                                                               1.9%                       0.0%
Environmental sustainability*                                                   0.0%                       8.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                         2.4%                       0.0%
Health*                                                                         30.8%                     17.5%
Education                                                                       41.2%                     52.6%
Food security                                                                   4.3%                       1.8%
Climate change                                                                  1.9%                       3.5%
Agricultural development                                                        15.6%                     22.8%
Trade and exports                                                               5.7%                       0.0%
Economic growth*                                                                13.7%                      1.8%
Law and justice                                                                 5.2%                       0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                            1.9%                       3.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                          2.4%                       0.0%
Natural resource management                                                     9.5%                       3.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                 4.3%                       8.8%
Information and communications technology                                       1.9%                       1.8%
Disaster management                                                             1.4%                       0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE…
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                              Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
Convening/Facilitating                                                         2.1%                        1.9%
Data                                                                           6.2%                        5.6%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                               13.0%                      22.2%
Financial resources*                                                           38.9%                      20.4%
Capacity development                                                           25.4%                      29.6%
Technical assistance                                                           3.6%                        3.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources*                                    5.2%                       13.0%
Donor coordination                                                             2.1%                        1.9%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                  2.1%                        1.9%
Other                                                                          1.6%                        0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            111
The World Bank Group                                                  Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

… and which activity is of second greatest value in Tanzania?
 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                            Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
Convening/Facilitating                                                                       2.1%                       0.0%
Data*                                                                                        7.3%                       0.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                             16.1%                     17.3%
Financial resources                                                                          17.2%                     13.5%
Capacity development                                                                         24.5%                     21.2%
Technical assistance*                                                                        15.1%                     26.9%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                   8.3%                      11.5%
Donor coordination                                                                           4.7%                       7.7%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                                2.6%                       1.9%
Other                                                                                        2.1%                       0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Tanzania’s efforts to achieve development results?

                                                                                            Dar es Salaam region       Other Areas
                                                                                              N     Mean    SD       N    Mean     SD
Convening/Facilitating                                                                       171      6.45   1.92    36      6.19      2.29
Data                                                                                         182      6.90   1.87    40      6.60      2.35
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                             183      7.28   1.94    43      6.60      2.32
Financial resources                                                                          186      7.85   1.71    44      7.41      1.53
Technical assistance                                                                         180      7.12   1.97    41      6.93      1.94
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                   163      7.01   1.78    44      6.73      2.42
Donor coordination                                                                           174      7.07   1.86    38      6.53      2.08
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                                151      6.17   2.02    35      6.34      2.27
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Tanzania. To what degree would
Tanzania benefit, if capacity building were to support…?

                                                                                            Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                                              N     Mean    SD       N       Mean     SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                                             195      7.36   2.23    47      7.32      2.47
more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                             201      8.04   1.99    49      7.29      2.39
projects on the ground*
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                                             194      7.76   2.10    46      6.50      2.38
sociopolitical conditions)*
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                              197      7.58   2.25    43      7.21      2.34
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                       112
The World Bank Group                                          Tanzania                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Tanzania?

                                                                               Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                                 N     Mean    SD        N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                  183      7.23    2.08    38      7.63      1.87
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)            167      6.47    2.20    39      7.03      2.42
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                182      7.13    2.07    35      6.49      2.55
goals)
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Tanzania to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?

                                                                               Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                                 N     Mean    SD        N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                  189      7.77    2.24    38      8.08      2.08
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)            184      7.52    2.26    42      7.76      2.14
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                185      7.71    2.35    34      7.97      2.13
goals)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Tanzania?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Staff too inaccessible                                                            5.0%                      5.5%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                          8.0%                      3.6%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Tanzania                17.5%                    10.9%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                          25.5%                    32.7%
Arrogant in its approach*                                                         9.0%                      0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                                               5.5%                      7.3%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                             6.5%                      9.1%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                          27.0%                    14.5%
Not willing to raise concerns related to policy and reform efforts in
                                                                                 12.0%                        1.8%
Tanzania*
Too influenced by developed countries*                                           13.0%                        40.0%
Not doing enough to ensure sustainability of reforms                             7.5%                         7.3%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities            3.5%                         0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                            10.0%                        10.9%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                      19.0%                        10.9%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                              3.0%                         1.8%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                   6.0%                         10.9%
Not client focused                                                               1.5%                         3.6%
Other                                                                            5.0%                         3.6%
Don't know                                                                       5.0%                         1.8%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                113
The World Bank Group                                       Tanzania                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Tanzania?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
Capacity development                                                            52.0%                     58.2%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                         30.4%                     30.9%
Knowledge products/services                                                     20.6%                     12.7%
Investment lending                                                              46.1%                     38.2%
Technical assistance                                                            21.6%                     27.3%
Trust Fund management                                                           13.7%                     16.4%
Other                                                                           3.4%                       0.0%
Don't know                                                                      1.5%                       3.6%

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                    Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                        25.8%                     30.4%
Donor Community                                                                 19.1%                     12.5%
Media                                                                           12.9%                      7.1%
NGOs*                                                                           16.3%                     35.7%
Local Government                                                                28.2%                     23.2%
Private Sector*                                                                 39.2%                     23.2%
Parliament*                                                                     9.1%                       0.0%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                            21.5%                     33.9%
Beneficiaries                                                                   13.9%                      8.9%
Foundations                                                                     2.9%                       5.4%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                       3.8%                       5.4%
Other                                                                           0.0%                       0.0%
Don't know*                                                                     1.0%                       5.4%
*Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Tanzania?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                              Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                                N     Mean    SD        N      Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                               204    7.04     2.22    44      7.30      2.28
in Tanzania
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                               199    7.05     1.96    44      6.68      2.13
development priorities for Tanzania
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                               198    7.04     2.10    47      6.66      2.34
for Tanzania
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Tanzania with
                                                                               188    7.19     2.12    41      6.98      2.40
respect




                                                            114
The World Bank Group                                                  Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Tanzania, in terms of each of the following?

                                                                                            Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                                              N     Mean    SD       N       Mean     SD
Responsiveness                                                                               182      6.48   1.92    39      6.54      2.28
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)                       182      6.29   1.97    35      6.43      2.06
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                     183      6.38   1.99    40      6.05      2.28
Being inclusive                                                                              189      6.66   1.97    33      6.18      2.17
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                                193      7.18   2.07    37      7.16      2.44
Staff accessibility                                                                          190      6.85   2.09    35      6.57      2.03
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                              190      7.08   2.18    35      7.09      2.39
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                             189      6.72   2.14    40      5.73      2.62
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with groups outside of the Government*                                         171      6.76   2.09    38      5.45      2.49
Collaboration with the Government*                                                           195      7.91   1.77    46      8.65      1.65
Collaboration with other donors                                                              179      7.65   1.80    35      7.63      2.55
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                                 189      6.39   1.97    41      6.61      2.28
Being a long-term partner                                                                    191      7.82   2.02    36      7.47      2.18
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To be a more effective development partner in Tanzania, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                 Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
More local presence                                                                          65.4%                     76.9%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                              26.7%                     19.2%
Less local presence                                                                          3.7%                       1.9%
Don't know                                                                                   4.2%                       1.9%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                 Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-
                                                                                              13.2%                       16.7%
up
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation*                        29.8%                       51.9%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                                              25.9%                       16.7%
realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                           22.9%                       25.9%
Poor donor coordination                                                                       11.7%                       18.5%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                         12.7%                       7.4%
The Government works inefficiently                                                            21.5%                       14.8%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                             21.5%                       14.8%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                               23.9%                       22.2%
Other                                                                                         4.4%                        0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                       115
The World Bank Group                                     Tanzania                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Tanzania? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

                                                                            Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                              N     Mean    SD       N       Mean     SD
Anti-corruption                                                              201    6.96    2.73     44      7.82      2.48
Information and communications technology*                                   201    7.31    2.41     44      8.14      1.56
Transport                                                                    204    7.88    2.24     44      8.18      2.03
Crime and violence*                                                          188    5.62    2.34     43      6.47      2.40
Law and justice*                                                             192    6.33    2.51     45      7.16      2.45
Urban development                                                            202    7.45    2.24     40      7.05      2.56
Environmental sustainability                                                 200    7.77    2.09     43      7.88      2.11
Regulatory framework                                                         199    7.21    2.24     42      6.43      2.68
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                      187    6.84    2.35     45      7.98      1.75
Poverty reduction*                                                           203    7.96    2.33     50      8.70      1.66
Gender equity                                                                198    6.83    2.52     43      7.37      2.13
Domestic private sector development                                          203    7.52    2.15     46      7.46      2.00
Foreign direct investment                                                    200    7.16    2.34     46      6.57      2.48
Water and sanitation*                                                        199    7.68    2.24     45      8.40      1.80
Trade and exports                                                            198    7.12    2.25     46      7.09      2.62
Economic growth                                                              206    8.08    2.03     46      8.46      1.86
Energy                                                                       199    8.18    1.97     46      8.22      1.79
Disaster management                                                          190    7.03    2.41     44      7.61      2.44
Public sector governance/reform                                              203    7.58    2.27     42      8.19      2.10
Job creation/employment                                                      197    7.50    2.14     45      7.67      2.34
Financial markets                                                            198    7.26    2.26     44      6.89      2.31
Equality of opportunity                                                      191    7.31    2.30     45      7.69      1.56
Health                                                                       201    7.82    2.09     45      8.47      1.80
Rural development*                                                           202    7.81    2.28     47      8.53      1.83
Global/regional integration                                                  196    6.72    2.17     45      6.80      2.12
Food security*                                                               194    7.27    2.30     43      8.12      1.85
Education*                                                                   205    8.14    2.05     46      9.15      1.30
Social protection                                                            198    7.06    2.34     45      6.87      2.41
Climate change                                                               200    7.36    2.19     46      7.91      2.30
Agricultural development                                                     204    8.14    2.19     46      8.76      1.70
Natural resource management                                                  203    7.53    2.42     47      7.85      2.38
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           116
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Tanzania? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                                            Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                              N     Mean    SD        N       Mean     SD
Anti-corruption                                                              140     5.66    2.56     29      5.90      2.77
Information and communications technology                                    149     6.60    2.39     32      7.19      1.91
Transport                                                                    178     7.37    2.07     38      7.79      1.98
Crime and violence                                                           133     6.28    2.27     22      6.27      2.37
Law and justice                                                              135     6.33    2.35     27      6.59      2.45
Urban development                                                            161     6.95    2.12     40      7.58      1.88
Environmental sustainability                                                 165     7.00    2.13     37      7.30      2.25
Regulatory framework                                                         160     6.88    2.09     31      6.81      2.33
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       149     6.66    2.22     34      6.76      2.12
Poverty reduction                                                            174     7.45    2.14     44      7.59      1.97
Gender equity                                                                157     6.54    2.01     35      6.89      2.00
Domestic private sector development                                          166     6.77    2.09     29      6.38      2.43
Foreign direct investment                                                    153     6.86    2.17     33      6.30      2.56
Water and sanitation                                                         170     7.21    2.30     37      7.35      2.24
Trade and exports                                                            148     6.73    2.13     32      6.41      2.20
Economic growth                                                              183     7.54    2.02     42      7.36      2.28
Energy                                                                       171     7.61    1.83     36      7.36      2.23
Disaster management                                                          136     6.79    2.22     31      6.48      2.20
Public sector governance/reform                                              172     7.32    2.18     37      6.95      2.67
Job creation/employment                                                      162     6.90    2.19     33      6.48      2.67
Financial markets*                                                           143     7.00    1.97     24      5.83      2.22
Equality of opportunity                                                      150     6.81    2.14     32      6.53      2.48
Health                                                                       164     7.35    2.10     38      7.50      1.98
Rural development                                                            168     7.11    2.23     41      7.20      2.80
Global/regional integration                                                  153     6.61    2.24     30      6.70      2.35
Food security                                                                155     6.81    2.28     37      7.46      2.21
Education                                                                    173     7.36    2.25     38      7.53      2.19
Social protection                                                            153     6.52    2.25     29      7.21      2.04
Climate change                                                               148     6.95    2.19     35      6.66      2.46
Agricultural development                                                     168     7.35    2.14     44      7.27      2.45
Natural resource management                                                  160     6.99    2.20     36      7.06      2.84
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           117
The World Bank Group                                       Tanzania                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Tanzania?

Percentage of Respondents                                             Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                      39.8%                    36.4%
In the country                                                                36.8%                    29.1%
Don't know                                                                    23.4%                    34.5%


                                                                           Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                            N      Mean    SD         N      Mean     SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                            204    7.14      1.92    48      7.13      1.95
development results in Tanzania?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Tanzania?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                           Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                             N     Mean    SD         N      Mean     SD
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Tanzania     197    6.24      2.17    42      6.60      1.82
The World Bank Group meets Tanzania’s needs for knowledge services          198    6.39      2.10    41      6.39      1.94


                                                                           Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                             N     Mean    SD         N      Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation
mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving results in        169    6.85      1.99    35      6.91      1.88
Tanzania?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Weekly                                                                        13.2%                     3.7%
Monthly                                                                       21.5%                    14.8%
A few times a year                                                            40.5%                    31.5%
Rarely                                                                        18.0%                    14.8%
Never                                                                         6.8%                     35.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            118
The World Bank Group                                                    Tanzania                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Tanzania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:

                                                                                               Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                                                 N     Mean    SD       N       Mean     SD
Are timely                                                                                      189      6.60   1.95    36      6.17      2.10
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                         184      6.55   1.99    33      6.67      2.13
Are relevant to Tanzania’s development priorities                                               199      6.85   2.02    40      7.13      1.96
Lead to practical solutions                                                                     188      6.64   1.88    39      6.97      1.93
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                            193      6.95   1.92    34      7.15      2.05
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                     197      7.38   1.86    34      7.26      2.39
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                                            193      7.28   1.93    38      7.11      2.55
Are adequately disseminated                                                                     185      6.74   1.98    38      6.53      2.28
Are translated enough into local language                                                       176      5.89   2.16    33      5.30      2.54
Are adaptable to Tanzania’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                                190      6.56   1.90    37      6.70      2.26
circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


                                                                                               Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                                                 N     Mean    SD       N       Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
Group's knowledge work and activities make to development results in your                       201      7.52   1.83    49      7.18      1.94
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                                202      7.59   1.67    44      7.57      1.97
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Tanzania’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

                                                                                               Dar es Salaam region          Other Areas
                                                                                                 N     Mean    SD       N       Mean     SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                                       181      7.01   1.99    41      6.76      1.76
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                                                  184      7.22   2.04    41      6.80      1.95
Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making appropriate
                                                                                                188      7.13   1.93    43      6.84      1.80
adjustments)
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                                                   186      7.22   1.88    41      7.05      2.02




                                                                         119
The World Bank Group                                          Tanzania                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                                Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                                  N     Mean    SD         N      Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                    177      6.67   2.21     36      6.22      2.84
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                 192      7.31   1.91     40      7.73      2.00
programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion        182      6.67   1.92     38      6.47      2.54
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable            167      6.84   1.99     33      6.58      2.19
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable*                 175      6.77   1.94     35      5.74      2.74
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Tanzania                         180      6.44   2.02     40      6.10      2.94
Working with the World Bank Group increases Tanzania’s institutional
                                                                                 190      7.21   1.92     39      7.49      2.30
capacity
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                 155      6.81   1.73     29      7.52      2.18
changes
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                 175      7.03   1.92     37      7.14      2.59
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                   187      7.30   2.04     39      7.28      2.16
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Tanzania?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Tanzania                              10.7%                       3.6%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Tanzania                        25.9%                      21.8%
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is appropriate                            29.9%                      20.0%
Don't know                                                                        19.3%                      30.9%
Prefer not to answer                                                              14.2%                      23.6%
*Significantly different between locations


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Tanzania?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                                  17.3%                        12.7%
Tanzania’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                              32.7%                        34.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                                          16.3%                        10.9%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                  12.5%                        10.9%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                    23.1%                        34.5%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Tanzania’s specific
                                                                                  13.5%                        12.7%
challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                          10.1%                        7.3%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                            14.9%                        5.5%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                         25.5%                        29.1%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                     23.6%                        29.1%
Work faster                                                                       5.8%                         0.0%
Other                                                                             1.9%                         1.8%



                                                               120
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Tanzania, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in
Tanzania?

Percentage of Respondents                                                Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
Financial services                                                               38.1%                      33.9%
Knowledge products                                                               17.8%                      16.1%
Convening services                                                               4.5%                        8.9%
None of the above                                                                1.5%                        3.6%
The combination is appropriate for Tanzania                                      35.1%                      35.7%
Don't know                                                                       3.0%                        1.8%

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                               Dar es Salaam region            Other Areas
                                                                                 N     Mean    SD         N       Mean     SD
The World Bank Group should ensure stronger reform efforts linked to its
                                                                                 204     7.54    2.25     50      7.82      2.10
lending in Tanzania
The World Bank Group should have greater visibility throughout the country
                                                                                 198     7.24    2.34     53      8.09      1.96
to ensure greater support for reform*
*Significantly different between locations

Please indicate which of the following best represents your views.

Percentage of Respondents                                                Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
The WBG exerts too much pressure on the Government of Tanzania
                                                                                 21.7%                         22.8%
on matters related to economic and social reforms
The WBG exerts too little pressure on the Government of Tanzania
                                                                                 31.0%                         21.1%
on matters related to economic and social reforms
The WBG exerts the correct amount of pressure on the Government
                                                                                 26.1%                         31.6%
on matters related to economic and social reforms
Don't know                                                                       8.9%                          14.0%
No opinion                                                                       12.3%                         10.5%


G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Tanzania? (Choose no more than
TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Dar es Salaam Region             Other Areas
Local newspapers                                                                 49.8%                      55.4%
International newspapers                                                         7.2%                        1.8%
Local radio*                                                                     10.6%                      21.4%
International radio                                                              5.3%                        7.1%
Local television                                                                 26.1%                      30.4%
International television                                                         9.2%                        8.9%
Periodicals                                                                      9.2%                        7.1%
Internet*                                                                        60.9%                      42.9%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                          3.9%                        8.9%
Blogs                                                                            6.8%                        7.1%
Mobile phones                                                                    1.0%                        3.6%
Instant messaging                                                                1.4%                        0.0%
Other                                                                            3.9%                        0.0%
*Significantly different between locations



                                                              121
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Blogs*                                                                        20.8%                     7.3%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                          21.3%                    18.2%
e-Newsletters                                                                 24.6%                    27.3%
Instant messaging                                                             4.3%                      3.6%
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences                             35.7%                    47.3%
World Bank Group's publications and other written materials                   32.9%                    23.6%
Mobile phones                                                                 7.2%                     12.7%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                       14.0%                    10.9%
World Bank Group's website                                                    34.8%                    36.4%
Other                                                                         0.5%                      1.8%
*Significantly different between locations

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*

Percentage of Respondents                                              Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Yes                                                                            41.6%                    18.5%
No                                                                             58.4%                    81.5%
*Significantly different between locations

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                              Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Yes                                                                            59.1%                    29.6%
No                                                                             40.9%                    70.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Yes                                                                            93.9%                    82.4%
No                                                                             6.1%                     17.6%

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                              Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Yes                                                                            92.9%                    75.0%
No                                                                             7.1%                     25.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                              Dar es Salaam Region           Other Areas
Yes                                                                            84.9%                    55.6%
No                                                                             15.1%                    44.4%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                              122
The World Bank Group                                         Tanzania                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
The World Bank Group’s country website                                            54.7%                     60.9%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                               45.3%                     39.1%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
High speed                                                                        82.7%                     56.5%
Dial-up                                                                           17.3%                     43.5%
*Significantly different between locations

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                                Dar es Salaam region           Other Areas
                                                                                  N     Mean    SD        N       Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few years
                                                                                 193     6.48    2.40     40      5.75      3.24
ago.
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.                         188     7.06    2.01     35      7.51      2.38
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.                182     7.71    1.92     33      7.64      2.18
The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                 138     6.64    2.55     30      6.60      3.42
information about the institution.
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it.         186     7.18    2.22     35      7.20      3.19
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                 172     6.85    2.13     32      6.28      3.45
inquiries.
*Significantly different between locations



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Tanzania? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)*                                                        55.0%                     18.5%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                                      22.0%                      5.6%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                               10.5%                      3.7%
None*                                                                             29.0%                     74.1%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Dar es Salaam Region            Other Areas
Observer*                                                                         13.5%                     28.0%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                                46.5%                     26.0%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                    40.5%                     36.0%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                     27.0%                     36.0%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                30.0%                     28.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                              123
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Collaborators
Collaborators N=164              Non-Collaborators N=103

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania

In general, how would you say that Tanzania is headed in...?
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                              Collaborators           Non-Collaborators
The right direction                                                                   82.8%                    66.0%
The wrong direction                                                                   10.4%                    14.0%
Not sure                                                                               6.7%                    20.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Tanzania. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Tanzania. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                              Collaborators           Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                                      1.9%                     1.0%
Transport                                                                             29.4%                    31.4%
Public sector governance/reform                                                       19.4%                    19.6%
Global/regional integration                                                            3.8%                     2.0%
Gender equity                                                                         10.0%                     8.8%
Domestic private sector development                                                    8.1%                     9.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                              2.5%                     2.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                   8.1%                     2.9%
Anti-corruption*                                                                       7.5%                    16.7%
Job creation/employment                                                                8.1%                    10.8%
Rural development                                                                      8.1%                     7.8%
Financial markets                                                                      0.0%                     0.0%
Urban development                                                                      5.0%                     1.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                           1.3%                     2.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                                1.3%                     0.0%
Health                                                                                13.1%                    12.7%
Education                                                                             53.1%                    53.9%
Poverty reduction                                                                     16.9%                    15.7%
Energy                                                                                31.3%                    21.6%
Food security                                                                          3.8%                     4.9%
Climate change*                                                                        0.0%                     6.9%
Agricultural development                                                              18.1%                    17.6%
Trade and exports                                                                      2.5%                     3.9%
Crime and violence                                                                     3.8%                     2.0%
Economic growth                                                                       14.4%                    16.7%
Law and justice                                                                        5.6%                     2.9%
Regulatory framework                                                                   1.9%                     2.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                 0.0%                     0.0%
Natural resource management                                                           13.1%                    11.8%
Disaster management*                                                                   0.0%                     2.9%
Information and communications technology                                              2.5%                     3.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        124
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Water and sanitation                                                                   5.5%             4.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                                8.6%             6.8%
Economic growth                                                                       27.0%            26.2%
Climate change                                                                         1.2%             1.0%
Global/regional integration                                                            3.7%             2.9%
Gender equity                                                                          6.7%            12.6%
Rural development                                                                     20.9%            28.2%
Urban development                                                                      2.5%             1.9%
Regulatory framework                                                                   0.6%             0.0%
Social protection                                                                      6.7%             5.8%
Law and justice                                                                        6.7%             6.8%
Transport                                                                             16.6%            21.4%
Crime and violence                                                                     1.8%             1.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                 1.2%             0.0%
Information and communications technology                                              2.5%             3.9%
Anti-corruption                                                                        6.1%            12.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                   11.7%             9.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                              1.8%             2.9%
Education                                                                             42.3%            40.8%
Energy*                                                                               16.6%             6.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                                       16.6%            22.3%
Natural resource management                                                           14.7%            11.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                           3.7%             3.9%
Disaster management                                                                    2.5%             0.0%
Health*                                                                               20.9%             7.8%
Agricultural development                                                              25.2%            31.1%
Job creation/employment                                                               14.1%            12.6%
Financial markets                                                                      1.2%             1.0%
Trade and exports                                                                      3.7%             1.9%
Food security                                                                          1.8%             3.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        125
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Energy                                                                                28.6%            31.1%
Gender equity                                                                          4.3%             6.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                               12.4%             7.8%
Social protection                                                                      3.7%             3.9%
Global/regional integration                                                            5.0%             1.0%
Climate change                                                                         4.3%             5.8%
Anti-corruption                                                                       12.4%            11.7%
Disaster management                                                                    2.5%             1.0%
Rural development                                                                      7.5%            12.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                              4.3%             6.8%
Urban development                                                                      3.1%             0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                   0.6%             1.9%
Education*                                                                            20.5%            34.0%
Information and communications technology                                              5.6%             2.9%
Regulatory framework                                                                   3.1%             1.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                 0.6%             1.0%
Trade and exports                                                                     16.8%             9.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                                       23.0%            28.2%
Domestic private sector development                                                   26.1%            17.5%
Job creation/employment*                                                               9.3%            20.4%
Agricultural development                                                              19.9%            25.2%
Food security                                                                          3.7%             4.9%
Transport                                                                             24.8%            16.5%
Natural resource management                                                           27.3%            20.4%
Environmental sustainability                                                           3.1%             3.9%
Health                                                                                14.3%             7.8%
Law and justice                                                                        1.2%             1.0%
Crime and violence                                                                     0.0%             1.9%
Financial markets                                                                      4.3%             7.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        126
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                     Collaborators                  Non-Collaborators
Better employment opportunities for young people                                             14.3%                           20.4%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                    13.6%                            9.7%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                 20.4%                           15.1%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater
                                                                                             24.5%                              34.4%
accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                          10.2%                              12.9%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium
                                                                                             17.7%                              4.3%
sized businesses)*
A growing middle class                                                                       11.6%                              7.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                      15.6%                              16.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                      4.8%                               7.5%
Consistent economic growth                                                                   16.3%                              21.5%
More reliable social safety net                                                              6.1%                               3.2%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                              6.8%                               7.5%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity*                                   15.0%                              25.8%
Better quality public services*                                                              19.0%                              7.5%
Other                                                                                        0.0%                               2.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean     SD       N    Mean      SD

How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Tanzania?*           163    7.02    1.67   101     5.30    2.19

(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean     SD      N     Mean      SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                     161 7.25 1.82         91    6.16    2.18
 effectiveness in Tanzania.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean     SD      N     Mean      SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared
                                                                                     156 7.68 1.60         83    6.48 2.37
 to help Tanzania solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        127
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Tanzania, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                              Collaborators     Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                                      3.7%               5.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                                       26.2%              24.3%
Transport                                                                             34.1%              29.1%
Poverty reduction*                                                                    14.6%              24.3%
Global/regional integration                                                            4.9%               1.9%
Gender equity                                                                         10.4%               7.8%
Crime and violence                                                                     2.4%               1.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                    9.8%              13.6%
Rural development*                                                                     6.1%              15.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                              1.8%               1.9%
Water and sanitation                                                                   6.1%               5.8%
Energy                                                                                23.2%              14.6%
Job creation/employment                                                                7.9%              10.7%
Financial markets                                                                      3.0%               0.0%
Urban development                                                                      2.4%               0.0%
Environmental sustainability*                                                          0.0%               4.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                                2.4%               1.0%
Health*                                                                               33.5%              18.4%
Education                                                                             39.6%              49.5%
Food security                                                                          3.7%               3.9%
Climate change                                                                         1.8%               3.9%
Agricultural development*                                                             13.4%              23.3%
Trade and exports                                                                      6.1%               3.9%
Economic growth*                                                                      14.0%               5.8%
Law and justice                                                                        3.7%               4.9%
Regulatory framework                                                                   3.0%               1.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                 2.4%               1.0%
Natural resource management                                                            7.9%               8.7%
Anti-corruption                                                                        4.9%               6.8%
Information and communications technology                                              1.8%               1.9%
Disaster management                                                                    1.8%               0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE…
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborators     Non-Collaborators
Convening/Facilitating                                                                 1.4%               3.1%
Data                                                                                   5.4%               7.1%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                     10.1%              20.4%
Financial resources*                                                                  43.9%              20.4%
Capacity development                                                                  27.0%              27.6%
Technical assistance                                                                   4.7%               2.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                             5.4%               9.2%
Donor coordination                                                                     0.7%               4.1%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                          0.7%               4.1%
Other                                                                                  0.7%               2.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        128
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

… and which activity is of second greatest value in Tanzania?
 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Collaborators                Non-Collaborators
Convening/Facilitating                                                                         1.4%                          2.1%
Data                                                                                           5.4%                          7.4%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                              17.6%                         13.7%
Financial resources                                                                           16.2%                         16.8%
Capacity development                                                                          20.3%                         27.4%
Technical assistance                                                                          20.9%                         13.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                     9.5%                          8.4%
Donor coordination                                                                             6.8%                          3.2%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*                                                                 0.7%                          5.3%
Other                                                                                          1.4%                          2.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Tanzania’s efforts to achieve development results?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N     Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD
Convening/Facilitating*                                                           139    6.69    1.89    67     5.78   2.04
Data                                                                              148    6.89    1.74    74     6.70   2.32
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                 148    7.44    1.89    76     6.61   2.17
Financial resources*                                                              150    8.01    1.62    79     7.29   1.67
Technical assistance                                                              145    7.26    1.82    76     6.74   2.16
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                        133    7.11    1.80    70     6.59   2.14
Donor coordination*                                                               140    7.19    1.76    70     6.51   2.13
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                     121    6.33    1.95    62     5.90   2.29
 (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Tanzania. To what degree would
Tanzania benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N     Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                                  153     7.29   2.24     88    7.55   2.31
more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                  159     8.11   1.81     90    7.53   2.47
projects on the ground*
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                                  152     7.87   2.02     87    7.05   2.39
sociopolitical conditions)*
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                   156     7.38   2.23     83    7.76   2.28
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         129
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Tanzania?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                    149    7.51    1.83    72       6.85    2.37
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               138    6.54    2.12    68       6.59    2.56
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                   147    7.17    2.04    69       6.78    2.41
goals)
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Tanzania to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                     153    7.99    2.07    74       7.49    2.45
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)               149    7.54    2.19    77       7.60    2.34
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                   149    7.81    2.12    70       7.61    2.68
goals)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Tanzania?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                      Collaborators                   Non-Collaborators
Staff too inaccessible                                                                         4.5%                             6.1%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                       5.8%                             9.1%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Tanzania*                           21.9%                             7.1%
Not enough public disclosure of its work*                                                     21.3%                            36.4%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                       6.5%                             8.1%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                            5.2%                             6.1%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                          9.0%                             3.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex*                                                     32.9%                            13.1%
Not willing to raise concerns related to policy and reform efforts in
                                                                                              12.9%                               5.1%
Tanzania*
Too influenced by developed countries*                                                        11.6%                               30.3%
Not doing enough to ensure sustainability of reforms*                                         3.9%                                13.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                         5.2%                                1.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                         12.3%                               7.1%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                   20.6%                               12.1%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                           3.2%                                2.0%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors*                                               2.6%                                14.1%
Not client focused                                                                            1.3%                                3.0%
Other                                                                                         5.2%                                2.0%
Don't know                                                                                    3.2%                                6.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        130
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Tanzania?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators                  Non-Collaborators
Capacity development                                                                        56.7%                           48.5%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                     33.1%                           25.7%
Knowledge products/services                                                                 19.7%                           17.8%
Investment lending                                                                          42.0%                           46.5%
Technical assistance                                                                        20.4%                           27.7%
Trust Fund management*                                                                      10.8%                           19.8%
Other                                                                                        3.2%                            2.0%
Don't know                                                                                   0.6%                            4.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators                  Non-Collaborators
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                    24.8%                           32.0%
Donor Community*                                                                            24.8%                            5.8%
Media*                                                                                       8.1%                           17.5%
NGOs*                                                                                       15.5%                           29.1%
Local Government*                                                                           34.8%                           14.6%
Private Sector                                                                              32.3%                           39.8%
Parliament*                                                                                 11.2%                            1.0%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)*                                                       18.6%                           32.0%
Beneficiaries                                                                               14.3%                           10.7%
Foundations                                                                                  1.9%                            5.8%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                    3.7%                            4.9%
Other                                                                                        0.0%                            0.0%
Don't know                                                                                   0.6%                            3.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Tanzania?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean   SD       N   Mean        SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                  157   7.53   2.02    90       6.34   2.38
in Tanzania*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                  156   7.48   1.69    86       5.99   2.09
development priorities for Tanzania*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                                  158   7.41   1.89    86       6.12   2.30
for Tanzania*
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Tanzania with
                                                                                  149   7.44   1.99    79       6.48   2.30
respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        131
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Tanzania, in terms of each of the following?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness*                                                                   148   6.80     1.88   73     5.86   2.03
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)            147   6.35     1.94   69     6.25   2.07
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                         146   6.53     1.95   75     5.85   2.12
Being inclusive*                                                                  147   6.77     1.83   74     6.11   2.21
Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                    155   7.38     1.95   73     6.66   2.36
Staff accessibility*                                                              150   7.15     2.00   74     6.12   2.09
Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                  153   7.41     2.08   70     6.26   2.25
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                  154   7.08     2.00   75     5.27   2.21
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with groups outside of the Government*                              125   7.25     1.88   84     5.40   2.21
Collaboration with the Government*                                                153   8.31     1.48   85     7.55   2.13
Collaboration with other donors*                                                  141   7.99     1.51   70     6.86   2.44
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                     152   6.55     1.79   77     5.96   2.35
Being a long-term partner*                                                        151   8.10     1.87   76     7.07   2.20
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To be a more effective development partner in Tanzania, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?*
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                     Collaborators                Non-Collaborators
More local presence                                                                          58.4%                         80.6%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                              34.2%                         12.9%
Less local presence                                                                           3.4%                          3.2%
Don't know                                                                                    4.0%                          3.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                     Collaborators                Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-
                                                                                               13.8%                            13.3%
up
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation*                         26.9%                            50.0%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social
                                                                                               25.6%                            19.4%
realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                            25.0%                            19.4%
Poor donor coordination                                                                        11.3%                            16.3%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                          15.0%                            8.2%
The Government works inefficiently                                                             18.1%                            23.5%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                              18.8%                            21.4%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                25.6%                            20.4%
Other                                                                                          4.4%                             2.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        132
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Tanzania? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
         Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                No
                the World Bank Group in your country?                             N     Mean   SD     N    Mean   SD
Anti-corruption                                                                   153   7.04   2.65   91   7.34   2.69
Information and communications technology                                         154   7.54   2.24   90   7.40   2.36
Transport                                                                         158   7.96   2.10   89   7.85   2.39
Crime and violence                                                                148   5.75   2.29   82   5.89   2.38
Law and justice                                                                   147   6.38   2.36   89   6.76   2.60
Urban development                                                                 154   7.55   2.13   87   7.17   2.53
Environmental sustainability                                                      153   7.88   1.89   89   7.66   2.39
Regulatory framework                                                              150   7.20   2.11   89   6.96   2.52
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            143   7.12   2.31   88   6.92   2.28
Poverty reduction                                                                 161   8.04   2.21   91   8.15   2.30
Gender equity                                                                     153   7.14   2.27   87   6.70   2.60
Domestic private sector development                                               156   7.46   1.98   91   7.65   2.34
Foreign direct investment*                                                        154   7.29   2.13   91   6.65   2.70
Water and sanitation                                                              153   7.92   1.98   90   7.64   2.48
Trade and exports                                                                 154   7.34   2.03   89   6.83   2.65
Economic growth                                                                   159   8.22   1.78   92   8.02   2.36
Energy                                                                            155   8.35   1.63   89   7.88   2.36
Disaster management                                                               150   7.31   2.29   83   6.95   2.43
Public sector governance/reform                                                   157   7.68   2.22   87   7.66   2.31
Job creation/employment                                                           153   7.56   1.97   88   7.51   2.42
Financial markets*                                                                153   7.54   2.04   86   6.70   2.47
Equality of opportunity                                                           147   7.56   1.97   86   7.20   2.39
Health                                                                            156   8.08   1.78   89   7.69   2.47
Rural development                                                                 159   7.86   2.17   89   8.04   2.30
Global/regional integration                                                       153   6.90   2.00   86   6.53   2.28
Food security*                                                                    151   7.19   2.21   85   7.92   2.22
Education                                                                         161   8.20   1.85   89   8.54   2.17
Social protection                                                                 153   7.09   2.24   91   6.91   2.51
Climate change                                                                    156   7.47   2.15   89   7.56   2.25
Agricultural development                                                          159   8.20   2.10   90   8.34   2.18
Natural resource management                                                       157   7.52   2.33   92   7.79   2.47
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        133
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Tanzania? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                  No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean   SD       N    Mean    SD
Anti-corruption                                                                   105   5.96   2.42     61   5.43   2.69
Information and communications technology                                         116   6.78   2.19     63   6.63   2.48
Transport                                                                         144   7.53   2.01     70   7.17   2.13
Crime and violence*                                                               98    6.59   2.20     54   5.83   2.26
Law and justice                                                                   104   6.52   2.40     56   6.27   2.27
Urban development                                                                 130   7.13   2.01     68   6.93   2.26
Environmental sustainability                                                      132   7.14   1.96     66   6.85   2.51
Regulatory framework*                                                             126   7.16   1.84     61   6.43   2.42
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            116   6.84   2.21     63   6.33   2.17
Poverty reduction*                                                                143   7.76   1.88     75   6.96   2.42
Gender equity*                                                                    125   6.81   1.88     65   6.18   2.17
Domestic private sector development*                                              123   7.00   1.88     68   6.07   2.46
Foreign direct investment*                                                        122   7.01   2.04     60   6.12   2.54
Water and sanitation                                                              133   7.35   2.05     71   6.94   2.69
Trade and exports*                                                                116   7.01   2.00     60   5.97   2.27
Economic growth*                                                                  146   7.86   1.73     78   6.82   2.45
Energy                                                                            137   7.73   1.66     67   7.18   2.29
Disaster management*                                                              109   7.09   2.02     54   5.96   2.43
Public sector governance/reform*                                                  136   7.46   2.00     72   6.69   2.58
Job creation/employment*                                                          124   7.11   2.02     68   6.22   2.60
Financial markets*                                                                110   7.22   1.79     55   6.02   2.30
Equality of opportunity*                                                          116   7.03   1.90     62   6.29   2.59
Health                                                                            135   7.43   2.02     65   7.22   2.20
Rural development*                                                                133   7.37   2.12     72   6.54   2.63
Global/regional integration*                                                      118   6.94   2.05     61   6.18   2.36
Food security                                                                     120   7.06   2.18     69   6.57   2.40
Education                                                                         142   7.56   2.07     67   7.01   2.54
Social protection                                                                 118   6.86   2.17     60   6.20   2.17
Climate change                                                                    116   7.14   2.15     63   6.51   2.32
Agricultural development                                                          138   7.46   2.20     71   7.03   2.23
Natural resource management                                                       127   7.22   2.24     65   6.60   2.42
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Tanzania?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                               Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                    45.9%                        27.1%
In the country                                                                              40.3%                        28.1%
Don't know                                                                                  13.8%                        44.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        134
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean     SD       N     Mean     SD
 To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                    162 7.44 1.74         90    6.56 2.09
 development results in Tanzania?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Tanzania?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean     SD      N      Mean    SD

The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Tanzania*          158    6.74   2.04    79      5.37    1.90

The World Bank Group meets Tanzania’s needs for knowledge services*               155    6.63   2.01    83      5.88    2.05
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean      SD      N     Mean     SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation
 mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving results in                136 7.37 1.53        67     5.93 2.32
 Tanzania?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators                  Non-Collaborators
Weekly                                                                                      18.2%
Monthly                                                                                     27.7%                              8.0%
A few times a year                                                                          40.9%                              35.0%
Rarely                                                                                      11.9%                              27.0%
Never                                                                                        1.3%                              30.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        135
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Tanzania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                               N     Mean     SD       N     Mean    SD
Are timely*                                                                         152     6.88   1.70     71     5.65    2.21
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*            146     6.99   1.81     70     5.60    2.05
Are relevant to Tanzania’s development priorities*                                  155     7.26   1.80     83     6.20    2.18
Lead to practical solutions*                                                        149     7.03   1.70     77     5.99    2.02
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                               153     7.27   1.84     73     6.32    1.96
Are source of relevant information on global good practices*                        153     7.56   1.69     77     7.01    2.24
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills*                                               154     7.60   1.72     76     6.53    2.38
Are adequately disseminated*                                                        148     7.16   1.79     74     5.78    2.18
Are translated enough into local language*                                          133     6.08   2.12     74     5.22    2.33
Are adaptable to Tanzania’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                    152     6.89   1.75     75     6.01    2.17
circumstances*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                N    Mean      SD      N     Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
Group's knowledge work and activities make to development results in your            156    7.87    1.55     94     6.71   2.06
country?*
 Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                      158 7.99 1.33           87    6.80   2.03
 knowledge work and activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Tanzania’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                N    Mean      SD      N     Mean     SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)*                           147    7.33    1.65     75     6.23   2.25
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)*                                      147    7.44    1.81     78     6.58   2.27
Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making appropriate
                                                                                     147    7.37    1.71     84     6.60   2.12
adjustments)*
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)*                                       147    7.44    1.61     80     6.79   2.27
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         136
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                  No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                    147   7.05    2.04    65   5.37   2.51
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                  153   7.73    1.64    79   6.80   2.23
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                                  151   6.97    1.81    68   5.81   2.25
fashion*
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable*            135   7.09    1.87    66   6.21   2.17
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable*                  144   7.14    1.83    67   5.46   2.26
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Tanzania*                         150   6.92    1.91    71   5.20   2.32
Working with the World Bank Group increases Tanzania’s institutional
                                                                                  153   7.63    1.66    75   6.43   2.32
capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                  124   7.13    1.60    61   6.48   2.10
changes*
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                  143   7.48    1.92    70   6.21   2.05
appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                   152   7.62    1.86    75   6.67   2.29
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Tanzania?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                               Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Tanzania                                         9.5%                         7.4%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Tanzania                                  29.7%                        17.0%
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is appropriate                                      28.5%                        24.5%
Don't know                                                                                  15.8%                        31.9%
Prefer not to answer                                                                        16.5%                        19.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania

Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Tanzania?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                                                                                           18.4%                           12.0%
Tanzania’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                       35.6%                           28.0%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                   16.0%                           14.0%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets*                          15.3%                           7.0%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government*                                            17.8%                           40.0%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Tanzania’s specific
                                                                                               9.2%                        20.0%
challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                   11.0%                           8.0%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                     13.5%                           12.0%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                  25.2%                           25.0%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                              25.2%                           26.0%
Work faster                                                                                6.1%                            2.0%
Other                                                                                      1.8%                            2.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        137
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Tanzania (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Tanzania, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in
Tanzania?

Percentage of Respondents                                                               Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
Financial services                                                                          40.1%                        29.7%
Knowledge products                                                                          14.6%                        21.8%
Convening services                                                                           3.8%                         7.9%
None of the above                                                                              -                          5.0%
The combination is appropriate for Tanzania                                                 40.1%                        30.7%
Don't know                                                                                   1.3%                         5.0%

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                  No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean   SD       N    Mean     SD

The World Bank Group should ensure stronger reform efforts linked to its
                                                                                  157   7.68   1.99     96   7.59    2.49
lending in Tanzania

The World Bank Group should have greater visibility throughout the country
                                                                                  151   7.33   2.07     99   7.60    2.56
to ensure greater support for reform


Please indicate which of the following best represents your views.

Percentage of Respondents                                                               Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
The WBG exerts too much pressure on the Government of Tanzania
                                                                                           21.3%                            20.2%
on matters related to economic and social reforms
The WBG exerts too little pressure on the Government of Tanzania
                                                                                           27.5%                            31.3%
on matters related to economic and social reforms
The WBG exerts the correct amount of pressure on the Government
                                                                                           31.9%                            22.2%
on matters related to economic and social reforms
Don't know                                                                                 6.3%                             16.2%
No opinion                                                                                 13.1%                            10.1%


G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Tanzania? (Choose no more than
TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
Local newspapers                                                                            46.3%                        57.0%
International newspapers                                                                     8.0%                         3.0%
Local radio                                                                                 12.3%                        14.0%
International radio                                                                          3.7%                         8.0%
Local television*                                                                           22.8%                        36.0%
International television                                                                    11.1%                         8.0%
Periodicals                                                                                  6.8%                        12.0%
Internet*                                                                                   65.4%                        43.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                      3.7%                         7.0%
Blogs                                                                                        8.0%                         5.0%
Mobile phones                                                                                2.5%                         0.0%
Instant messaging                                                                            0.0%                         2.0%
Other*                                                                                       4.9%                         0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        138
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                              Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Blogs                                                                                 18.4%            16.3%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                  19.0%            23.5%
e-Newsletters                                                                         23.3%            30.6%
Instant messaging                                                                      3.1%             6.1%
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences                                     36.2%            41.8%
World Bank Group's publications and other written materials                           31.9%            26.5%
Mobile phones                                                                          7.4%            10.2%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                               12.9%            14.3%
World Bank Group's website                                                            39.9%            28.6%
Other                                                                                  0.6%             1.0%

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                   45.8%             22.1%
No                                                                                    54.2%             77.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                   65.1%             33.0%
No                                                                                    34.9%             67.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                   92.8%             91.2%
No                                                                                     7.2%              8.8%

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                   92.9%             83.0%
No                                                                                     7.1%             17.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                         Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                                   90.4%             60.4%
No                                                                                     9.6%             39.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        139
The World Bank Group                                                   Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                                               Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group’s country website                                                      52.2%                        63.8%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                                         47.8%                        36.3%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                               Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
High speed                                                                                  85.5%                        62.0%
Dial-up                                                                                     14.5%                        38.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                  No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean   SD       N    Mean    SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few years
                                                                                  154   6.96   2.02     78   5.12   2.98
ago.*
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.*                         150   7.43   1.72     72   6.40   2.49
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.*                148   7.96   1.62     69   7.12   2.43
The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                  108   6.71   2.47     58   6.55   3.13
information about the institution.
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it.*         149   7.62   1.83     72   6.33   3.06
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                  142   7.40   1.80     64   5.33   2.81
inquiries.*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Tanzania? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)*                                                                  75.2%                         4.1%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                                                25.5%                         7.1%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                         10.2%                         7.1%
None*                                                                                        9.6%                        83.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                    Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
Observer*                                                                                   11.3%                        25.6%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                           46.3%                        36.7%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities*                             47.5%                        25.6%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                              37.5%                        14.4%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.*                         19.4%                        48.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        140
The World Bank Group                                                  Tanzania                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix E: Responses to Questions across Country Surveys1
FY11 N=348            FY14 N=277

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group


                                                                                            FY11                   FY14
                                                                                     N     Mean       SD     N     Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                                   341      6.61      2.07   273   6.34    2.08
Tanzania?
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                           FY11                    FY14
                                                                                     N     Mean       SD     N     Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                   308      6.49      2.07   260   6.88    2.01
effectiveness in Tanzania.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) **Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Tanzania?
                                                                                            FY11                   FY14
                                                                                     N     Mean       SD     N     Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                                   328      7.10      2.46   256   7.13    2.22
development in Tanzania
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                   324      6.48      2.35   250   7.01    2.00
development priorities for Tanzania*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that
                                                                                   320      5.99      2.48   252   6.95    2.14
are realistic for Tanzania*
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in
                                                                                   305      6.51      2.56   236   7.14    2.15
Tanzania with respect*
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Tanzania, in terms of each of the following?

                                                                                            FY11                   FY14
                                                                                     N     Mean       SD     N     Mean    SD
Staff accessibility                                                                290      6.75      2.26   232   6.78    2.09
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                    289      6.75      2.46   232   7.08    2.19
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
Note the response scales for these questions in FY11 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY14.




1
    Only those questions with similar response scales/options could be compared.



                                                                        141
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Tanzania? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                           FY11                 FY14
                                                                     N     Mean   SD      N    Mean        SD
Law and justice*                                                     302   7.89   2.35   245    6.51      2.50
Poverty reduction*                                                   330   8.62   1.88   261    8.11      2.22
Gender equity*                                                       313   7.73   2.09   249    6.94      2.44
Domestic private sector development*                                 317   8.50   1.79   255    7.55      2.12
Economic growth*                                                     322   8.70   1.74   260    8.17      2.00
Financial markets*                                                   315   8.74   1.66   247    7.21      2.27
Health*                                                              310   8.46   1.90   254    7.96      2.08
Global/regional integration*                                         305   8.17   1.94   247    6.78      2.16
Education                                                            318   8.53   1.95   259    8.34      1.97
Social protection*                                                   295   7.62   2.26   251    7.07      2.35
Climate change                                                       310   7.85   2.24   254    7.50      2.21
Agricultural development                                             309   8.57   1.81   258    8.27      2.14
Natural resource management*                                         303   8.21   1.91   258    7.62      2.43
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11country surveys

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Tanzania? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                           FY11                 FY14
                                                                     N     Mean   SD      N    Mean        SD
Law and justice*                                                     278   5.59   2.36   168    6.40      2.34
Poverty reduction*                                                   314   6.17   2.22   225    7.52      2.11
Gender equity*                                                       286   6.26   2.11   198    6.63      2.00
Domestic private sector development*                                 292   6.29   2.30   199    6.75      2.16
Economic growth*                                                     300   6.33   2.15   233    7.49      2.07
Financial markets                                                    292   6.66   2.19   173    6.83      2.05
Health*                                                              284   6.42   2.12   207    7.40      2.07
Global/regional integration*                                         279   6.19   2.08   187    6.67      2.26
Education*                                                           290   6.50   2.17   217    7.40      2.22
Social protection*                                                   261   5.63   2.16   186    6.66      2.22
Climate change*                                                      267   5.42   2.33   187    6.93      2.25
Agricultural development*                                            287   6.34   2.21   217    7.35      2.20
Natural resource management*                                         283   6.02   2.17   200    6.98      2.33
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys




                                                           142
The World Bank Group                                               Tanzania                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Tanzania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:

                                                                                       FY11                      FY14
                                                                                  N    Mean       SD       N     Mean      SD
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                      304    7.06     2.29     238     7.37     1.92
Are adaptable to Tanzania’s specific development challenges
                                                                                 302    6.65     2.11     234     6.54     1.99
and country circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
Note the response scales for these questions in FY11 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY14.



E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                                       FY11                      FY14
                                                                                  N    Mean       SD       N     Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly*                                   197    6.04     2.45     219     6.53     2.33
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the
                                                                                 197    7.39     2.16     238     7.39     1.94
projects and programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s requirements on its lending are
                                                                                 191    6.47     2.52     216     6.56     2.15
reasonable
Working with the World Bank Group increases Tanzania’s
                                                                                 197    6.85     2.33     235     7.21     2.01
institutional capacity
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys




G. Communication and Information Sharing

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY11                   FY14
Yes                                                                           93.5%                  89.3%
No                                                                            6.5%                   10.7%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY11                   FY14
Yes                                                                           70.0%                  79.2%
No                                                                            30.0%                  20.8%
*Significantly different FY14 and FY11 country surveys

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY11                   FY14
The World Bank Group’s country website                                        56.3%                  55.6%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                           43.7%                  44.4%




                                                                     143
The World Bank Group                                         Tanzania                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                                FY11                      FY14
                                                                          N     Mean         SD     N     Mean    SD
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests
                                                                         287     6.58        2.60   209   6.76   2.36
and inquiries.




H. Background Information

Which of the following best describes your current position? (Select only ONE response)
                                                     FY11                                                                FY14
Percentage of Respondents                          (N=343)     Percentage of Respondents                               (N=269)
Employee of a Ministry                              20.8%      NGO                                                      18.7%
NGO/CBO/Private Foundation                          20.1%      Ministry/Regional Administration                         15.5%
Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank        12.3%      Bilateral or Multilateral Agency                         12.8%
Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister      9.7%      Private Sector                                           12.2%
Consultant on WBG-supported Project/PMU              7.4%      Office of the President/Permanent Secretary              10.8%
Independent Government Institution                   7.1%      Media                                                     7.9%
Media                                                6.3%      Independent Government Institution                        5.8%
Academia                                             5.6%      Local Government                                          5.5%
Other                                                5.6%      Other                                                     4.1%
Bilateral/Multilateral Agency                        5.2%      Academia                                                  3.2%
                                                               Trade Union                                               1.7%
                                                               Judiciary                                                 1.7%

Which best represents your geographic location?
                                                       FY11                                                              FY14
Percentage of Respondents                            (N=335)     Percentage of Respondents                             (N=268)
Dar es Salaam region                                  60.3%      Dar es Salaam region                                   78.7%
Other districts                                       17.3%      Other urban centers                                    12.3%
Other urban centers                                   14.9%      Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba)                             6.0%
Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba)                            7.5%      Rural areas                                             3.0%




                                                               144
The World Bank Group                                                                                                                   Tanzania                                                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix F: Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’ Specializations/Sectors
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Tanzania? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                                                                                                             Public sector
                                                                                                        Health /                                                  Natural                    governance /
                         Agriculture/   Climate                                                      communicable                                   Law and      resource     Private sector     public
                             rural     change /                             Financial Gender equity      /non-      Information                     justice /  management / development /      financial
                       development /    disaster                            markets /  / equality of communicable    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental foreign direct mgmt. / anti-        Social                   Urban     Water and
                        food security management    Education    Energy      banking   opportunity     diseases      technology   employment      framework    sustainability investment      corruption     protection   Transport development   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                          N     Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption*        18    5.67     3    6.00    18   5.50   11   8.18   4    8.00    2    9.00    11    8.64    24    7.29     1      8.00    8     9.38     11    5.73    18     7.06    24     8.00    15   7.40    13   7.62   8    8.63   6    6.17    6    9.67    40     6.15
Information and
                        18    7.39     3    6.00    19   6.42   11   7.64   4    6.25    2    9.00    9     8.33    25    7.64     1      9.00    7     8.86     11    7.91    18     6.33    26     8.19    13   7.15    15   8.00   8    8.25   5    6.60    7    6.86    39     6.95
communications tech.
Transport               18    7.50     3    6.33    19   7.00   12   8.50   4    8.25    3    8.67    11    8.09    23    7.65     1      9.00    7     9.71     11    7.82    18     8.50    28     8.29    15   7.40    15   8.60   6    9.33   6    7.33    7    8.43    37     7.16
Crime and violence*     17    5.65     3    6.33    19   4.21   11   5.82   4    7.00    1    5.00    9     6.33    22    7.23     1      8.00    7     7.57     11    5.09    14     5.14    26     5.88    13   6.38    13   6.69   8    5.63   6    5.33    6    5.17    36     5.14
Law and justice*        18    5.56     3    6.00    19   5.00   12   6.75   4    7.75    1    5.00     9    6.78    25    7.52     1      8.00    8     8.13     11    6.09    17     6.53    26     6.85    14   7.00    13   6.92   8    7.38   5    6.40    6    8.00    36     5.31
Urban development*      17    6.47     3    5.00    19   6.63   12   7.92   4    8.00    1    9.00    11    8.09    21    7.14     1      7.00    7     8.29     11    8.27    18     6.89    24     7.54    15   6.60    15   8.67   8    8.75   6    7.33    7    8.86    40     6.78
Environmental
                        17    6.71     3    6.00    18   7.61   12   8.00   4    7.00    1    8.00    11    8.64    23    7.61     1      8.00    7     8.29     11    8.36    18     8.28    26     8.31    15   7.20    15   8.67   8    8.25   6    8.00    7    8.57    38     6.82
sustainability
Regulatory
                        17    5.47     3    7.00    19   5.89   12   8.58   4    7.50    1    5.00    11    6.91    24    7.50     1      9.00    8     8.75     11    7.36    18     7.83    26     7.38    15   7.00    11   7.55   8    7.38   5    7.40    7    8.29    37     5.84
framework*
(Non)Communicable
                        18    7.22     3    7.67    19   6.00   11   9.09   4    5.75    1    5.00    9     7.22    24    7.25                    7     9.00     11    7.73    18     5.39    24     7.54    13   6.92    11   8.45   8    7.50   5    7.00    6    5.67    38     6.11
diseases*
Poverty reduction*      18    7.56     3    7.00    22   7.18   12   9.08   4    7.25    2    9.00    11    8.91    25    8.16     1      9.00    7     9.29     11    8.45    18     7.28    28     8.86    15   6.47    15   8.53   8    8.88   4    9.50    7    9.43    40     7.60
Gender equity           18    5.89     3    7.33    19   6.63   11   8.55   4    6.75    1    10.00   10    7.90    25    7.12     1      9.00    7     8.14     11    6.64    17     6.41    24     7.75    15   5.53    15   6.60   8    6.88   6    6.67    7    8.14    37     6.30
Domestic private
                        17    6.18     3    7.00    19   6.89   12   7.92   4    6.75    2    5.50    10    7.40    25    8.28     1      8.00    8     9.63     10    7.50    18     7.89    26     8.23    15   7.20    15   7.87   8    7.00   6    7.33    7    8.00    39     6.69
sector development*
Foreign direct
                        18    6.33     3    7.00    19   6.63   12   8.00   4    8.00    2    7.50    10    7.50    24    7.33     1      8.00    7     9.57     11    7.55    18     8.00    26     7.15    15   6.07    15   6.93   8    8.13   4    6.25    7    6.71    40     5.95
investment*
Water and sanitation    18    7.11     3    7.67    19   7.79   10   9.20   4    6.50    1    8.00    11    8.09    24    7.58     1      8.00    7     9.29     11    7.64    18     8.00    26     8.19    15   7.47    15   8.00   8    8.25   4    7.50    7    8.29    40     7.03
Trade and exports*      18    6.72     3    7.67    19   6.16   11   7.55   4    6.50    2    8.00    11    7.18    23    7.52     1      7.00    7     9.14     10    6.60    18     7.00    26     7.62    13   7.77    15   7.33   8    7.38   6    7.50    7    8.86    40     5.90
Economic growth         18    8.22     3    5.67    19   7.47   12   8.75   4    8.00    2    10.00   11    8.82    25    8.20     1      9.00    7     9.43     11    8.64    18     8.22    27     8.30    15   7.47    15   8.60   8    8.50   6    8.17    7    9.14    41     7.41
Energy*                 18    8.17     3    5.33    19   8.11   12   9.42   4    8.00    2    9.00    10    7.80    25    7.76                    7     9.86     11    9.00    18     7.89    26     8.23    15   7.07    15   8.67   8    8.50   6    8.00    7    9.29    37     7.84
Disaster
                        18    6.78     3    6.67    17   6.94   12   8.75   4    6.75    2    9.50    11    8.27    25    7.56                    7     9.29     10    7.40    16     6.31    24     6.83    15   5.80    15   8.33   8    7.63   5    7.60    7    6.57    36     6.08
management*
Public sector
                        17    7.47     3    8.33    19   7.26   11   8.55   4    7.75    2    9.50    10    8.00    25    7.96     1      9.00    8     9.75     11    7.09    18     7.61    25     8.44    15   5.73    15   8.27   8    7.75   6    7.83    7    8.29    40     6.83
governance/reform*
Job creation/
                        18    7.39     3    5.33    19   7.00   11   8.18   4    7.25    2    9.50    11    8.55    24    6.96     1      8.00    7     9.14     11    7.18    18     7.11    26     7.62    15   7.27    13   8.15   8    7.88   6    6.83    7    9.29    36     6.97
employment
Financial markets       16    6.69     3    6.33    17   5.76   11   7.55   4    7.50    2    8.50    10    7.30    25    7.08     1      8.00    7     9.43     10    6.80    18     7.28    27     7.59    15   7.07    11   8.27   8    7.75   5    5.60    7    7.86    38     6.68
Equality of
                        18    6.50     3    6.67    17   7.24   11   8.18   4    8.50    2    10.00   10    8.30    24    6.54     1      6.00    7     9.00     10    7.20    18     6.89    24     7.46    14   8.00    11   7.82   8    6.75   6    6.67    7    9.00    35     6.74
opportunity
Health                  18    8.28     3    6.00    20   7.90   12   9.25   4    8.00    2    9.50    10    8.20    25    7.84     1      6.00    7     9.00     11    7.82    16     7.38    26     8.19    14   8.07    14   8.43   8    8.13   6    7.33    7    7.86    38     6.84
Rural development       18    8.44     3    5.33    20   7.10   12   8.75   4    8.00    2    9.50    9     8.56    24    7.67     1      7.00    7     9.00     11    8.45    18     7.61    27     8.22    15   7.20    15   8.93   8    8.50   6    7.83    7    8.43    38     7.42
Global/regional
                        18    6.00     3    5.33    17   5.76   12   7.75   4    8.75    2    8.50    10    6.80    24    6.88     1      8.00    7     8.43     11    7.27    18     6.39    21     7.14    14   6.64    15   7.27   8    7.13   5    5.60    7    7.00    38     5.82
integration*
Food security           16    7.31     3    5.67    19   6.47   12   8.58   4    7.75    2    7.50    10    7.90    24    7.88     1      9.00    7     8.00     11    6.73    16     7.31    24     7.42    14   7.00    13   7.92   8    8.13   6    7.00    7    7.29    36     6.89
Education               18    8.28     2    6.00    20   8.20   12   9.42   4    7.75    2    10.00   11    8.64    25    8.60     1      9.00    8     9.50     11    8.82    18     7.89    26     8.38    15   7.87    15   8.07   8    9.13   6    7.67    7    9.00    38     7.50
Social protection       16    6.25     3    6.00    19   6.26   12   7.58   4    7.25    2    9.50    10    7.40    25    7.24     1      7.00    7     8.43     11    6.36    18     7.28    26     7.85    15   7.00    13   7.46   8    6.63   6    6.83    7    8.00    36     6.58
Climate change          18    6.78     3    5.67    18   7.39   11   9.00   4    6.75    2    8.50    11    7.45    25    7.40     1      8.00    7     7.86     11    8.18    18     7.67    25     7.28    15   6.47    15   7.27   8    8.25   6    9.00    7    8.57    37     7.19
Agricultural
                        18    7.72     3    5.67    18   8.28   11   9.27   4    8.25    2    9.00    11    8.45    25    8.84     1      7.00    7     9.86     11    8.45    18     7.67    28     8.46    15   7.33    15   8.07   7    8.86   6    7.50    7    9.00    39     7.69
development
Natural resource
                        18    6.94     3    6.00    21   7.33   12   8.92   4    7.75    2    9.50    11    7.64    25    7.28     1      8.00    6     7.83     11    8.09    18     7.67    26     8.04    15   6.47    15   6.93   8    8.75   6    7.50    7    9.43    37     7.24
management
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                                         145
The World Bank Group                                                                                                                   Tanzania                                                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Tanzania? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                                                                                             Public sector
                                                                                                        Health /                                                  Natural                    governance /
                         Agriculture/   Climate                                                      communicable                                   Law and      resource     Private sector     public
                             rural     change /                             Financial Gender equity      /non-      Information                     justice /  management / development /      financial
                       development /    disaster                            markets /  / equality of communicable    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental foreign direct mgmt. / anti-        Social                   Urban     Water and
                        food security management    Education    Energy      banking   opportunity     diseases      technology   employment      framework    sustainability investment      corruption     protection   Transport development   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                          N     Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption         16    4.75     3    5.00    10   3.50   6    6.67   3    4.67    2    5.50    6     6.17    15    6.47     1      9.00    5     5.80     8     6.75    11     4.73    18     6.72    13   5.38    8    6.63   5    7.80   4    5.00    6    5.50    27     4.96
Information and
                        14    4.86     3    6.00    10   4.80   7    7.57   3    8.00    2    6.00    6     7.67    20    6.95     1     10.00    4     7.50     10    7.80    10     5.50    19     8.00    13   5.92    11   6.64   4    7.75   4    5.75    3    8.67    33     6.21
communications
Transport*              16    6.56     3    6.00    12   5.92   11   8.55   4    6.75    1    8.00    7     8.00    21    7.24                    7     9.00     11    7.64    14     5.93    21     8.48    13   6.92    15   8.40   8    8.00   6    6.67    7    8.29    33     7.00
Crime and violence*     15    5.00     3    5.00     9   6.00    6   7.00   3    6.33    1    2.00    5     6.00    15    6.80     1      9.00    2     5.00      8    7.50     9     5.33    15     7.27    11   7.00     9   7.56   5    7.00   4    5.25    3    3.67    28     5.54
Law and justice*        14    5.14     3    6.00    12   5.25   7    7.29   3    6.00    1    3.00    5     7.60    14    6.79     1     10.00    5     5.80     9     7.78     9     5.67    19     7.26    13   6.54    9    7.33   3    8.33   4    4.75    3    5.00    27     5.63
Urban development       15    6.87     3    5.67    12   7.25   11   7.91   3    8.33    2    5.50    7     6.86    21    6.38     1      8.00    6     7.83     10    7.80    10     6.50    20     7.30    12   5.75    13   7.85   8    8.38   4    5.00    7    7.43    31     6.94
Environmental
                        17    6.06     3    5.67    12   7.08   11   8.00   4    7.75    2    6.50    7     7.43    19    6.53     1      7.00    6     8.83     11    7.64    10     5.80    19     7.74    13   6.08    11   7.27   8    7.63   5    6.20    4    6.00    32     6.81
sustainability
Regulatory
                        15    5.07     3    6.33    12   7.25   10   7.30   4    7.00    1    3.00    6     7.33    17    7.12     1      8.00    8     8.63     7     7.29    11     6.18    19     6.84    13   7.00    11   7.27   8    7.50   4    6.25    4    6.25    31     6.35
framework
Communicable/non-
                        15    5.87     3    5.67    12   5.17   9    7.89   2    7.50    1    4.00    7     5.86    18    6.89     1      7.00    6     7.67     9     7.22     8     5.88    19     7.37    13   5.92    9    6.89   6    6.67   4    7.50    6    7.00    28     6.46
communicable
Poverty reduction       16    6.56     3    7.00    18   8.22   9    8.89   4    6.75    2    6.00    10    7.70    20    7.60     1      7.00    6     8.50     11    7.64    12     6.42    21     7.76    13   6.23    13   8.31   8    8.38   6    6.33    7    8.00    34     7.00
Gender equity           17    6.12     3    6.33    16   7.13   7    7.43   3    7.67    2    6.00     6    5.67    18    6.28     1      5.00    6     7.67      9    7.33    11     5.55    17     7.12    13   6.38     9   7.78   8    6.88   4    5.50    4    6.00    33     5.94
Domestic private
                        15    6.20     3    6.67    10   7.00   7    7.00   4    6.00    1    5.00    8     6.38    18    7.17     1      6.00    7     7.57     10    7.60    13     5.77    19     7.42    13   7.23    11   6.64   6    6.33   4    6.25    5    6.00    33     6.15
sector development
Foreign direct
                        15    5.27     3    7.33    10   6.80   8    7.63   4    5.75    1    6.00    8     6.25    17    6.94     1      8.00    6     7.67     10    8.10     9     5.56    20     7.50    13   7.38    10   7.00   6    7.67   4    5.25    4    5.25    30     6.20
investment
Water and sanitation    16    6.56     3    6.33    11   7.45   10   8.60   3    7.33    1    5.00    7     7.29    16    6.75     1      6.00    6     7.17     11    7.73    14     6.50    22     7.59    13   6.31    13   7.46   8    8.00   6    6.83    7    8.14    33     6.79
Trade and exports       13    5.15     3    7.67    10   7.00   5    8.40   3    5.33    1    7.00    8     6.63    17    6.65     1      8.00    6     6.83     8     7.50    11     6.36    19     7.11    13   7.08    10   6.20   6    7.17   4    6.00    4    6.75    31     5.94
Economic growth         16    6.50     3    6.67    16   8.38   10   8.30   4    6.75    2    9.00    9     8.22    20    7.20     1      7.00    7     7.00     11    7.64    16     6.19    21     7.95    13   7.69    15   7.53   8    8.88   5    6.00    7    8.29    37     7.03
Energy*                 16    6.38     3    6.00    13   7.62   11   8.45   3    6.67    1    5.00    8     7.13    18    7.39     1      8.00    6     9.00     11    7.91    12     6.25    21     7.86    13   7.00    11   7.91   8    8.50   5    6.20    7    8.71    33     7.67
Disaster
                        14    5.64     3    6.67    10   6.40   6    7.33   2    7.50    1    2.00    6     7.00    18    7.44     1     10.00    4     6.25     10    7.20     8     5.88    19     6.79    13   7.77    6    7.17   7    8.14   3    5.33    3    6.67    28     5.68
management*
Public sector
                        18    6.56     3    7.00    14   7.29   10   7.70   4    7.25    3    6.67    8     6.75    16    7.44     1      9.00    7     7.86     7     7.43    13     6.77    21     8.29    13   7.23    13   8.38   8    8.25   5    5.60    7    6.43    33     6.58
governance/reform
Job creation/
                        16    5.56     3    6.33    11   7.45   9    7.44   3    7.33    2    6.00    8     7.50    15    6.80     1      9.00    6     5.50     11    7.27    11     6.00    21     7.52    13   5.85    11   6.91   8    7.13   4    4.75    6    7.67    30     6.57
employment
Financial markets       15    5.53     3    5.67    12   7.08   6    6.83   3    5.67    2    5.00    7     6.86    13    6.54                    7     6.29     7     7.14     9     6.56    18     7.50    13   7.23    8    7.13   6    8.33   4    5.25    3    7.67    28     6.54
Equality of
                        15    5.33     3    7.00    12   6.50   6    7.67   3    7.00    2    5.50    7     6.71    17    6.88     1      8.00    6     4.33     8     7.75     9     6.00    19     7.26    13   7.23    11   8.09   5    7.60   5    6.60    3    5.33    30     6.07
opportunity*
Health                  16    7.19     3    7.00    15   7.13   11   8.73   3    7.33    2    5.50    9     7.67    18    6.94     1      9.00    6     7.83     10    7.60    11     5.91    21     8.29    13   6.31    11   7.73   8    7.75   5    6.20    6    6.17    28     7.43
Rural development       15    6.87     3    6.67    15   6.93   9    8.44   4    6.75    2    7.50    8     6.88    20    7.20     1      9.00    6     4.67     11    7.73    13     5.85    21     7.62    13   5.92    11   8.36   8    7.63   5    5.80    7    7.14    32     7.03
Global/regional
                        15    4.67     2    9.00    11   6.55   9    7.22   3    6.00    2    8.50    7     7.00    14    6.64     1     10.00    7     8.43     9     7.78    11     6.18    19     6.21    13   6.92    9    7.22   8    7.88   4    5.50    4    7.50    28     5.54
integration*
Food security           16    6.13     3    8.33    12   5.67    8   7.88   3    7.67    2    6.50    8     7.13    14    7.07     1      9.00    6     7.17      9    7.56    12     6.42    19     7.32    13   6.15    11   7.64   8    7.75   4    4.50    6    7.17    31     6.39
Education*              16    6.31     3    7.67    18   8.83   11   8.45   3    7.33    2    5.00    9     8.11    19    7.11     1     10.00    4     8.50     11    7.55    12     6.33    22     7.68    13   6.69    11   7.45   8    8.13   6    6.50    6    8.50    33     6.52
Social protection       14    5.36     3    7.67    11   6.18   9    6.44   3    7.00    1    1.00    9     7.11    14    7.07     1      9.00    4     6.50     9     7.00    11     6.27    21     7.10    14   5.93    8    7.50   5    7.60   4    5.50    5    7.00    29     6.21
Climate change*         14    5.71     3    7.00    11   6.55   9    8.44   3    7.67    1    1.00    6     6.33    15    6.73     1      5.00    6     8.33     11    8.00     8     6.25    22     7.00    13   6.23    11   6.55   7    8.14   3    7.00    5    7.80    28     6.18
Agricultural
                        19    7.42     3    7.67    14   8.21   12   7.75   3    6.33    2    6.00    7     7.43    17    6.88     1      5.00    6     8.33     11    8.36    12     7.17    22     7.55    13   5.77    13   6.85   8    7.25   5    6.80    6    6.67    32     7.03
development
Natural resource
                        15    6.07     3    8.33    11   7.09   10   8.00   4    5.75    2    6.00    7     7.29    15    6.40     1      8.00    6     6.33     11    8.09     9     6.33    21     7.05    13   6.46    13   6.92   6    8.33   6    6.83    7    7.43    29     6.69
management
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                                         146
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania




In instances where more than 10% of respondents come from a specific sector, additional analyses are
conducted to further examine their perceptions as opposed to those from other sectors. In the case of
Tanzania, there were 11% of respondents from the Public sector governance/public financial
management/anti-corruption sector.


Public Sector vs. Others
Public Sector Governance/Public Financial Management/Anti-Corruption Sector N=28
All Others N=236

A. General Issues Facing Tanzania

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Tanzania. Please identify which of the following you consider the
most important development priorities in Tanzania. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Public Sector             All Others
Social protection                                                        3.6%                      1.3%
Transport                                                                17.9%                    32.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                          14.3%                    19.0%
Global/regional integration                                              0.0%                      3.4%
Gender equity                                                            7.1%                      9.9%
Domestic private sector development*                                     17.9%                     6.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                0.0%                      3.0%
Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                      6.9%
Anti-corruption                                                          7.1%                     11.6%
Job creation/employment                                                  17.9%                     8.6%
Rural development                                                        17.9%                     6.5%
Financial markets                                                        0.0%                      0.0%
Urban development                                                        0.0%                      3.9%
Environmental sustainability                                             0.0%                      2.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                  0.0%                      0.9%
Health                                                                   10.7%                    13.4%
Education                                                                64.3%                    53.0%
Poverty reduction                                                        25.0%                    15.5%
Energy                                                                   35.7%                    27.6%
Food security                                                            0.0%                      4.7%
Climate change                                                           0.0%                      2.2%
Agricultural development                                                 10.7%                    19.8%
Trade and exports                                                        7.1%                      2.6%
Crime and violence                                                       7.1%                      2.6%
Economic growth                                                          17.9%                    13.8%
Law and justice                                                          7.1%                      4.3%
Regulatory framework                                                     0.0%                      2.2%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                      0.0%
Natural resource management                                              3.6%                     13.8%
Disaster management                                                      0.0%                      1.3%
Information and communications technology                                7.1%                      2.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            147
The World Bank Group                                    Tanzania




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Public Sector             All Others
Water and sanitation                                                  3.6%                      5.5%
Equality of opportunity*                                              21.4%                     6.4%
Economic growth                                                       35.7%                    26.0%
Climate change                                                        0.0%                      1.3%
Global/regional integration                                           7.1%                      3.0%
Gender equity                                                         3.6%                      9.8%
Rural development                                                     28.6%                    24.7%
Urban development                                                     0.0%                      2.6%
Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%                      0.4%
Social protection                                                     7.1%                      6.4%
Law and justice                                                       3.6%                      7.2%
Transport                                                             14.3%                    19.6%
Crime and violence                                                    0.0%                      1.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                0.0%                      0.9%
Information and communications technology                             0.0%                      3.8%
Anti-corruption                                                       10.7%                     8.5%
Domestic private sector development                                   14.3%                     9.8%
Foreign direct investment                                             7.1%                      2.1%
Education                                                             35.7%                    43.0%
Energy                                                                14.3%                    12.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                       10.7%                    18.7%
Natural resource management*                                          0.0%                     14.5%
Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%                      4.3%
Disaster management                                                   0.0%                      1.7%
Health                                                                3.6%                     16.2%
Agricultural development*                                             53.6%                    24.7%
Job creation/employment                                               10.7%                    13.6%
Financial markets*                                                    7.1%                      0.0%
Trade and exports                                                     7.1%                      1.7%
Food security                                                         0.0%                      3.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          148
The World Bank Group                                   Tanzania




A. General Issues Facing Tanzania (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Public Sector            All Others
Energy                                                                33.3%                   28.6%
Gender equity                                                         0.0%                     6.0%
Equality of opportunity                                               14.8%                   10.3%
Social protection                                                     0.0%                     4.3%
Global/regional integration                                           3.7%                     3.4%
Climate change                                                        0.0%                     5.6%
Anti-corruption                                                       11.1%                   12.8%
Disaster management                                                   3.7%                     1.7%
Rural development                                                     14.8%                    9.8%
Foreign direct investment*                                            14.8%                    4.3%
Urban development                                                     0.0%                     2.1%
Water and sanitation                                                  0.0%                     1.3%
Education                                                             29.6%                   24.8%
Information and communications technology                             3.7%                     4.7%
Regulatory framework                                                  7.4%                     1.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                3.7%                     0.4%
Trade and exports                                                     18.5%                   13.2%
Public sector governance/reform*                                      7.4%                    26.9%
Domestic private sector development                                   18.5%                   22.6%
Job creation/employment                                               7.4%                    14.1%
Agricultural development                                              22.2%                   22.2%
Food security                                                         0.0%                     4.7%
Transport                                                             29.6%                   21.4%
Natural resource management                                           37.0%                   23.5%
Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%                     3.8%
Health                                                                3.7%                    12.4%
Law and justice                                                       0.0%                     1.3%
Crime and violence                                                    0.0%                     0.9%
Financial markets                                                     11.1%                    3.8%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                         149
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Tanzania, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                 Public Sector             All Others
Social protection                                                       10.7%                     3.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                         28.6%                    24.6%
Transport                                                               32.1%                    32.6%
Poverty reduction                                                       10.7%                    19.9%
Global/regional integration                                             0.0%                      4.2%
Gender equity                                                           3.6%                     10.2%
Crime and violence                                                      3.6%                      2.1%
Domestic private sector development*                                    25.0%                     8.9%
Rural development                                                       14.3%                     9.7%
Foreign direct investment                                               0.0%                      2.1%
Water and sanitation                                                    0.0%                      6.8%
Energy                                                                  14.3%                    20.8%
Job creation/employment                                                 7.1%                      9.3%
Financial markets                                                       3.6%                      1.7%
Urban development                                                       0.0%                      1.7%
Environmental sustainability                                            3.6%                      1.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                 0.0%                      2.1%
Health*                                                                 7.1%                     29.2%
Education                                                               57.1%                    41.5%
Food security                                                           3.6%                      3.8%
Climate change                                                          0.0%                      3.0%
Agricultural development*                                               35.7%                    15.3%
Trade and exports                                                       10.7%                     4.7%
Economic growth                                                         7.1%                     10.2%
Law and justice                                                         0.0%                      4.7%
Regulatory framework                                                    0.0%                      2.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                  3.6%                      1.7%
Natural resource management                                             14.3%                     7.2%
Anti-corruption                                                         3.6%                      6.4%
Information and communications technology                               0.0%                      2.1%
Disaster management                                                     0.0%                      1.3%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            150
The World Bank Group                                     Tanzania




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Tanzania? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                    Public Sector Gov./
                                                                      Public Financial
                                                                       Mgmt./Anti-
                                                                     Corruption Sector          All Others
                                                                      N Mean SD           N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                      24    8.00   2.41    217     7.01   2.68
Information and communications technology                            26    8.19   1.90    215     7.30   2.33
Transport                                                            28    8.29   2.09    216     7.84   2.23
Crime and violence                                                   26    5.88   2.37    201     5.77   2.32
Law and justice                                                      26    6.85   2.05    210     6.42   2.55
Urban development                                                    24    7.54   2.09    216     7.32   2.32
Environmental sustainability                                         26    8.31   1.52    215     7.67   2.14
Regulatory framework                                                 26    7.38   2.02    212     6.98   2.36
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                               24    7.54   2.32    206     6.91   2.28
Poverty reduction*                                                   28    8.86   1.69    223     7.96   2.29
Gender equity                                                        24    7.75   2.13    215     6.78   2.47
Domestic private sector development                                  26    8.23   1.68    219     7.38   2.15
Foreign direct investment                                            26    7.15   2.44    218     7.00   2.38
Water and sanitation                                                 26    8.19   2.04    216     7.70   2.21
Trade and exports                                                    26    7.62   2.25    216     7.01   2.32
Economic growth                                                      27    8.30   1.77    223     8.12   2.04
Energy                                                               26    8.23   1.93    217     8.15   1.95
Disaster management                                                  24    6.83   2.67    211     7.14   2.37
Public sector governance/reform                                      25    8.44   1.58    220     7.57   2.29
Job creation/employment                                              26    7.62   2.65    214     7.45   2.11
Financial markets                                                    27    7.59   2.53    208     7.08   2.23
Equality of opportunity                                              24    7.46   2.50    206     7.28   2.17
Health                                                               26    8.19   1.79    216     7.84   2.12
Rural development                                                    27    8.22   2.04    218     7.91   2.15
Global/regional integration                                          21    7.14   2.01    214     6.63   2.15
Food security                                                        24    7.42   2.23    209     7.35   2.24
Education                                                            26    8.38   1.90    221     8.28   2.01
Social protection                                                    26    7.85   2.13    213     6.98   2.28
Climate change                                                       25    7.28   2.30    217     7.49   2.13
Agricultural development                                             28    8.46   1.77    218     8.17   2.21
Natural resource management                                          26    8.04   2.20    220     7.51   2.44
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           151
The World Bank Group                                      Tanzania




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Tanzania? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                     Public Sector Gov./
                                                                       Public Financial
                                                                        Mgmt./Anti-
                                                                      Corruption Sector          All Others
                                                                       N Mean SD           N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                       18    6.72   2.47    149     5.49   2.55
Information and communications technology*                            19    8.00   1.92    158     6.43   2.28
Transport*                                                            21    8.48   1.81    189     7.25   2.05
Crime and violence                                                    15    7.27   2.74    137     6.08   2.18
Law and justice                                                       19    7.26   2.64    142     6.20   2.29
Urban development                                                     20    7.30   2.00    176     7.02   2.11
Environmental sustainability                                          19    7.74   2.10    176     6.86   2.16
Regulatory framework                                                  19    6.84   2.52    166     6.78   2.06
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                19    7.37   2.06    157     6.49   2.17
Poverty reduction                                                     21    7.76   1.81    193     7.40   2.14
Gender equity                                                         17    7.12   2.37    170     6.46   1.94
Domestic private sector development                                   19    7.42   1.98    169     6.59   2.08
Foreign direct investment                                             20    7.50   2.54    159     6.62   2.14
Water and sanitation                                                  22    7.59   1.97    179     7.08   2.32
Trade and exports                                                     19    7.11   2.64    154     6.51   2.06
Economic growth                                                       21    7.95   2.04    200     7.38   2.09
Energy                                                                21    7.86   1.49    180     7.46   1.96
Disaster management                                                   19    6.79   2.55    143     6.64   2.14
Public sector governance/reform*                                      21    8.29   1.74    183     7.12   2.24
Job creation/employment                                               21    7.52   2.34    168     6.62   2.26
Financial markets                                                     18    7.50   2.36    146     6.62   1.97
Equality of opportunity                                               19    7.26   2.56    156     6.56   2.11
Health*                                                               21    8.29   1.93    176     7.20   2.07
Rural development                                                     21    7.62   2.38    183     6.97   2.33
Global/regional integration                                           19    6.21   2.96    157     6.59   2.13
Food security                                                         19    7.32   2.85    167     6.75   2.18
Education                                                             22    7.68   2.68    186     7.30   2.17
Social protection                                                     21    7.10   2.66    154     6.45   2.13
Climate change                                                        22    7.00   2.74    155     6.76   2.14
Agricultural development                                              22    7.55   2.46    184     7.21   2.17
Natural resource management                                           21    7.05   2.48    168     6.90   2.30
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            152
The World Bank Group                                                                                            Tanzania                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG
                                                           H3. Currently, do you
                                                        professionally collaborate/    H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                           work with the WBG?                 Observer          Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate         Use WBG website

Indicator Question                                        No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                            6.16          7.25         6.77              7.49    6.67         7.17       6.95           6.78       6.86         6.93     6.91        6.81
Bank Group's effectiveness in Tanzania.
To what extent do you believe the World Bank
Group's staff is well prepared to help Tanzania solve       6.48          7.68         7.17              7.64    7.25         7.24       7.22           7.28       7.12         7.54     7.32        7.06
its most complicated development challenges?
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                            6.34          7.53         7.16              6.84    6.93         7.34       6.90           7.43       6.89         7.65     7.27        6.74
relevant role in development in Tanzania
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
                                                            5.99          7.48         6.98              7.08    6.85         7.18       6.89           7.16       6.72         7.71     7.20        6.54
consider the development priorities for Tanzania
Responsiveness                                              5.86          6.80         6.44              6.94    6.32         6.76       6.48           6.55       6.36         6.90     6.63        6.23
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
                                                            6.25          6.35         6.09              7.39    6.21         6.39       6.48           6.04       6.23         6.41     6.20        6.52
products and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                            5.85          6.53         6.20              7.00    6.06         6.66       6.69           5.85       6.23         6.52     6.34        6.26
circumstances)
Being inclusive                                             6.11          6.77         6.46              7.13    6.45         6.71       6.70           6.36       6.45         6.82     6.52        6.69
Openness (sharing data and other information)               6.66          7.38         7.27              6.68    6.78         7.66       7.17           7.19       7.10         7.36     7.31        6.84
Staff accessibility                                         6.12          7.15         6.91              6.44    6.81         6.87       6.67           7.05       6.47         7.66     6.96        6.51
Straightforwardness and honesty                             6.26          7.41         7.13              7.09    7.03         7.23       6.98           7.30       6.96         7.46     7.25        6.77
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                            5.40          7.25         6.63              5.91    6.32         6.74       6.44           6.62       6.29         7.16     6.71        6.08
Government
Collaboration with the Government                           7.55          8.31         7.97              8.29    7.79         8.32       8.07           7.95       7.91         8.30     8.09        7.87
Collaboration with other donors                             6.86          7.99         7.62              7.70    7.41         7.92       7.69           7.56       7.40         8.25     7.76        7.34
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
                                                            5.96          6.55         6.30              7.13    6.36         6.51       6.57           6.23       6.46         6.34     6.42        6.43
the ground
To what extent does the World Bank Group's work
                                                            6.56          7.44         7.01              7.78    6.99         7.32       7.23           6.99       7.06         7.29     7.26        6.82
help to achieve development results in Tanzania?
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet
                                                            5.37          6.74         6.33              6.43    6.05         6.74       6.23           6.51       6.21         6.70     6.60        5.75
the needs of Tanzania
The World Bank Group meets Tanzania's needs for
                                                            5.88          6.63         6.36              6.59    6.10         6.78       6.38           6.41       6.35         6.49     6.60        5.94
knowledge services
Are adaptable to Tanzania’s specific development
                                                            6.01          6.89         6.59              6.41    6.43         6.73       6.54           6.60       6.39         6.98     6.66        6.34
challenges and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
                                                            6.71          7.87         7.37              7.97    7.26         7.74       7.45           7.48       7.46         7.46     7.60        7.14
and activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of
the World Bank Group's knowledge work and                   6.80          7.99         7.60              7.77    7.47         7.83       7.53           7.77       7.48         7.99     7.82        7.19
activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                            6.21          7.48         7.15              6.94    6.81         7.51       7.10           7.13       6.97         7.43     7.29        6.64
Bank Group makes appropriate use of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.
                                                                                                                   153
The World Bank Group                                                                                                        Tanzania                                                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group
                                                                              Consultant on                             Private Sector/                                               Independent
                                         Office of the     Employee of a      WBG-supported           Bilateral/       Financial Sector/        NGO/CBO/                              Government
                                      President/Minister     Ministry          Project/PMU       Multilateral Agency     Private Bank       Private Foundation        Media            Institution           Academia                 Other
                                       N    Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean   SD       N   Mean    SD      N     Mean      SD    N    Mean    SD     N    Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N     Mean      SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank           26    7.15   1.52   55   7.64   1.73   20   7.40   1.19    14    7.64   1.45    31     6.48   2.26    50    6.26   2.47   14   6.50    1.79   19   6.21   2.20   12     6.92     1.24     12   5.83    1.90
Group's effectiveness in Tanzania*
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Tanzania solve its    24    8.08   1.44   52   7.94   1.26   20   7.85   1.18    14    7.71   1.38    27     6.37   2.53    47    6.66   2.51   12   6.83    1.99   19   5.95   2.09   12     6.92     1.78     14   7.79    1.72
most complicated development
challenges?*
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in     26    7.15   1.87   56   7.91   1.95   20   6.85   1.42    14    8.43   1.87    32     6.03   2.28    44    6.45   2.90   13   6.15    2.04   17   7.35   1.62   15     7.33     2.09     12   7.25    1.91
development in Tanzania*
The WBG's work is aligned with
what I consider the development        24    7.25   1.54   55   7.71   1.74   20   7.40   1.27    14    8.07   1.90    32     5.97   2.24    43    6.49   2.32   13   6.31    1.44   16   7.06   1.48   14     6.36     2.17     13   6.85    1.91
priorities for Tanzania*
Responsiveness                         23    6.17   1.83   53   6.98   1.77   20   6.75   1.33    10    7.10   1.10    28     6.11   2.03    40    6.18   2.58   11   6.36    1.43   16   5.56   1.63   10     6.90     2.42     11   7.09    2.17
Flexibility (in terms of the WBG's
                                       23    6.57   1.88   55   6.60   1.82   18   5.89   1.45    10    6.30   1.49    28     5.93   1.63    37    6.11   2.76   9    7.11    1.62   16   5.19   1.38   10     7.10     1.20     12   6.33    2.54
products and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                       23    6.78   2.13   53   6.87   1.84   17   5.88   1.17    12    6.08   2.11    28     5.96   1.71    41    5.41   2.56   8    6.75    1.58   17   5.71   1.96   10     6.30     1.49     15   7.20    2.08
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                       23    7.09   1.70   52   7.23   1.58   18   6.83   1.25    12    5.83   1.64    32     5.84   1.82    37    5.49   2.57   9    7.00    1.87   19   6.53   2.14   10     7.40     1.43     10   7.20    2.15
Openness (sharing data and other
                                       23    7.13   1.89   52   7.40   1.99   20   7.45   1.28    14    6.93   2.30    31     6.94   1.93    37    6.68   2.64   8    6.75    2.55   18   6.67   2.47   12     7.92     1.68     14   8.14    2.07
information)
Staff accessibility*                   23    7.00   1.17   55   7.36   2.14   19   7.84   1.43    13    7.15   1.86    29     6.00   2.04    37    6.22   2.45   8    6.75    0.71   17   5.76   2.17   9      7.11     1.45     15   6.87    2.33
Straightforwardness and honesty        24    6.96   2.26   55   7.49   1.93   19   8.21   1.23    13    7.08   1.26    29     7.24   2.23    36    6.53   2.68   9    5.89    2.89   18   6.33   2.20   11     7.00     1.95     11   6.91    2.30
Collaboration with groups outside
                                       21    6.76   1.64   43   7.28   1.76   12   7.25   1.96     5    6.40   1.34    31     6.55   2.19    44    5.23   2.60   11   7.00    2.41   17   6.12   2.21   12     6.75     1.36     12   6.92    2.19
of the Government*
Collaboration with the Government      25    7.96   1.70   54   8.57   1.35   20   8.10   1.25    13    8.15   1.35    29     7.66   2.13    46    7.72   2.11   11   8.18    1.83   18   7.17   2.38   12     8.25     1.22     13   8.38    1.33

Collaboration with other donors        23    7.57   1.59   50   8.28   1.33   16   7.56   1.41    14    7.36   1.65    27     7.30   2.32    39    7.03   2.46   10   7.80    2.04   16   7.56   2.37   9      7.22     1.86      9   8.44    1.81
The speed in which it gets things
                                       23    6.87   1.58   53   6.72   1.92   20   6.65   1.31    11    6.09   1.30    29     5.86   2.13    40    5.60   2.53   11   7.36    1.29   18   6.22   1.90   11     7.27     1.42     15   6.20    2.70
accomplished on the ground
To what extent does the World
Bank Group's work help to achieve      26    7.27   1.46   56   7.96   1.44   20   7.10   1.12    14    7.86   1.23    31     6.45   2.01    49    6.57   2.65   12   6.83    1.90   17   6.47   1.59   13     7.00     1.47     15   7.53    1.96
development results in Tanzania?*
The WBG's financial instruments
                                       26    6.23   1.90   56   7.04   1.61   20   6.50   1.28    14    7.71   1.73    30     5.67   1.99    42    5.64   2.66   12   5.58    1.98   16   5.56   1.83   11     6.45     2.02     12   6.42    2.75
meet the needs of Tanzania*
The WBG meets Tanzania's needs
                                       25    6.28   1.62   56   6.86   1.84   20   6.10   1.41    14    7.21   1.42    30     6.50   2.36    43    6.12   2.37   12   5.33    2.64   18   5.56   1.95   12     6.58     1.73      9   6.44    2.70
for knowledge services
Are adaptable to Tanzania’s
specific development challenges        24    7.13   1.83   52   6.52   1.75   19   7.37   0.90    13    7.77   1.83    29     5.97   2.29    38    6.00   2.22   13   6.46    2.22   16   5.69   1.20   11     6.91     1.76     13   7.15    1.82
and country circumstances*
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
WBG's knowledge work and               26    7.88   1.37   54   8.35   1.08   20   7.25   1.21    13    7.15   1.07    32     7.13   2.21    50    6.90   2.23   12   7.42    1.83   19   6.79   2.15   13     7.23     1.83     12   7.42    1.98
activities make to development
results in your country?*
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the WBG's         26    7.62   1.44   55   8.18   1.22   20   7.70   0.73    14    7.79   0.89    32     7.19   2.01    46    7.13   2.26   12   7.58    1.78   18   6.94   1.96   11     7.73     1.74     13   7.77    1.92
knowledge work and activities?
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group         25    6.68   2.34   46   7.67   1.70   20   7.45   1.73    10    6.30   2.11    28     6.79   2.22    37    6.78   2.06   11   6.09    2.95   14   6.79   2.05   9      7.22     1.48     12   7.50    1.68
makes appropriate use of them
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                              154
The World Bank Group                                Tanzania                              Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix I: Tanzania FY 2014 Questionnaire




                            World Bank Group Country Survey FY14 – Tanzania


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Tanzania or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Tanzania, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Tanzania.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING TANZANIA

 A1. In general would you say that Tanzania is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                      155
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Tanzania.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
 Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                            17      Education
       assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)        18      Poverty reduction
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public      19      Energy
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4    Global/regional integration                             20      Food security
  5    Gender equity                                           21      Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  6    Domestic private sector development                     22      Agricultural development
  7    Foreign direct investment                               23      Trade and exports
  8    Water and sanitation                                    24      Crime and violence
  9    Anti corruption                                         25      Economic growth
 10    Job creation/employment                                 26      Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11    Rural development                                       27      Regulatory framework
 12    Financial markets                                       28      Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 13    Urban development                                       29      Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 14    Environmental sustainability                            30      Disaster management
 15    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
                                                               31      Information and communications technology
 16    Health




                                                              156
The World Bank Group                                       Tanzania                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                               16    Anti corruption
  2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             17    Domestic private sector development
  3    Economic growth                                    18    Foreign direct investment
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      19    Education
  5    Global/regional integration                        20    Energy
                                                                Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  6    Gender equity                                      21    effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  7    Rural development                                  22    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
  8    Urban development                                  23    Environmental sustainability
  9    Regulatory framework                               24    Disaster management
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 10                                                       25    Health
       social assistance)
 11    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)            26    Agricultural development

 12    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)   27    Job creation/employment
 13    Crime and violence                                 28    Financial markets
 14    Communicable/non-communicable diseases             29    Trade and exports
 15    Information and communications technology          30    Food security




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               157
The World Bank Group                                          Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy                                             16      Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 2    Gender equity                                      17      Trade and exports
                                                                 Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             18      effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                 expenditure, fiscal system reform)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 4                                                       19      Domestic private sector development
      social assistance)
 5    Global/regional integration                        20      Job creation/employment
 6    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      21      Agricultural development
 7    Anti corruption                                    22      Food security
 8    Disaster management                                23      Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 9    Rural development                                  24      Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 10   Foreign direct investment                          25      Environmental sustainability
 11   Urban development                                  26      Health
 12   Water and sanitation                               27      Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 13   Education                                          28      Crime and violence
 14   Information and communications technology
                                                         29      Financial markets
 15   Regulatory framework


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following
 TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Better employment opportunities for young people
  2    Better employment opportunities for women
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  6    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  7    A growing middle class
  8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
  9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 10    Consistent economic growth
 11    More reliable social safety net
 12    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14    Better quality public services
 15    Other (please specify):_____________________________________




                                                                158
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Tanzania?
          1                 2               3       4       5             6        7        8            9              10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                             Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Tanzania.
          1             2           3           4   5       6             7        8        9           10              
                                                                                                         Very
 Not effective at all                                                                                               Don't know
                                                                                                     effective



 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Tanzania solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2       3       4       5   6   7            8        9                 10                      
                                                                                       To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                Don't know
                                                                                                    degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in Tanzania, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
 resources (financial and knowledge services) in Tanzania? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                              17       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
      assistance)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 2    effectiveness, public financial management, public        18       Health
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)          19       Education
 4    Poverty reduction                                         20       Food security
 5    Global/regional integration                               21       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Gender equity                                             22       Agricultural development
 7    Crime and violence                                        23       Trade and exports
 8    Domestic private sector development                       24       Economic growth
 9    Rural development                                         25       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10   Foreign direct investment                                 26       Regulatory framework
 11   Water and sanitation                                      27       Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 12   Energy                                                    28       Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)
 13   Job creation/employment                                   29       Anti corruption
 14   Financial markets                                         30       Information and communications technology
 15   Urban development
                                                                31       Disaster management
 16   Environmental sustainability




                                                                159
The World Bank Group                                           Tanzania                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Tanzania?
                                                                              Greatest Value              Second Greatest Value
                                                                           (Choose only ONE) (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/Facilitating                                                                                       
 2     Data                                                                                                         
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                             
 4     Financial resources                                                                                          
       Capacity development (e.g., institutional development,
 5     training for staff at state institutions in such sectors as                                                  
       PFM, agriculture, energy, transport, etc.)
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                         
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                                   
 8     Donor coordination                                                                                           
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 9                                                                                                                  
       knowledge sharing)
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________                                                             

 How effectively do the World Bank Group’s activities below support Tanzania’s efforts to achieve
 development results?
                                                                     Not effective                                       Very    Don't
                                                                     at all                                          effective   know
  B6     Convening/Facilitating                                        1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B7     Data                                                          1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B8     Policy advice, studies, analyses                              1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B9     Financial resources                                           1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B10     Technical assistance                                          1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B11     Mobilizing third party financial resources                    1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B12     Donor coordination                                            1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 B13                                                                   1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         knowledge sharing)

 The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Tanzania. To
 which degree would Tanzania benefit, if capacity building were to support...?
                                                                     To no                                        To a very
                                                                                                                                 Don't
                                                                     degree                                      significant
                                                                                                                                 know
                                                                     at all                                         degree
         Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
 B14     media) to help them more effectively engage and               1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         participate in development efforts
         The public sector, related to implementation of
 B15                                                                   1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         specific development projects on the ground
         The public sector, related to changing institutions
 B16                                                                   1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         (organizations or sociopolitical conditions)
         The private sector, related to institutional and
 B17                                                                   1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         policy change




                                                                 160
The World Bank Group                                           Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
 each of the following areas in Tanzania? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                    Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                    at all                                       effective   know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B18                                                                   1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B19                                                                   1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B20                                                                   1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)

 When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Tanzania to help ensure better development
 results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
 please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                    Not important                                Very        Don't
                                                                    at all                                   important       know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B21                                                                   1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B22                                                                   1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B23                                                                   1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)

 B24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Staff too inaccessible
 2     Not exploring alternative policy options
 3     Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Tanzania
 4     Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5     Arrogant in its approach
 6     Not aligned with country priorities
 7     The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8     World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 9     Not willing to raise concerns related to policy and reform efforts in Tanzania
 10    Too influenced by developed countries
 11    Not doing enough to ensure sustainability of reforms
 12    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 13    World Bank Group’s processes too slow
 14    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 15    Not aligned with other donors’ work
 16    Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 17    Not client focused
 18    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 19    Don’t know




                                                                 161
The World Bank Group                                         Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B25. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
       Capacity development (e.g., institutional development, training for staff at state institutions in such sectors as
 1
       PFM, agriculture, energy, transport, etc.)
 2     Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 3     Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 4     Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 5     Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6     Trust Fund management
 7     Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8     Don’t know


 B26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which
 TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 2     Donor community
 3     Media
 4     NGOs
 5     Local Government
 6     Private sector
 7     Parliament
 8     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 9     Beneficiaries
 10    Foundations
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    Other (please specify): __________________________
 13    Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
 Tanzania?
                                                                  Strongly                                     Strongly   Don't
                                                                  disagree                                        agree   know
         Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B27                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         relevant role in development in Tanzania
         The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B28                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         consider the development priorities for Tanzania
         The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B29                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         strategies that are realistic for Tanzania
         The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B30                                                                 1   2     3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         stakeholders in Tanzania with respect




                                                               162
The World Bank Group                                          Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Tanzania in terms of each
 of the following?
                                                                   To no                                     To a very
                                                                                                                          Don't
                                                                   degree at                                significant
                                                                                                                          know
                                                                   all                                         degree
 B31     Responsiveness                                               1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
 B32                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         products and services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B33                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         circumstances)
 B34     Being inclusive                                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B35     Openness (sharing data and other information)                1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B36     Staff accessibility                                          1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B37     Straightforwardness and honesty                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B38     Group who are making decisions important to my               1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         work
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B39                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B40     Collaboration with the Government                            1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B41     Collaboration with other donors                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B42                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         the ground
 B43     Being a long-term partner                                    1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B44. To be a more effective development partner in Tanzania, do you believe that the World Bank
 Group should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                     Less local presence       Don't know
                                           presence is adequate

 B45. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 3     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5     Poor donor coordination
 6     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7     The Government works inefficiently
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                163
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Tanzania?
                                                                 Not important                            Very     Don't
                                                                 at all                               important    know
  1    Anti corruption                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  2    Information and communications technology                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  4    Crime and violence                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  6    Urban development                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  7    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  8    Regulatory framework                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 10    Poverty reduction                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 11    Gender equity                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 12    Domestic private sector development                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 13    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 14    Water and sanitation                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 15    Trade and exports                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 16    Economic growth                                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 17    Energy                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 18    Disaster management                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 19    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 20    Job creation/employment                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 21    Financial markets                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 22    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 23    Health                                                       1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 24    Rural development                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 25    Global/regional integration                                  1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 26    Food security                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 27    Education                                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 28                                                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       assistance)
 29    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 30    Agricultural development                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 31    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       




                                                              164
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Tanzania? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the
 sectors listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                 Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                 at all                                       effective   know
  1    Anti corruption                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  2    Information and communications technology                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  4    Crime and violence                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  6    Urban development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  7    Environmental sustainability                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  8    Regulatory framework                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 10    Poverty reduction                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 11    Gender equity                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 12    Domestic private sector development                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 13    Foreign direct investment                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 14    Water and sanitation                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 15    Trade and exports                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 16    Economic growth                                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 17    Energy                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 18    Disaster management                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 19    effectiveness, public financial management, public           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 20    Job creation/employment                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 21    Financial markets                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 22    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 23    Health                                                       1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 24    Rural development                                            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 25    Global/regional integration                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 26    Food security                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 27    Education                                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 28                                                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       assistance)
 29    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 30    Agricultural development                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 31    Natural resource management (e.g., oil, gas, mining)         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      




                                                              165
The World Bank Group                                                Tanzania                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in
 Tanzania? (Select only ONE response)
  1    At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
  2    In the country
  3    Don’t know


 C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
 Tanzania?
         1              2       3       4       5       6           7         8       9                   10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                           To a very
                                                                                                                             Don't know
 all                                                                                              significant degree


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in
 Tanzania?
                                                                Strongly                                                    Strongly    Don't
                                                                disagree                                                       agree    know
       The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
       (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
 C5                                                             1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
       meet the needs of Tanzania
       The World Bank Group meets Tanzania’s
 C6    needs for knowledge services (e.g., research,            1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold the
 institution accountable for achieving results in Tanzania?
             1              2       3       4       5       6           7         8       9                    10                      
                                                                                                    To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                            Don't know
                                                                                                                 degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                        166
The World Bank Group                                              Tanzania                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
 you do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never


 In Tanzania, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and
 activities:
                                                             To no                                                       To a very
                                                                                                                                      Don't
                                                             degree at                                                  significant
                                                                                                                                      know
                                                             all                                                           degree
  D2     Are timely                                           1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D3                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Tanzania’s development
  D4                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         priorities
  D5     Lead to practical solutions                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D6                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D7                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         good practices
  D8     Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                 1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

  D9     Are adequately disseminated                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

 D10     Are translated enough into local language            1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are adaptable to Tanzania’s specific
 D11     development challenges and country                   1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         circumstances


 D12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3   4     5        6            7           8       9                  10                        
 Not significant at all                                                                              Very significant       Don't know



 D13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities?
          1               2       3    4        5        6            7           8       9              10                        
 Very low                                                                                         Very high technical
                                                                                                                            Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                            quality




                                                                      167
The World Bank Group                                       Tanzania                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s delivery work contribute
 to solving Tanzania’s development challenges?
                                                         To no                                  To a very
                                                                                                              Don't
                                                         degree at                             significant
                                                                                                              know
                                                         all                                      degree
        Conceptualization (understanding and framing
 E1                                                      1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        the problem)
 E2     Design (appraising and planning the solutions)   1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        Implementation (executing, carrying out,
 E3     monitoring and making appropriate                1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        adjustments)
 E4     Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      


 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                         Strongly                                  Strongly   Don't
                                                         disagree                                     agree   know
         The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E5                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         promptly
         The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E6     and evaluates the projects and programs it      1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         supports
         The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E7                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         reviews are done in a timely fashion
         The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
  E8                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         requirements are reasonable
         The World Bank Group’s requirements on its
  E9                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         lending are reasonable
         The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
 E10                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         in Tanzania
         Working with the World Bank Group
 E11                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         increases Tanzania’s institutional capacity
         The World Bank Group ensures consistency
 E12                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         and continuity through staff changes
         Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
         financial management, etc.) are adequate,
 E13                                                     1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
         of them
         The World Bank Group provides effective
 E14     implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1      2     3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         projects)

 E15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Tanzania?
 (Select only one response)
 1     The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Tanzania
 2     The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Tanzania
 3     The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
 4     Don’t know
 5     Prefer not to answer




                                                             168
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN TANZANIA
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Tanzania’s economy
  2    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
  3    Offer more innovative financial products
  4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
  5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
  6    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Tanzania’s specific challenges
  7    Offer more innovative knowledge services
  8    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
       Increase the level of capacity development in the country (e.g., institutional development, training for staff at
  9
       state institutions)
 10    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 11    Work faster
 12    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Tanzania, and
 taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World
 Bank Group should offer more of in Tanzania? (Select only ONE response)
  1    Financial services
  2    Knowledge products
  3    Convening services
  4    None of the above
  5    The combination is appropriate for Tanzania
  6    Don’t know




                                                              169
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                             Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN TANZANIA

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                          Strongly                                    Strongly   Don't
                                                          disagree                                       agree   know
       The World Bank Group should ensure stronger
 F3                                                       1      2     3   4   5     6   7   8    9       10      
       reform efforts linked to its lending in Tanzania
       The World Bank Group should have greater
 F4    visibility throughout the country to ensure        1      2     3   4   5     6   7   8    9       10      
       greater support for reform


 F5. Please indicate which of the following best represents your views?            (Select only ONE
 response)
       The World Bank Group exerts too much pressure on the Government of Tanzania on matters related to
  1
       economic and social reforms
       The World Bank Group exerts too little pressure on the Government of Tanzania on matters related to
  2
       economic and social reforms
       The World Bank Group exerts the correct amount of pressure on the Government of Tanzania on matters
  3
       related to economic and social reforms
  4    Don’t know
  5    No opinion




                                                              170
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Tanzania? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?                    (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1    Blogs
 2    Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials
 7    Mobile phones
 8    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 9    World Bank Group’s website
 10   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 G3                                                                                                       Yes       No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G4                                                                                                       Yes       No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                          Yes       No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                                Yes       No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                             Yes       No




                                                                171
The World Bank Group                                       Tanzania                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use? (Select only ONE response)
 1     The World Bank Group’s country website (www.worldbank.org/tanzania)
 2     The World Bank Group’s main website (www.worldbank.org)


 G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 1     High speed
 2     Dial-up


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                      Strongly                              Strongly   Don't
                                                                      disagree                                 agree   know
         I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than
 G10                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         I did a few years ago
         I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G11     navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank         1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Group website)
         I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 G12     websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World       1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Bank Group website)
         The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G13     Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) are valuable sources     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         of information about the institution
         When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G14     know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach      1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         them, etc.)
         The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                  1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             172
The World Bank Group                                        Tanzania                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?           (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
                                                              Natural resource management / environmental
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security   11
                                                              sustainability
                                                              Private sector development / foreign direct
 2    Climate change / disaster management             12
                                                              investment
                                                              Public sector governance / public financial
 3    Education                                        13
                                                              management / anti corruption
 4    Energy                                           14     Social protection
 5    Financial markets / banking                      15     Transport
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity          16     Urban development
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                     17     Water and sanitation
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology        18     Generalist
 9    Job creation/employment
                                                       19     Other (please specify): _________________________
 10   Law and justice / regulatory framework




                                                              173
The World Bank Group                                         Tanzania                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Tanzania?
 (Select all that apply)
 1    The World Bank (IBRD/IDA) 
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    None


 H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Tanzania?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H6. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Dar es Salaam region
 2    Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba)
 3    Other urban centers (regional centers, district centers, or municipal centers)
 4    Rural areas




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               174
