                       96138




      Togo
  The World Bank
Country Survey FY14

  Report of Findings
     April 2014
The World Bank                               Togo                             Country Survey 2014



Acknowledgements
The Togo Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of the
World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group (PORG)
team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica Cameron,
Svetlana Markova, and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data support. The
report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP).
PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Togo country team and the local
fielding agency B.F. CONSEIL. In particular, PORG is grateful to Katrina Sharkey (Country
Program Coordinator) and Sylvie Nenonene (Communications Officer) for their ongoing support
throughout the Country Opinion Survey process.




                                              1
The World Bank                                          Togo                                      Country Survey 2014




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................4

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................6

         IV. General Issues Facing Togo .......................................................12

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................17

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ......................................26

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................32

       VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo ....................40

         IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................46

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................53

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................60




                                                          2
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:

       Assist the World Bank in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in Togo
        perceive the World Bank;

       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Togo regarding:
             Their views regarding the general environment in Togo;
             Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank in Togo;
             Overall impressions of the World Bank’s effectiveness and results,
              project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
              communication and information sharing in Togo; and
             Perceptions of the World Bank’s future role in Togo.

       Use data to help inform Togo country team’s strategy.




                                               3
The World Bank                                 Togo                                Country Survey 2014



II. Methodology
In January and February, 2014, 1,129 stakeholders of the World Bank in Togo were invited to
provide their opinions on the Bank’s assistance to the country by participating in a country
survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or Prime
Minister; the office of a Minister, the office of a Parliamentarian; employee of a ministry,
ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World
Bank Group-supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of a project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral
agencies; private sector organizations; the financial sector/private banks; civil society
organizations (CSOs), NGOs, associations, or community-based organizations (CBOs); the
media; independent government institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia/research
institutes/think tanks; youth organizations; the judiciary branch; and other organizations. A total
of 608 stakeholders participated in the survey (54% response rate).

Respondents completed questionnaires with a representative from the fielding agency.
Respondents were asked about: general issues facing Togo; their overall attitudes toward the
WBG; the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities; working
with the WBG; the Bank’s future role in Togo; and the Bank’s communication and information
sharing in Togo. In addition, every country that engages in the Country Survey must include
specific indicator questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual Corporate Scorecard.
These questions are identified throughout the survey report.

A. General Issues Facing Togo: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Togo is headed in
   the right direction, what they thought were the most important development priorities, which
   areas would contribute most to reducing poverty, which areas would contribute most to
   generating economic growth, and what would best achieve “shared prosperity? in Togo.

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their
   familiarity with the WBG, the Bank’s effectiveness in Togo, Bank staff preparedness to help
   Togo solve its development challenges, the effectiveness of the Bank’s activities, to what
   extent the Bank should provide capacity building support to various groups, the importance
   and effectiveness of the Bank’s current capacity building work, their agreement with various
   statements regarding the Bank’s work, and the extent to which the Bank is an effective
   development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the sectoral areas on which it
   would be most productive for the Bank to focus its resources, the Bank’s greatest values and
   greatest weaknesses, the Bank’s most effective instruments, with which stakeholder groups
   the Bank should collaborate more, if the Bank should have more or less of a local presence in
   Togo, and to what they attributed slowed or failed reform efforts.




                                                 4
The World Bank                               Togo                               Country Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent
   to which the Bank’s work helps achieve development results in Togo, the extent to which the
   Bank meets Togo’s needs for knowledge services and financial instruments, the extent to
   which the Bank helps strengthen existing country systems, the extent to which the Bank’s
   internal evaluation mechanisms hold it accountable for achieving results, and the importance
   of the Bank’s involvement and the Bank’s level of effectiveness across seventeen
   development areas. Respondents were also asked to indicate if Bank decisions regarding its
   Togo program were made primarily in country or at Headquarters.

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult Bank knowledge work as well as rating the quality of
   the Bank’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant of a contribution it
   makes to development results and its technical quality.

E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which various
   aspects of the Bank’s technical assistance/advisory work contributes to solving Togo’s
   development challenges, their level of agreement with a series of statements regarding
   working with the Bank, and the extent to which the Bank is adequately staffed in Togo.
   Respondents were also asked to indicate if the Bank operates with too much risk.

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo: Respondents were asked to indicate what
   the Bank should do to make itself of greater value in Togo, which of its services the Bank
   should offer more of in Togo, and which areas of development would benefit most from the
   Bank playing a leading role and which would benefit from other donors playing a leading
   role in Togo.

G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the Bank, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   Bank’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the Bank’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the Bank, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank as a result of the Bank’s Open Data policy.
   Respondents were also asked to evaluate the Bank’s information accessibility and
   responsiveness to information requests.

H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the World Bank Group in Togo,
   with which of the WBG agencies they work, their exposure to the Bank in Togo, and their
   geographic location.

In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey
were compared to responses from the 589 respondents (64% response rate) who completed the
country survey in FY ’11. Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were
possible.



                                               5
The World Bank                                 Togo                              Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample
Current Position
       For further analyses, the few respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister
        were combined with those from the office of a Ministry; respondents from PMUs were
        combined with consultants working on WBG-supported projects; the few respondents
        from the financial sector/private banks were combined with those from the private sector;
        those from multilateral agencies were combined with those from bilateral agencies; and
        the few respondents from trade unions, youth organizations, and the judiciary branch
        were included in the “Other? category.




                                                6
The World Bank                               Togo                              Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Comparisons of ratings for the WBG’s sector importance and effectiveness across
        respondents’ specializations can be found in the Appendix (see page 125).




                                               7
The World Bank                                   Togo                                Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The majority of respondents were from Lomé. Only significant geographic location
        differences in ratings of indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this report.
        All geographic locations comparisons can be found in the Appendix (see page 105).




                                                  8
The World Bank                                Togo                               Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the World Bank Group

       Differences in responses to all questions, based on collaboration with the World Bank
        Group in Togo, can be found in the Appendix (see page 127).




                                                9
The World Bank                                  Togo                               Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Exposure to the World Bank Group

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on exposure to the World Bank
        Group in Togo, can be found in the Appendix (see page 127). Please note that where
        these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall views of the Bank,
        it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                                 10
The World Bank                                 Togo                               Country Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group

       Respondents’ familiarity with the World Bank Group in Togo in this country survey was
        significantly higher than that of respondents in the FY ’11 country survey (4.9).
       Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian had the highest levels of familiarity
        with the World Bank Group in Togo whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral
        agencies and employees of ministries had significantly lower levels of familiarity.
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group had a strong significant
        correlation with perceptions of the World Bank Group’s overall effectiveness in Togo, a
        moderate correlation with perceptions of the World Bank Group’s ability to help achieve
        development results in Togo, and a small but significant correlation with the relevance of
        the Bank’s role in development in Togo.




                                                11
The World Bank                        Togo   Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Togo

Togo Heading in the Right Direction




                                       12
The World Bank                                Togo                             Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Development Priority

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that government effectiveness/
        governance (40%) was the most important development priority for Togo.




                                               13
The World Bank                               Togo                             Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that increasing employment (32%)
        and government effectiveness/governance (26%) would contribute most to poverty
        reduction in Togo.




                                              14
The World Bank                      Togo     Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth




                                     15
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity?

       Respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies considered consistent economic
        growth as the best way to achieve “shared prosperity? in Togo.




                                               16
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


Focusing World Bank Group Resources

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that it would be most productive for
        the Bank to focus most of its resources on government effectiveness/governance (22%),
        improving basic infrastructure (20%), increasing employment (18%), and agriculture
        development (18%) in Togo.




                                               17
The World Bank                                 Togo                               Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents’ ratings for the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in this country survey
        were significantly higher than that of respondents in the FY ’11 country survey (6.6).
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from CSOs/NGOs/
        CBOs/Associations and the media gave the highest ratings for the World Bank Group’s
        effectiveness in Togo whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies gave
        significantly lower ratings. Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations gave the
        highest ratings for the extent to which the Bank’s work achieves development results in
        Togo whereas respondents from local government and academia gave significantly lower
        ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé gave significantly higher ratings for the World Bank
        Group’s effectiveness and significantly higher ratings for the extent to which the Bank’s
        work achieves development results in Togo compared to respondents from Lomé.




                                                18
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the media gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World
        Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Togo solve its most complicated development
        challenges whereas respondents from local government and academia gave significantly
        lower ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé gave significantly higher ratings for the extent to which
        the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Togo solve its most complicated
        development challenges compared to respondents from Lomé.




                                               19
The World Bank                                Togo                               Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions

       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations gave the highest ratings across all of
        the country survey indicator questions whereas respondents from academia gave
        significantly lower ratings. Responses for individual indicator questions by stakeholder
        groups can be found in the Appendix (see page 128).




                                               20
The World Bank                                Togo                               Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the Bank’s greatest values to
        Togo were its investment lending (42%) and policy and economic advice (28%).




                                               21
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Effectiveness

       There were significant stakeholder group differences across all of these areas except
        “Mobilizing third party financial resources?. For the most part, consultants on WBG-
        supported projects/PMUs and respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations tended
        to give the highest ratings for the Bank’s effectiveness across these areas whereas
        respondents from local government and bilateral or multilateral agencies tended to give
        significantly lower ratings.




                                               22
The World Bank                Togo                   Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness




                               23
The World Bank                                  Togo                               Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Capacity Building

       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations and the media gave the highest
        ratings for the extent which Togo would benefit from WBG capacity building support to
        groups outside of government whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies
        gave significantly lower ratings.
       Employees of ministries and respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/
        Minister, the media, and other organizations gave the highest ratings for the extent which
        Togo would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the public sector, related to
        implementation of specific development projects on the ground, whereas respondents
        from local government gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks gave the highest
        ratings for the extent which Togo would benefit from WBG capacity building support to
        the public sector, related to changing institutions, and to the private sector, related to
        institutional and policy change, whereas respondents from academia gave significantly
        lower ratings.
       Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and the media gave the highest ratings
        for the extent which Togo would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the
        legislative branch whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and
        academia gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                 24
The World Bank                                 Togo                              Country Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Capacity Building (continued)
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks tended to give the
        highest ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s capacity building work across these
        areas whereas respondents from local government and the media tended to give
        significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations tended to give the highest ratings for
        the importance of the WBG’s involvement in these aspects of capacity building whereas
        respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies tended to give significantly lower
        ratings.




                                                25
The World Bank                 Togo         Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                26
The World Bank                                Togo                             Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder group differences in ratings for most of these
        seventeen areas of development. Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks gave some of the highest ratings of importance whereas respondents from
        local government and academia tended to give significantly lower ratings. Those areas
        with significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Agriculture?;
             “Finance and markets?;
             “Health, nutrition, and population?;
             “Transport and ICT?;
             “Water?;
             “Education?;
             “Environment and natural resources?;
             “Trade and competitiveness?;
             “Poverty?;
             “Urban, rural, and social development?;
             “Climate change?; and
             “Gender?.




                                               27
The World Bank                                 Togo                              Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher importance ratings
        for the WBG being involved in “Poverty?, “Agriculture?, and “Education?, but
        significantly lower importance ratings for the WBG being involved in “Gender?
        compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.




                                                28
The World Bank                    Togo                  Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas




                                   29
The World Bank                                  Togo                                Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were significant stakeholder group differences in ratings for most of these
        seventeen areas of development. Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks and the media tended to give some of the highest ratings for the Bank’s
        effectiveness in these areas whereas respondents from local government, bilateral or
        multilateral agencies, and other organizations tended to give significantly lower ratings.
        Those areas with significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Education?;
             “Health?;
             “Agricultural development?;
             “Infrastructure (roads, water & sanitation, electricity)?;
             “Community development?;
             “Social protection?;
             “Trade?;
             “Transport?;
             “Private sector development and business climate?;
             “Financial sector?;
             “Disaster management and climate change?;
             “Energy?;
             “Extractive industries?;
             “Public sector governance/reform?; and
             “Job creation/employment?.




                                                 30
The World Bank                               Togo                              Country Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       For those areas of development that could be compared, respondents in this year’s
        country survey gave higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness across nearly all areas
        compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey. Those differences that reached
        statistical significance are noted in the chart.




                                              31
The World Bank                                 Togo                                Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Togo

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Togo and
        that the World Bank Group is aligned with their development priorities for Togo
        compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (7.1 and 6.5, respectively).
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from local government,
        bilateral or multilateral agencies, and CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations had the highest
        levels of agreement that the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
        development in Togo whereas respondents from academia had significantly lower levels
        of agreement.
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and the media had the
        highest levels of agreement that the World Bank Group is aligned with their development
        priorities and that the Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Togo with respect whereas
        respondents from local government had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé had significantly higher levels of agreement that the
        Bank currently plays a relevant role in development in Togo, that the Bank is aligned
        with their development priorities, that the Bank supports programs and strategies that are
        realistic for Togo, and that Bank treats clients and stakeholders in Togo with respect
        compared to respondents from Lomé.




                                                32
The World Bank                                 Togo                               Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that working with the Bank increases Togo’s institutional capacity compared to
        respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (7.1). In contrast, respondents in this year’s
        country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement that the Bank disburses funds
        promptly, that the Bank effectively monitors and evaluates the projects it supports, and
        that the Bank’s conditions on its lending are reasonable compared to respondents from
        the FY ’11 country survey (6.6, 8.2, and 7.6, respectively).
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings across all of these
        areas, except that working with the Bank increases Togo’s institutional capacity. For the
        most part, respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and
        CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations tended to have the highest levels of agreement across
        these areas whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies and academia
        tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                33
The World Bank                                  Togo                               Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner
       Respondents in this country survey had statistically similar ratings for the Bank’s staff
        accessibility and straightforwardness compared to respondents from the FY ’11 survey.
       There were significant stakeholder group differences across all of these aspects, except
        collaboration with the Government. For the most part, respondents from the private
        sector/financial sector/private banks and bilateral or multilateral agencies tended to give
        the highest ratings across these areas whereas respondents from the local government and
        academia tended to give significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé gave higher ratings for these aspects of the Bank,
        significantly so for flexibility, inclusiveness, straightforwardness, collaboration, and the
        speed at which things get done compared to respondents from Lomé. However,
        respondents from Lomé gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s staff accessibility
        compared to respondents from Outside Lomé.




                                                 34
The World Bank                                 Togo                              Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Strengthening Country Systems




Where Decisions are Made

       A plurality of respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that decisions about
        the program in Togo are made at Headquarters (Washington, D.C.). A plurality of
        respondents from local government, however, indicated that they didn’t know where
        decisions about the program in Togo are made.




                                                35
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Internal Evaluation Mechanisms

       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and CSOs/NGOs/
        CBOs/Associations gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World Bank
        Group’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold it accountable for achieving results in Togo
        whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies gave significantly lower
        ratings.




                                               36
The World Bank                                Togo                               Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Technical Assistance/Advisory Work

       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations and the media gave the highest
        ratings for the extent to which the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory
        work contributes to implementation whereas respondents from academia gave
        significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and CSOs/NGOs/
        CBOs/Associations gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World Bank
        Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contributes to design whereas respondents
        from local government gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and CSOs/NGOs/
        CBOs/Associations gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World Bank
        Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contributes to conceptualization whereas
        consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from bilateral or
        multilateral agencies gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/
        Associations, and the media gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World
        Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contributes to evaluation whereas
        respondents from local government gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               37
The World Bank                                 Togo                               Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Risk-Taking

       A plurality of consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from the
        office of a Parliamentarian, the media, and academia indicated that the World Bank
        Group does not take enough risk in Togo. A plurality of employees of ministries and
        respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister, local government,
        bilateral or multilateral agencies, and CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations indicated that
        they didn’t know and a plurality of respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks and other organizations indicated that they preferred not to answer.




                                                38
The World Bank                                 Togo                              Country Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Staffing in Togo

       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations gave the highest ratings for the
        extent to which the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in Togo whereas
        respondents from the media, bilateral or multilateral agencies, academia, and local
        government gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                39
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value
       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the Bank should reduce the
        complexity of obtaining Bank financing (42%) and improve the quality of its experts as
        related to Togo’s specific challenges (24%) to make itself of greater value in Togo.




                                               40
The World Bank                 Togo                   Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

Focusing Services




                                41
The World Bank                                Togo                             Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)
The WBG Playing a Leading Role vs. Other Donors
       Respondents indicated that Togo would benefit most from the World Bank Group playing
        a leading role in generating jobs, strengthening public financial management, and
        increasing access to basic services. On the other hand, respondents indicated that Togo
        would benefit most from other donors playing a leading role in increasing access to
        justice systems and stimulating dialogue to promote peace and stability.
       Although respondents across stakeholder groups tended to agree on these areas,
        respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks indicated that Togo
        would benefit most from other donors playing a leading role in increasing cohesion and
        respondents from academia indicated that Togo would benefit most from other donors
        playing a leading role in improving livelihoods.




                                               42
The World Bank                                  Togo                                Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

Local Presence in Togo

       Although the majority of respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that the
        Bank should have more of a local presence in Togo to be a more effective development
        partner, a plurality of respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies indicated that
        the current level of local presence is adequate.




                                                 43
The World Bank                                Togo                               Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

Collaborating with Stakeholders in Togo

       Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the World Bank should work
        more closely with NGOs and CBOs to ensure better development results in Togo (40%
        and 29%, respectively).
       A plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that the Bank should
        collaborate more with CBOs, local government, the private sector, NGOs, beneficiaries,
        and academia/research institutes/think tanks in Togo, except the majority of respondents
        from the office of a Parliamentarian who indicated that the Bank should collaborate more
        with Parliamaent and the majority of respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies
        who indicated that the Bank should collaborate more with regional organizations.




                                               44
The World Bank                                   Togo                                Country Survey 2014



VIII. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts

       Although a plurality of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        attribute failed or slow reform efforts to there not being an adequate level of citizen/civil
        society participation; however, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs indicated
        that they attribute failed or slow reform efforts to the Government working inefficiently
        and respondents from bilateral or multilateral agencies who indicated that they attribute
        failed or slow reform efforts to the WBG working too slowly.




                                                  45
The World Bank                                Togo                             Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities

       Respondents from academia indicated the most frequent usage of WBG knowledge work
        and activities (40% indicated monthy usage) whereas employees of ministries and
        respondents from local government and other organizations indicated significantly less
        frequent usage (24%, 29%, and 49%, respectively, indicated never).




                                               46
The World Bank                              Togo                            Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Togo’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations had the highest levels of agreement
        that the World Bank Group meets Togo’s needs for knowledge services whereas
        respondents from local government had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé had significantly higher levels of agreement that the
        World Bank Group meets Togo’s needs for knowledge services compared to respondents
        from Lomé.




                                             47
The World Bank                                  Togo                                Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities
       Respondents in this country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the Bank’s
        knowledge work and acivities being a source of relevant information on global good
        practices, but statistically similar ratings for being adaptable to Togo’s circumstances
        compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings across all of these
        areas. For the most part, respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private
        banks and bilateral or multilateral agencies tended to give the highest ratings whereas
        respondents from local government and academia tended to give significantly lower
        ratings.




                                                 48
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and CSOs/NGOs/
        CBOs/Associations gave the highest ratings for the contribution of the World Bank
        Group’s knowledge work and activities whereas respondents from bilateral or multilateral
        agencies and academia gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé gave significantly higher ratings for the contribution of
        the Bank’s knowledge work and activities compared to respondents from Lomé.




                                               49
The World Bank                                Togo                              Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the Bank’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations gave the highest ratings for the
        technical quality of the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities whereas
        respondents from local government gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé gave significantly higher ratings for the technical
        quality of the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities compared to
        respondents from Lomé.




                                               50
The World Bank                                Togo                             Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Togo’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations had the highest levels of agreement
        that the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Togo whereas
        respondents from the office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister and academia had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Outside Lomé had significantly higher levels of agreement that the
        World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Togo compared to
        respondents from Lomé.




                                               51
The World Bank                               Togo                              Country Survey 2014



IX. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Most Effective Instruments

       Respondents from the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the Bank’s investment
        lending was its most effective instrument in reducing poverty in Togo (63%).




                                              52
The World Bank                               Togo                             Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that they got most of their
        information about economic and social development issues in Togo from state-owned
        national television (50%) and national newspapers (31%).




                                              53
The World Bank                                Togo                               Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that they preferred to get information
        from the World Bank Group from state-owned national television (32%), World Bank
        conferences/seminars (23%), or national newspapers (18%).




                                               54
The World Bank                                Togo                             Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Access to Information
       Respondents from the media were significantly more likely to have been aware of the
        Bank’s Access to Information policy compared to respondents from other stakeholder
        groups.




       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from the office of the
        President/Prime Minister/Minister, the media, and academia were significantly more
        likely to have requested information from the Bank compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.




                                               55
The World Bank                                 Togo                                Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)
       Respondents from the media had the highest levels of agreement that they use the WBG’s
        data more often whereas employees of ministries and respondents from the private sector/
        financial sector/private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement.




Internet Access

       Respondents in this year’s country survey indicated significantly greater access to the
        Internet compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.
       Respondents from CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations and other organizations had
        significantly lower rates of Internet access compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.




                                                56
The World Bank                                 Togo                               Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Website Usage
       Respondents in this year’s survey indicated statistically similar rates of usage for the
        World Bank Group’s website compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey.
       Employees of ministries and respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private
        banks, CSOs/NGOs/CBOs/Associations, and other organizations were significantly less
        likely to have used the World Bank Group’s website compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.




       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher rates of usage for the
        Bank’s main website compared to respondents from the FY ’11 survey.
       Respondents from the office of a Parliamentarian and local government were
        significantly more likely to have utilized the Bank’s country website compared to other
        stakeholder groups whereas respondents from academia were significantly more likely to
        have utilized the Bank’s main website compared to other stakeholder groups.




                                                57
The World Bank                                 Togo                              Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website/Social Media Evaluation

       Respondents from the media had the highest levels of agreement that they find the
        information on the Bank’s websites useful and that they find the Bank’s websites easy to
        navigate whereas respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                                58
The World Bank                                Togo                             Country Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Respondents from the media had the highest levels of agreement that the Bank is
        responsive to their information requests whereas respondents from local government had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               59
The World Bank                                    Togo                                  Country Survey 2014



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 61

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 77

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations........... 102

          D. Responses to All Questions across Collaborators ....................... 119

          E. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ................... 137

          F. Responses to Key Questions by Specializations/Sectors ............. 140

          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank ........ 152

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 153

          I. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2014 Togo Questionnaire .......................................................... 154


                                                 TOGO




                                                   60
The World Bank                                           Togo                                Country Survey 2014


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=608)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).



A. General Issues Facing Togo

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Togo is headed in...?                                      (N=502)
The right direction                                                                          80.7%
The wrong direction                                                                          4.2%
Not sure                                                                                     15.1%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Togo.
   Please identify which of the following you consider the most important         Percentage of Respondents
   development priorities in Togo. (Choose no more than THREE)                    (Responses Combined; N=600)
Public sector governance/reform                                                              50.5%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                                                39.0%
Transport                                                                                    30.5%
Education                                                                                    29.0%
Job creation/employment                                                                      26.3%
Poverty reduction                                                                            20.0%
Private sector development                                                                   18.8%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable diseases)                                    11.2%
Water and sanitation                                                                         10.0%
Local governance and institutions                                                            9.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                        8.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                                      7.8%
Social protection and labor                                                                  6.7%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                                             6.0%
Law and justice                                                                              5.3%
Economic growth                                                                              5.2%
Urban development                                                                            3.7%
Energy and mining                                                                            3.5%
Social cohesion                                                                              1.8%
Gender equity                                                                                1.5%
Global/regional integration                                                                  1.3%
Information and communications technology                                                    0.7%
Natural resource management                                                                  0.5%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                               0.3%
Financial markets                                                                            0.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                         0.3%




                                                          61
The World Bank                                      Togo                                 Country Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Togo?                          Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=607)
Agriculture, food security, rural development                                            56.5%
Job creation/employment                                                                  42.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          36.4%
Private sector development                                                               25.0%
Education                                                                                23.1%
Transport                                                                                19.4%
Economic growth                                                                          18.9%
Equality of opportunity                                                                  13.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                     11.4%
Local governance and institutions                                                        11.2%
Social protection and labor                                                              8.1%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable diseases)                                7.6%
Law and justice                                                                          4.4%
Energy and mining                                                                        4.0%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                    3.3%
Natural resource management                                                              2.5%
Financial markets                                                                        2.3%
Urban development                                                                        2.0%
Gender equity                                                                            1.6%
Information and communications technology                                                1.5%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                                         1.5%
Social cohesion                                                                          0.8%
Global/regional integration                                                              0.3%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                           0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                     0.0%




                                                     62
The World Bank                                          Togo                                   Country Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth          Percentage of Respondents
   in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)                                              (Responses Combined; N=607)
Private sector development                                                                     59.3%
Public sector governance/reform                                                                51.9%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                                                  47.8%
Transport                                                                                      31.3%
Energy and mining                                                                              20.9%
Job creation/employment                                                                        20.9%
Education                                                                                      10.7%
Information and communications technology                                                      7.1%
Local governance and institutions                                                              5.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                                        5.4%
Global/regional integration                                                                    5.1%
Water and sanitation                                                                           5.1%
Law and justice                                                                                4.1%
Natural resource management                                                                    3.8%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                                          3.1%
Social cohesion                                                                                2.8%
Financial markets                                                                              2.6%
Urban development                                                                              2.0%
Social protection and labor                                                                    1.5%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                                               1.5%
Gender equity                                                                                  1.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                           1.3%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable diseases)                                      1.0%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                                 0.0%

5. When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country,
   which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved             Percentage of Respondents
   in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (Responses Combined; N=511)
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                      32.3%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                               28.6%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                            23.7%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                   20.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                        15.7%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                14.7%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                                           13.9%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability             11.0%
More reliable social safety net                                                                10.0%
Better quality public services                                                                 8.6%
Consistent economic growth                                                                     8.2%
A growing middle class                                                                         5.3%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                      3.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                        2.7%
Other                                                                                          0.4%




                                                         63
The World Bank                                                 Togo                                 Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                         N         DK     Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Togo?
                                                                                580           3       6.49      2.38
    (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


Overall Effectiveness                                                               N         DK     Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                500           91      6.92      2.18
   effectiveness in Togo.* (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                  N         DK     Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Togo solve its most
                                                                                426           168     7.48      2.28
    complicated development challenges?*
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
   on development results in Togo, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
   World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and                   Percentage of Respondents
   knowledge services) in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)                             (Responses Combined; N=602)
Agriculture                                                                                         71.4%
Education                                                                                           38.5%
Urban, rural, and social development                                                                26.7%
Health, nutrition, and population                                                                   25.2%
Governance                                                                                          24.1%
Poverty                                                                                             23.9%
Jobs                                                                                                21.6%
Transport and ICT                                                                                   15.8%
Energy and extractives                                                                              9.3%
Water                                                                                               8.3%
Social protection and labor                                                                         8.0%
Trade and competitiveness                                                                           7.8%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                                                6.5%
Environment and natural resources                                                                   6.1%
Climate change                                                                                      1.8%
Gender                                                                                              1.7%
Finance and markets                                                                                 0.3%

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                 Percentage of Respondents (N=560)
                                                                                         nd
   activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity       Greatest       2 Greatest
   is of second greatest value in Togo?                                   Value           Value          Combined
Providing financial resources                                             40.4%           15.2%            55.6%
Strategy formulation                                                      18.6%           28.6%            47.2%
Supporting capacity development                                           14.6%           11.1%            25.7%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                          7.7%            8.2%             15.9%
Providing technical assistance                                            1.1%            13.4%            14.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                6.3%            6.1%             12.3%
Convening/facilitating                                                    3.4%            5.0%             8.4%
Making data available                                                     2.7%            4.3%             7.0%
Donor coordination                                                        2.9%            3.4%             6.3%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                             1.4%            3.9%             5.4%
Other                                                                     0.7%            0.4%             1.1%


                                                                64
The World Bank                                            Togo                              Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Togo’s             Effectiveness
efforts to achieve development results?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                     N     DK      Mean      SD
6.   Convening/facilitating                                                     337   142     6.48      2.11
7.   Making data available                                                      370   103     7.14      2.27
8.   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                           409   83      7.25      2.13
9.   Providing financial resources                                              492   44      7.82      2.08
10. Providing technical assistance                                              424   68      7.38      2.04
11. Mobilizing third party financial resources                                  371   108     7.14      2.14
12. Donor coordination                                                          374   112     6.97      2.32
13. Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South knowledge sharing)         318   159     6.51      2.20
14. Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                461   53      8.18      1.93

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number                  Degree
of ways in Togo. To what degree would Togo benefit, if capacity building
were to support…? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)      N     DK      Mean      SD
15. Groups outside of government to help them more effectively engage
                                                                                525   32      8.51      1.78
    and participate in development efforts
16. The public sector, related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                530   21      8.48      1.79
    projects on the ground
17. The public sector, related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                                460   51      7.81      2.05
    sociopolitical conditions)
18. The private sector, related to institutional and policy change              447   58      8.04      2.03
19. The legislative branch, to help them more effectively debate and
                                                                                488   53      8.50      1.96
    consider development programs

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the                  Effectiveness
capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Togo? (If
you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below, please
respond “Don’t know?) (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)               N     DK      Mean      SD
20. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)              452   136     7.95      1.78
21. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)        327   204     6.99      2.49
22. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                373   171     7.65      2.09
    goals)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Togo to help                  Importance
ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it
for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of
capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                     N     DK      Mean      SD
23. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)              488   81      8.72      1.59
24. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)        442   105     8.73      1.70
25. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                423   118     8.75      1.70
    goals)


                                                            65
The World Bank                                       Togo                                 Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

26. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest   Percentage of Respondents
     WEAKNESSES in its work in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)                  (Responses Combined; N=606)
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                  24.9%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                     20.3%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Togo                            20.0%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country              17.8%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                            17.8%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                               11.1%
Don’t know                                                                                10.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                     9.7%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                  9.6%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                     8.4%
Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members located in the country                6.9%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                       6.1%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                  4.6%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                    4.3%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving             3.3%
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries                   2.6%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                  2.5%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                       1.2%
Not client focused                                                                        1.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                     0.7%
Other                                                                                     0.7%

27. Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the          Percentage of Respondents
    MOST effective in reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)       (Responses Combined; N=605)
Investment lending                                                                        70.4%
Capacity development (state and semi-state institutions)                                  36.4%
Sector-wide approaches                                                                    23.6%
Policy based lending/budget support to the Government                                     22.6%
Technical assistance                                                                      12.7%
Emergency Recovery lending                                                                11.9%
Knowledge products/services                                                               5.6%
Trust Fund management                                                                     3.8%
Co-financing arrangements                                                                 2.6%
Don’t know                                                                                2.6%
Other                                                                                     1.5%




                                                      66
The World Bank                                        Togo                                     Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

28. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development         Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                         (Responses Combined; N=607)
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                           32.8%
Local Government                                                                               30.5%
Private Sector                                                                                 28.3%
NGOs                                                                                           25.0%
Beneficiaries                                                                                  20.8%
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                       19.6%
Regional Organizations (e.g., WAEMU, ECOWAS, African Union)                                    11.9%
Donor Community                                                                                8.1%
Media                                                                                          6.0%
Parliament                                                                                     5.4%
UN Agencies                                                                                    3.5%
Other                                                                                          1.5%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                      1.3%
Emerging Donors                                                                                1.3%
Don’t know                                                                                     0.8%
Foundations                                                                                    0.0%
UN and Regional Peace Keeping Forces                                                           0.0%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the                  Level of Agreement
World Bank Group’s work in Togo?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N        DK     Mean       SD
29. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                               549       32      8.17      2.02
    development in Togo*
30. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                               490       67      7.35      2.26
    development priorities for Togo*
31. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                               484       77      7.67      2.26
    realistic for Togo
32. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Togo with
                                                                               405      150      7.19      2.34
    respect




                                                       67
The World Bank                                             Togo                                     Country Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner                         Degree
in Togo, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                            N         DK      Mean      SD
33. Responsiveness*                                                                 317       215      6.18     2.09
34. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services) *        346       179      6.05     2.15
35. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       355       177      6.14     2.11
36. Being inclusive*                                                                329       195      6.76     2.31
37. Openness*                                                                       428       107      7.46     2.13
38. Staff accessibility*                                                            378       151      5.87     2.56
39. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                372       155      7.30     2.23
40. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                    349       186      5.96     2.63
    decisions important to my work
41. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government*                            413       120      6.62     2.57
42. Collaboration with the Government*                                              479       73       8.42     1.75
43. Collaboration with other development partners*                                  344       182      7.90     1.84
44. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                   426       111      7.34     2.09
45. Being a long-term partner                                                       420       122      8.50     1.60

46. To be a more effective development partner in Togo, do you believe that               Percentage of Respondents
    the World Bank Group should have…?                                                              (N=565)
More local presence                                                                                 73.6%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                     14.7%
Less local presence                                                                                 2.8%
Don't know                                                                                          8.8%

47. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
    place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                            Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than THREE)                                                           (Responses Combined; N=585)
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                51.3%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                   32.8%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                     32.6%
ground
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                      31.5%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                    29.9%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                  23.9%
Inadequate funding                                                                                   23.6%
The Government works inefficiently                                                                   18.5%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                                13.8%
Ongoing conflict and instability                                                                     9.2%
Poor donor coordination                                                                              3.6%
Other                                                                                                2.9%




                                                            68
The World Bank                                             Togo                         Country Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results

1.    In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be         Importance
      involved in the following areas of development in Togo?
      (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                            N    DK      Mean       SD
1.    Agriculture                                                           573    7      9.20      1.43
2.    Energy and extractives                                                470   46      7.99      2.07
3.    Finance and markets                                                   417   80      7.54      1.91
4.    Health, nutrition, and population                                     510   13      8.80      1.52
5.    Transport and ICT                                                     468   34      8.28      1.48
6.    Water                                                                 505   19      8.70      1.62
7.    Education                                                             539    9      9.09      1.29
8.    Environment and natural resources                                     464   31      7.86      1.84
9.    Governance                                                            513   21      8.60      1.87
10.   Trade and competitiveness                                             443   61      7.44      1.99
11.   Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                  444   54      8.09      1.79
12.   Poverty                                                               500   26      9.24      1.32
13.   Social protection and labor                                           460   38      8.10      1.63
14.   Urban, rural, and social development                                  489   25      8.58      1.45
15.   Climate change                                                        463   50      7.54      1.94
16. Gender                                                                  470   48      6.94      1.99
17. Jobs                                                                    504   34      8.83      1.57

2.    How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of            Effectiveness
      the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo?
      (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                            N    DK      Mean       SD
1.    Education                                                             416   155     7.31      2.13
2.    Health                                                                365   192     7.20      1.96
3.    Agricultural development                                              440   113     7.25      2.02
4.    Infrastructure (roads, water & sanitation, electricity)               421   130     7.05      2.01
5.    Community development                                                 368   187     6.97      2.32
6.    Social protection                                                     284   256     5.62      2.40
7.    Trade                                                                 265   249     6.10      2.21
8.    Transport                                                             375   148     7.26      2.05
9.    Telecommunications                                                    246   289     6.21      1.85
10.   Private sector development and business climate                       319   222     6.68      2.10
11.   Financial sector                                                      288   250     7.04      2.00
12.   Disaster management and climate change                                298   234     6.78      2.12
13.   Energy                                                                292   242     6.08      2.11
14.   Extractive industries                                                 282   258     6.28      2.47
15.   Public sector governance/reform                                       396   156     6.85      2.52
16. Job creation/employment                                                 371   175     6.35      2.38
17. Global/regional integration                                             256   286     6.77      2.06




                                                                69
The World Bank                                                  Togo                           Country Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

3.   Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support         Percentage of Respondents
     the program in Togo?                                                                     (N=589)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                       63.8%
In the country                                                                                 11.4%
Don't know                                                                                     24.8%


Achieving Development Results                                                 N         DK      Mean       SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
    development results in Togo?*                                             493       101      7.32      1.97
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)


Strengthening Country Systems                                                 N         DK      Mean       SD
5. To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen
    existing country systems in Togo?                                         468       122      7.51      2.03
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Togo? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)            N         DK      Mean       SD
6. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
                                                                              454       136      7.05      2.29
    Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of Togo*
7. The World Bank Group meets Togo’s needs for knowledge services
                                                                              402       179      6.31      2.23
    (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*


Internal Evaluation Mechanisms                                                N         DK      Mean       SD
8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal
    evaluation mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving
                                                                              304       280      7.02      2.56
    results in Togo?
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work            Percentage of Respondents
    and activities in the work you do?                                                    (N=365)
Weekly                                                                                        2.7%
Monthly                                                                                      14.7%
A few times a year                                                                           34.1%
Rarely                                                                                       32.8%
Never                                                                                        15.7%




                                                                 70
The World Bank                                                  Togo                           Country Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Togo, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s                         Degree
knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                            N    DK     Mean        SD
2.    Are timely                                                                   423   131    7.78       2.18
3.    Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                                   344   203     6.95      2.21
      preparation
4.    Are relevant to Togo's development priorities                                410   151     7.71      1.98
5.    Lead to practical solutions                                                  402   143     7.22      2.15
6.    Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                         413   142     6.56      2.29
7.    Are source of relevant information on global good practices                  423   133     7.80      1.83
8.    Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                         425   119     7.77      2.08
9.    Are adequately disseminated                                                  389   160     6.08      2.49
10.   Are translated enough into local language                                    355   194     3.33      2.62
11.   Are adaptable to Togo’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                   397   161     7.16      2.18
      circumstances


Overall Evaluations                                                                 N    DK     Mean       SD
12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results in           456   140     7.96      1.90
    your country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities?*                                        451   147     7.75      1.95
      (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank                        Degree
Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Togo’s
development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N    DK     Mean        SD
1. Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                       450   115    7.78       2.00
2.    Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                               483   90      7.88      2.00
3.    Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring, and making
                                                                                   501   73      7.80      1.99
      appropriate adjustments)
4.    Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                                475   98      7.83      2.07




                                                                  71
The World Bank                                             Togo                                  Country Survey 2014


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                                                      Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                         N       DK       Mean       SD
5.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                              420      145      4.90      2.68
6.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects
                                                                                518       67       7.71     2.29
     and programs it supports
7.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                                399      168       6.20     2.51
     fashion
8.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                                286      273       6.76     2.38
     reasonable
9.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable            280      280       6.34     2.57
10. The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Togo                        343      205       5.34     2.55
11. Working with the World Bank Group increases Togo’s institutional
                                                                                495       76       7.76     2.01
    capacity
12. The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                286      269       7.63     2.29
    changes
13. Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                327      238       7.97     2.09
    appropriate use of them
14. The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support              459      117       7.44     2.32

15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group           Percentage of Respondents
    operates in Togo?                                                                       (N=595)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Togo                                                2.2%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Togo                                         26.1%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                         19.2%
Don't know                                                                                     37.5%
Prefer not to answer                                                                           15.1%

Adequately Staffed                                                               N        DK      Mean       SD
16. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately
                                                                                261      338       5.60      2.30
    staffed in Togo? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo

1.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of           Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)                                  (Responses Combined; N=593)
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                   50.3%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                    28.3%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                             27.2%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                        25.0%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Togo’s economy                        18.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                         14.3%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                 6.6%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Togo’s specific challenges                      6.4%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                         6.2%
Work faster                                                                                      5.7%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                           3.4%
Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Togo’s office                                 3.4%
Other                                                                                            0.7%



                                                             72
The World Bank                                          Togo                                   Country Survey 2014


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

2.  When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
    offers in Togo, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which
    ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer            Percentage of Respondents
    more of in Togo?                                                                          (N=589)
The combination is appropriate for Togo                                                        64.2%
Financial services                                                                             15.8%
Knowledge products                                                                             9.7%
Don't know                                                                                     5.4%
Convening services                                                                             4.4%
None of the above                                                                               .5%

                                                   Which THREE areas below would
                                                     benefit most from the WBG        Which THREE areas below
                                                    playing a leading role among      would benefit most from
3.   Please answer the following questions.        international partners in Togo?     other donors in Togo?
     (Choose no more than THREE for each column)     (Responses Combined; N=207)     (Responses Combined; N=207)
Generating jobs                                                 58.9%                           25.9%
Strengthening public financial management                       58.4%                           28.7%
Increasing access to basic services                             56.7%                           28.0%
Building capacity of state institutions                         30.3%                           24.1%
Building social safety nets                                     25.5%                           28.9%
Stimulating dialogue to promote peace and
                                                                17.6%                           34.5%
stability
Improving livelihoods                                           16.8%                           20.4%
Increasing access to justice systems                            15.1%                           46.0%
Increasing cohesion                                             6.6%                            18.8%
Strengthening security mechanisms                               3.4%                            10.0%
Strengthening conflict resolution mechanisms                    2.4%                            16.0%
Reducing violence                                               1.2%                            4.9%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social                Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)                            (Responses Combined; N=593)
Internet                                                                                       45.7%
Local newspapers                                                                               36.6%
Local television                                                                               35.9%
Local radio                                                                                    24.1%
International radio                                                                            17.0%
International television                                                                       13.8%
International newspapers                                                                       8.4%
Periodicals                                                                                    5.1%
Mobile phones                                                                                  3.0%
Other                                                                                          2.9%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                        1.0%
Blogs                                                                                          0.5%
Instant messaging                                                                              0.3%




                                                         73
The World Bank                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

2.    How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?       Percentage of Respondents
      (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (Responses Combined; N=602)
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences                                            47.0%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials                                  30.9%
Emails                                                                                       30.6%
e-Newsletters                                                                                30.2%
World Bank Group’s website                                                                   27.1%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                         20.6%
Mobile phones                                                                                4.2%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                      3.5%
Other                                                                                        0.7%
Blogs                                                                                        0.2%

3.    Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy
      under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                                     (N=567)
Yes                                                                                          16.9%
No                                                                                           83.1%

4.    Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities   Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                                     (N=540)
Yes                                                                                          10.7%
No                                                                                           89.3%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                 (N=54)
Yes                                                                                          85.2%
No                                                                                           14.8%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                      (N=560)
Yes                                                                                          88.8%
No                                                                                           11.3%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?                                       (N=556)
Yes                                                                                          42.3%
No                                                                                           57.7%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                              (N=327)
The World Bank Group’s country website                                                       46.8%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                                          53.2%




                                                        74
The World Bank                                        Togo                                Country Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                    Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                   N         DK     Mean      SD
9.  I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than I did a few
                                                                           423      123     4.88      3.08
    years ago
10. I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to navigate                277      183     6.87      2.75
11. I find the information on the World Bank Group’s websites useful       263      169     7.84      2.05
12. The World Bank Group’s social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                           210      290     7.25      2.63
    information about the institution
13. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                           355      182     5.81      3.34
    find it
14. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                           269      250     6.02      3.01
    inquiries



H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                      (N=601)
Office of the President, Prime Minister                                                   18.5%
Office of Minister                                                                        18.0%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                 12.2%
Employee of a Ministry, Implementation Agency                                             7.8%
Consultant on WBG-supported project                                                       6.8%
PMU overseeing implementation of project                                                  5.9%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                          4.4%
Bilateral Agency                                                                          3.4%
Multilateral Agency                                                                       3.4%
Private Sector Organization                                                               2.9%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                             2.9%
Civil Society, NGO, Association, CBO                                                      2.4%
Media                                                                                     2.4%
Trade Union                                                                               2.0%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                    2.0%
Youth Organizations                                                                       2.0%
Judiciary Branch                                                                          1.0%
Other                                                                                     1.0%




                                                       75
The World Bank                                         Togo                               Country Survey 2014


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                       (N=593)
Agriculture/rural development/food security                                               19.7%
Other                                                                                     18.0%
Education                                                                                 14.7%
Generalist                                                                                9.3%
Private sector development/foreign direct investment                                      5.7%
Public sector governance/public financial management/anti-corruption                      5.6%
Information and communications technology                                                 4.0%
Law and justice/regulatory framework                                                      3.9%
Urban development                                                                         3.2%
Water and sanitation                                                                      2.7%
Job creation/employment                                                                   2.5%
Transport                                                                                 2.2%
Financial markets/banking                                                                 1.9%
Social protection                                                                         1.9%
Natural resource management/environmental sustainability                                  1.7%
Energy                                                                                    1.2%
Health/Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                             1.2%
Climate change/disaster management                                                         .7%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group   Percentage of Respondents
  in your country?                                                                        (N=583)
Yes                                                                                       56.4%
No                                                                                        43.6%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in   Percentage of Respondents
  Togo? (Select all that apply)                                                           (N=544)
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                     56.3%
International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                   14.2%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                       7.7%
None                                                                                      40.3%

5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank      Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                (N=572)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                             47.7%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)                 34.6%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                            30.6%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                         26.2%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                        19.9%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
6. Which best represents your geographic location?                                        (N=580)
Lomé                                                                                      62.2%
Outside Lomé                                                                              37.8%




                                                        76
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

Office of the President/Prime Minister/Minister N=73  Office of Parliamentarian N=34  Employee of a Ministry N=191
Consultant on WBG project/PMU N=60  Local Government N=14  Bilateral/Multilateral Agency N=14
Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=32  CSO/NGO/Association/CBO N=91  Media N=30  Academia/Research Institute N=20                                                         Other N=42

A. General Issues Facing Togo

In general, how would you say that Togo is headed in...?*
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
The right direction                                   81.0%       76.0%        87.6%         70.6%            76.9%        76.9%             82.8%            76.5%       73.7%    58.3%        88.2%
The wrong direction                                     -         24.0%        1.2%          9.8%               -            -                 -              8.8%          -        -          5.9%
Not sure                                              19.0%         -          11.2%         19.6%            23.1%        23.1%             17.2%            14.7%       26.3%    41.7%        5.9%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     77
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Togo. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Togo. (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Social protection and labor*                          2.7%        2.9%         12.3%         3.4%             14.3%        0.0%              0.0%             8.0%        0.0%     0.0%         7.1%
Transport*                                            28.8%       47.1%        34.8%         32.2%            21.4%        71.4%             15.6%            18.2%       33.3%    40.0%        23.8%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                11.0%       5.9%         5.9%          6.8%             7.1%         0.0%              34.4%            8.0%        6.7%     15.0%        4.8%
Public sector governance/reform*                      71.2%       47.1%        36.4%         64.4%            78.6%        35.7%             59.4%            46.6%       73.3%    55.0%        40.5%
Global/regional integration                           0.0%        0.0%         1.1%          3.4%             7.1%         0.0%              0.0%             1.1%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Gender equity*                                        0.0%        0.0%         1.1%          3.4%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             1.1%        0.0%     0.0%         9.5%
Private sector development*                           31.5%       35.3%        16.6%         18.6%            0.0%         7.1%              12.5%            12.5%       23.3%    30.0%        11.9%
Water and sanitation*                                 5.5%        8.8%         16.6%         6.8%             0.0%         0.0%              3.1%             11.4%       0.0%     5.0%         14.3%
Energy and mining*                                    2.7%        5.9%         6.4%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         11.9%
Regional conflict and tensions*                       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Job creation/employment*                              19.2%       20.6%        21.9%         22.0%            35.7%        35.7%             43.8%            35.2%       26.7%    45.0%        21.4%
Financial markets                                     0.0%        0.0%         1.1%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Urban development*                                    2.7%        0.0%         4.8%          10.2%            7.1%         21.4%             0.0%             1.1%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Environment, climate change,
                                                      2.7%         0.0%         4.3%          0.0%            0.0%         35.7%             6.3%             15.9%       0.0%      0.0%        7.1%
disaster management*
Equality of opportunity*                              6.8%        23.5%        6.4%          1.7%             0.0%         0.0%              18.8%            9.1%        3.3%     15.0%        7.1%
Health*                                               0.0%        8.8%         12.3%         15.3%            28.6%        0.0%              9.4%             8.0%        16.7%    0.0%         31.0%
Education*                                            35.6%       11.8%        31.6%         40.7%            28.6%        7.1%              3.1%             25.0%       20.0%    30.0%        45.2%
Poverty reduction*                                    17.8%       8.8%         16.0%         15.3%            21.4%        21.4%             18.8%            34.1%       36.7%    25.0%        16.7%
Social cohesion*                                      2.7%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              18.8%            2.3%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Agriculture, food security, rural
                                                      34.2%       55.9%        52.4%         39.0%            14.3%        35.7%             6.3%             35.2%       43.3%    15.0%        26.2%
development*
Economic growth                                       12.3%       0.0%          5.9%          5.1%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             6.8%        0.0%     10.0%        0.0%
Law and justice*                                      9.6%        0.0%          2.1%          3.4%            7.1%         0.0%              21.9%            2.3%        10.0%    15.0%        7.1%
Regulatory framework*                                 0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Local governance and institutions*                    2.7%        17.6%         7.5%          8.5%            28.6%        28.6%             28.1%            12.5%       6.7%     0.0%         0.0%
Natural resource management                           0.0%        0.0%          1.1%          0.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             1.1%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Information and communications
                                                      0.0%         0.0%         1.1%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             2.3%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
technology
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     78
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Water and sanitation*                                 2.7%        38.2%        12.6%         3.3%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             21.1%       0.0%     10.0%        14.3%
Equality of opportunity*                              4.1%        26.5%        6.3%          11.7%            42.9%        0.0%              34.4%            16.7%       6.7%     45.0%        21.4%
Economic growth*                                      21.9%       20.6%        23.6%         11.7%            0.0%         21.4%             6.3%             20.0%       40.0%    0.0%         7.1%
Regional conflict and tensions*                       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Global/regional integration*                          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Gender equity*                                        0.0%        0.0%         1.6%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        3.3%     0.0%         14.3%
Urban development                                     2.7%        0.0%         3.7%          3.3%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             1.1%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Regulatory framework*                                 0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Local governance and institutions*                    11.0%       0.0%         12.0%         11.7%            21.4%        21.4%             28.1%            13.3%       6.7%     0.0%         0.0%
Social protection and labor*                          5.5%        26.5%        9.4%          5.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             3.3%        0.0%     10.0%        23.8%
Law and justice*                                      12.3%       0.0%         1.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              6.3%             6.7%        6.7%     15.0%        7.1%
Transport*                                            17.8%       35.3%        18.3%         33.3%            35.7%        35.7%             21.9%            10.0%       13.3%    25.0%        7.1%
Information and communications
                                                      0.0%         0.0%         1.0%          1.7%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             4.4%        0.0%      0.0%        4.8%
technology
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                0.0%        0.0%         3.1%          8.3%             14.3%        0.0%              15.6%            0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Private sector development*                           30.1%       14.7%        28.8%         25.0%            42.9%        50.0%             28.1%            13.3%       43.3%    40.0%        0.0%
Energy and mining*                                    2.7%        5.9%         6.8%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              12.5%            0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         7.1%
Public sector governance/reform*                      42.5%       14.7%        33.5%         53.3%            35.7%        35.7%             46.9%            41.1%       36.7%    15.0%        26.2%
Social cohesion*                                      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          1.7%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        6.7%     0.0%         4.8%
Education*                                            30.1%       17.6%        19.4%         11.7%            21.4%        7.1%              0.0%             34.4%       23.3%    20.0%        45.2%
Natural resource management                           2.7%        0.0%         2.6%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              6.3%             2.2%        6.7%     10.0%        0.0%
Environment, climate change,
                                                      0.0%         0.0%         2.1%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             2.2%        0.0%      0.0%        7.1%
disaster management
Health*                                               9.6%         0.0%         8.9%          8.3%            21.4%        21.4%             0.0%             4.4%        0.0%      0.0%        16.7%
Agriculture, food security, rural
                                                      72.6%       67.6%        57.1%         58.3%            35.7%        64.3%             40.6%            56.7%       46.7%    55.0%        38.1%
development*
Job creation/employment                               31.5%       32.4%        47.6%         51.7%            28.6%        42.9%             46.9%            40.0%       50.0%    45.0%        33.3%
Financial markets*                                    0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              6.3%             8.9%        0.0%     10.0%        4.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     79
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Energy and mining*                                    34.2%       41.2%        20.9%         13.3%            14.3%        0.0%              6.3%             20.0%       10.0%    15.0%        28.6%
Gender equity*                                        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         19.0%
Equality of opportunity*                              2.7%        5.9%         4.7%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              28.1%            7.8%        0.0%     0.0%         9.5%
Global/regional integration*                          2.7%        0.0%         4.2%          8.3%             0.0%         0.0%              18.8%            5.6%        3.3%     10.0%        4.8%
Social protection and labor*                          8.2%        0.0%         1.6%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Regional conflict and tensions*                       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Urban development*                                    0.0%        0.0%         1.6%          0.0%             0.0%         21.4%             0.0%             6.7%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Water and sanitation*                                 8.2%        0.0%         1.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              15.6%            13.3%       0.0%     10.0%        9.5%
Information and communications
                                                      6.8%         0.0%         7.3%          6.7%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             8.9%        26.7%    20.0%        0.0%
technology*
Regulatory framework*                                 6.8%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              9.4%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Social cohesion                                       0.0%        0.0%         5.2%          1.7%             0.0%         0.0%              6.3%             2.2%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Public sector governance/reform*                      37.0%       50.0%        56.5%         53.3%           78.6%         78.6%             62.5%            55.6%       43.3%    35.0%        38.1%
Private sector development*                           69.9%       50.0%        68.6%         65.0%           100.0%        50.0%             50.0%            44.4%       50.0%    80.0%        33.3%
Job creation/employment*                              12.3%       32.4%        18.3%         26.7%            0.0%         50.0%             12.5%            18.9%       36.7%    10.0%        28.6%
Agriculture, food security, rural
                                                      57.5%       41.2%        49.7%         60.0%            21.4%        42.9%             37.5%            38.9%       56.7%    80.0%        23.8%
development*
Transport*                                            38.4%       55.9%        31.4%         23.3%            50.0%        21.4%             21.9%            27.8%       30.0%    10.0%        38.1%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                0.0%        0.0%         3.1%          6.7%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        23.3%    0.0%         4.8%
Education*                                            12.3%       5.9%         10.5%         8.3%             0.0%         7.1%              0.0%             7.8%        0.0%     10.0%        35.7%
Natural resource management*                          0.0%        17.6%        3.7%          0.0%             21.4%        0.0%              3.1%             4.4%        6.7%     0.0%         0.0%
Environment, climate change,
                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             6.7%        0.0%      0.0%        7.1%
disaster management*
Health*                                               0.0%         0.0%         0.5%         8.3%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Law and justice*                                      0.0%         0.0%         3.7%         0.0%             14.3%        28.6%             15.6%            4.4%        10.0%    0.0%         0.0%
Local governance and institutions*                    2.7%         0.0%         1.6%         10.0%            0.0%         0.0%              9.4%             16.7%       3.3%     0.0%         7.1%
Financial markets                                     0.0%         0.0%         3.1%         3.3%             0.0%         0.0%              3.1%             5.6%        0.0%     10.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     80
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Better employment opportunities for
                                                      47.4%        7.4%        27.3%         25.0%            0.0%         20.0%             16.1%            33.3%       13.8%    50.0%        43.3%
young people*
Better employment opportunities for
                                                      1.8%         7.4%         4.8%          0.0%            0.0%         20.0%             0.0%             0.0%        10.3%     0.0%        6.7%
women*
Greater access to micro-finance for
                                                      10.5%        7.4%        24.2%         15.4%            28.6%        40.0%             3.2%             39.7%       20.7%    11.1%        6.7%
the poor*
Greater voice and participation for
citizens to help ensure greater                       8.8%         0.0%         5.5%         17.3%            0.0%          0.0%             41.9%            7.7%        24.1%    16.7%        13.3%
accountability*
Greater access to health and
                                                      10.5%       40.7%        16.4%         34.6%            57.1%        10.0%             48.4%            23.1%       27.6%    22.2%        30.0%
nutrition for citizens*
Better entrepreneurial
                                                      15.8%       33.3%        10.9%         25.0%            14.3%         0.0%             12.9%            10.3%       13.8%    27.8%        0.0%
opportunities*
A growing middle class*                               5.3%        11.1%         3.6%          1.9%            0.0%         30.0%             0.0%             5.1%        17.2%    11.1%        0.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who
                                                      10.5%       29.6%        12.7%         13.5%            0.0%          0.0%             16.1%            24.4%       17.2%     0.0%        23.3%
live in rural areas*
Better opportunity for the poor who
                                                      3.5%        14.8%         2.4%          1.9%            14.3%         0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
live in urban areas*
Consistent economic growth*                           3.5%        0.0%         10.9%         3.8%             28.6%        70.0%             0.0%             2.6%        0.0%     22.2%        16.7%
More reliable social safety net*                      14.0%       0.0%         12.7%         19.2%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             3.8%        20.7%    0.0%         10.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                       19.3%       18.5%        12.7%         15.4%            0.0%         0.0%              19.4%            12.8%       6.9%     27.8%        16.7%
Education and training that better
                                                      42.1%       18.5%        39.4%         28.8%            28.6%        10.0%             35.5%            33.3%       20.7%    11.1%        16.7%
ensure job opportunity*
Better quality public services*                       7.0%        11.1%        15.2%          0.0%            28.6%         0.0%             6.5%             3.8%        0.0%      0.0%        16.7%
Other*                                                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        6.9%      0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     81
The World Bank                                                                                                                  Togo                                                                                                      Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                       Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                     President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                     Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work
                                     72    6.69   2.73   34   7.26   1.66   185   5.75   2.46    53   6.62   1.81   14   6.71    1.77    14   6.21   1.25   30    6.40   2.43   84   7.07   2.46   29   7.00    2.27    20    6.65   2.13    40   7.10    2.32
of the World Bank Group in Togo?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                       Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                     President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                     Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD             N   Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank         64    6.41   2.44   33   6.97   1.38   142   6.37   2.24    52   7.75   1.94   11   6.64     2.06   12   6.17   1.03   26    7.00   2.10   80   7.91   1.94   27    7.78   1.76    12    6.33   1.61    36   6.53    2.57
Group’s effectiveness in Togo.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                       Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                     President/Prime         Office of       Employee of a       Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                     Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian       Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute         Other
                                      N   Mean    SD     N    Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD      N    Mean   SD     N    Mean     SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean     SD    N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Togo solve its      52    6.65   2.88   33   7.12   1.93   116   7.12   2.26    40   8.48   1.68   8    5.50    2.27    10   8.40   0.84   21    7.76   2.17   75   8.23   1.78   26   8.73    1.64    12    5.33   2.06    29   7.24    2.64
most complicated development
challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            82
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Togo, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
of its attention and resources in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Agriculture                                           68.5%       64.5%        75.4%         65.5%            57.1%        64.3%             78.1%            72.2%       76.7%    90.0%        71.4%
Energy and extractives*                               9.6%        12.9%        14.1%         0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             7.8%        3.3%     10.0%        19.0%
Finance and markets                                   0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             2.2%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Health, nutrition, and population*                    19.2%       54.8%        28.3%         25.9%            28.6%        0.0%              43.8%            7.8%        33.3%    0.0%         31.0%
Transport and ICT*                                    11.0%       12.9%        14.1%         24.1%            28.6%        50.0%             12.5%            14.4%       3.3%     20.0%        19.0%
Water*                                                0.0%        22.6%        6.8%          10.3%            7.1%         0.0%              0.0%             18.9%       3.3%     0.0%         9.5%
Education*                                            54.8%       32.3%        39.8%         43.1%            35.7%        14.3%             9.4%             43.3%       23.3%    10.0%        45.2%
Environment and natural resources*                    0.0%        0.0%         6.3%          0.0%             7.1%         0.0%              12.5%            15.6%       3.3%     0.0%         11.9%
Governance*                                           20.5%       25.8%        25.7%         17.2%            50.0%        35.7%             34.4%            14.4%       50.0%    40.0%        9.5%
Trade and competitiveness*                            13.7%       0.0%         12.0%         5.2%             0.0%         7.1%              18.8%            2.2%        0.0%     10.0%        0.0%
Macroeconomics and fiscal
                                                      9.6%         6.5%         6.3%          5.2%            0.0%          0.0%             9.4%             8.9%        0.0%     10.0%        4.8%
management
Poverty*                                              26.0%       12.9%        12.6%         37.9%            14.3%        50.0%             31.3%            33.3%       30.0%    35.0%        14.3%
Social protection and labor*                          2.7%        0.0%         8.9%          8.6%             0.0%         0.0%              21.9%            7.8%        20.0%    0.0%         9.5%
Urban, rural, and social
                                                      30.1%       45.2%        21.5%         22.4%            35.7%        57.1%             25.0%            33.3%       26.7%    25.0%        14.3%
development*
Climate change*                                       0.0%         0.0%        1.6%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             6.7%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Gender*                                               1.4%         0.0%        1.0%          0.0%             7.1%         0.0%              0.0%             2.2%        0.0%     0.0%         9.5%
Jobs*                                                 24.7%        9.7%        23.6%         34.5%            21.4%        21.4%             3.1%             8.9%        26.7%    50.0%        26.2%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Togo?
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Greatest Value                                                   Parliamen
                                             President/Prime                    of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Convening/facilitating*                               3.1%        0.0%         5.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             2.6%        0.0%     0.0%         15.0%
Making data available                                 0.0%        0.0%         2.8%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              10.3%            3.9%        7.7%     0.0%         5.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                     15.6%       5.9%         7.8%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              6.9%             6.6%        30.8%    11.1%        0.0%
Providing financial resources*                        40.6%       38.2%        36.9%         45.8%            0.0%         42.9%             31.0%            35.5%       34.6%    61.1%        75.0%
Supporting capacity development*                      20.3%       17.6%        11.2%         5.1%             71.4%        35.7%             37.9%            15.8%       7.7%     0.0%         0.0%
Providing technical assistance                        0.0%        5.9%         2.2%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                                      4.7%         5.9%         5.6%         10.2%            7.1%          0.0%             0.0%             17.1%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
resources*
Donor coordination*                                   0.0%        0.0%         5.0%          3.4%             0.0%         21.4%             0.0%             0.0%        7.7%     0.0%         0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                         0.0%        0.0%         2.8%          5.1%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Strategy formulation*                                 15.6%       26.5%        19.6%         30.5%            21.4%        0.0%              13.8%            18.4%       11.5%    27.8%        0.0%
Other                                                 0.0%        0.0%         1.1%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         5.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                     83
The World Bank                                                                                                                     Togo                                                                                                      Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Togo?
 nd                                                         Office of               Office of      Employee       Consultant on                            Bilateral/          Private Sector/        CSO/NGO/                       Academia/
2 Greatest Value                                                                   Parliamen
                                                        President/Prime                              of a         WBG Project/               Local        Multilateral        Financial Sector/       Association                     Research
Percentage of Respondents                               Minister/Minister            tarian         Ministry          PMU                 Government        Agency              Private Bank             /CBO            Media        Institute         Other
Convening/facilitating*                                       3.1%                  8.8%            2.3%               11.9%                0.0%               0.0%                6.9%                 9.9%             7.7%             0.0%          0.0%
Making data available*                                        0.0%                  5.9%            9.2%               0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                6.9%                 2.5%             0.0%             0.0%          5.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                             7.8%                  0.0%            6.9%               11.9%                14.3%              7.1%                0.0%                 3.7%             7.7%             44.4%         15.0%
Providing financial resources                                 17.2%                 23.5%           12.1%              22.0%                21.4%              21.4%               0.0%                 21.0%            15.4%            11.1%         5.0%
Supporting capacity development                               10.9%                 17.6%           11.0%              5.1%                 28.6%              14.3%               24.1%                7.4%             7.7%             11.1%         5.0%
Providing technical assistance*                               9.4%                  5.9%            12.1%              18.6%                0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 13.6%            23.1%            0.0%          40.0%
Mobilizing third party financial
                                                              0.0%                  11.8%            2.9%              10.2%                28.6%              21.4%               24.1%                6.2%               0.0%           0.0%          0.0%
resources*
Donor coordination                                            6.3%                  0.0%            4.0%               0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 6.2%             11.5%            0.0%          0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*                                0.0%                  0.0%            6.9%               0.0%                 0.0%               7.1%                10.3%                3.7%             3.8%             11.1%         0.0%
Strategy formulation                                          45.3%                 26.5%           31.2%              20.3%                7.1%               28.6%               27.6%                25.9%            23.1%            22.2%         30.0%
Other                                                         0.0%                  0.0%            1.2%               0.0%                 0.0%               0.0%                0.0%                 0.0%             0.0%             0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Togo’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                      Office of the                                                                                                             Private Sector/
                                    President/Prime          Office of       Employee of a          Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                                Academia/
                                    Minister/Minister    Parliamentarian       Ministry            WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association            Media           Research Institute         Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N   Mean    SD       N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
Convening/facilitating*             53    5.81   2.44    30    6.80   1.67   79      6.54   1.82    31   7.45   1.39   8    7.25     1.49   10   6.90   1.37    20   7.45   1.88   60   6.42   2.43    17   5.35    2.83     11    6.36   1.03    15   5.80    2.43
Making data available*              52    6.35   2.66    30    6.17   2.21   97      7.12   2.27    34   7.44   2.19   7    6.43     1.51   11   7.27   1.01    20   7.75   1.74   58   7.84   2.06    19   7.74    2.18     18    7.17   2.38    21   7.14    2.58
Policy advice, studies, analyses*   55    6.95   2.32    30    6.63   1.71   105     6.75   2.28    48   7.67   2.11   9    5.33     1.58    7   8.57   0.54    23   7.70   1.55   64   7.80   1.97    24   7.92    1.69     18    7.50   1.65    24   7.54    2.62
Providing financial resources*      67    7.27   1.86    31    7.55   1.48   139     7.78   2.12    55   8.40   2.01   8    5.25     0.89   10   6.70   2.11    30   7.27   2.53   73   8.59   1.61    24   7.67    2.53     17    8.29   0.77    33   8.30    2.70
Providing technical assistance*     59    7.36   1.96    30    7.13   1.98   111     7.05   2.29    44   7.50   2.17   7    4.86     0.69    7   7.43   1.51    29   6.97   2.18   72   8.17   1.48    19   7.63    1.64     15    7.67   0.98    28   7.54    2.49
Mobilizing third party financial
                                    55    6.44   2.03    33    7.03   1.76   98      7.38   1.92    36   7.81   2.12   7    6.43     1.51    7   6.00   2.83    25   7.04   1.97   55   7.60   2.39    20   7.15    1.93     13    6.69   2.10    19   6.63    3.29
resources
Donor coordination*                 55    6.15   1.79    30    6.33   2.60   101     7.54   2.12    37   7.68   2.19   7    6.86     1.35   11   6.36   2.11    23   6.65   1.61   51   7.02   2.59    26   6.81    2.99     11    6.91   2.84    19   6.79    2.86
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*      56    6.50   2.37    28    6.36   2.09   61      5.87   2.20    31   6.81   2.37   7    6.00     1.41    7   4.00   3.87    18   6.67   2.14   55   6.96   1.95    16   7.88    1.03     15    6.93   1.03    21   6.67    2.29
Strategy formulation*               65    8.02   2.03    30    7.33   2.23   135     8.46   1.67    47   8.49   1.64   12   8.17     1.53    8   6.88   1.36    21   7.86   2.01   71   8.76   1.31    28   7.68    2.99     18    7.44   2.12    23   7.57    2.56
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                               84
The World Bank                                                                                                                     Togo                                                                                                    Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Togo. To what degree would Togo benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                          Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                        President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                        Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute        Other
                                         N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD           N    Mean    SD
Groups outside of government to
help them more effectively engage
                                        67    8.24   1.98   29   8.10   1.50   155   8.26   1.89    53   8.74   2.04   12   8.42     1.44   11   6.82   1.17   24    8.38   1.66   84   9.36   1.09   28   9.21    1.17    18    7.61   2.03   39   8.64    1.69
and participate in development
efforts*
The public sector , related to
implementation of specific
                                        69    8.65   1.10   34   7.88   1.77   159   8.87   1.38    58   8.17   2.31   12   7.50     1.73   14   8.43   0.51   30    8.23   1.74   71   8.15   2.68   24   8.67    1.47    19    8.47   1.26   38   8.61    1.82
development projects on the
ground*
The public sector , related to
changing institutions
                                        66    8.05   1.64   27   7.59   1.39   139   7.88   1.82    44   7.73   2.57   11   7.45     1.29   13   8.31   1.03   29    8.66   1.91   64   7.72   2.53   18   7.28    1.57    18    6.06   2.41   31   7.94    2.49
(organizations or sociopolitical
conditions)*
The private sector , related to
                                        53    7.70   1.60   27   8.15   1.20   137   7.86   2.15    45   8.51   1.91   11   8.00     1.84   14   7.36   2.34   26    9.12   0.99   67   8.22   2.15   15   8.67    1.54    18    7.06   2.56   31   8.03    2.61
institutional and policy change*
The legislative branch , to help
them more effectively debate and        62    7.95   1.91   34   9.35   0.81   148   8.41   2.00    52   8.52   1.86   11   9.18     0.41   10   7.50   1.35   29    9.07   1.31   68   8.54   2.40   25   9.28    1.21    15    7.47   1.92   34   8.32    2.61
consider development programs*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Togo?
                                          Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                        President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                        Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute        Other
                                         N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD           N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        53    7.38   1.79   30   7.60   1.61   137   7.90   1.66    52   8.08   2.26   9    6.56    2.07    7    7.43   0.54   19    8.84   1.21   71   8.68   1.42   24   7.63    1.97    13    7.15   1.82   32   8.09    1.82
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        39    7.13   2.15   20   6.90   1.62   95    7.03   2.30    32   6.13   2.86   3    3.33    0.58    7    7.71   1.25   16    8.69   0.70   57   7.74   2.42   18   5.11    3.89    10    5.00   0.94   27   7.22    2.61
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       44    7.59   1.90   31   7.00   1.73   106   7.79   2.21    46   7.89   2.07   6    7.33    1.97    10   8.10   0.57   15    8.53   1.69   52   7.62   1.94   19   6.11    3.14    13    6.92   2.02   28   8.36    1.68
goals)*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Togo to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in
the following aspects of capacity building?
                                          Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                        President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                        Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute        Other
                                         N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD           N    Mean    SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        60    8.43   1.83   29   8.90   0.72   148   8.99   1.31    54   8.56   2.12   12   8.00    1.60    14   7.07   1.54   23    8.61   1.62   74   9.30   1.23   17   8.29    1.45    18    7.06   2.21   35   8.89    1.18
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        62    9.08   1.61   27   8.56   1.25   122   8.61   1.83    47   8.68   1.51   8    8.13    1.81    13   7.46   1.13   26    8.08   2.40   72   9.26   1.25   18   9.56    0.78    18    8.00   2.17   26   8.62    1.86
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       47    8.68   1.90   34   8.06   1.25   123   9.03   1.53    43   8.49   2.13   10   8.80    0.79    14   7.64   1.34   21    8.14   1.68   66   9.29   1.41   17   7.82    1.67    19    8.63   0.90   27   9.22    2.39
goals)*
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                               85
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Staff too inaccessible*                               0.0%         5.9%         3.7%          5.0%            7.1%          0.0%             6.3%             12.1%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Not exploring alternative policy
                                                      0.0%         8.8%         2.6%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             3.1%             0.0%        3.3%     25.0%        0.0%
options*
Not adequately sensitive to
                                                      30.1%       26.5%        15.9%         15.0%            21.4%         0.0%             28.1%            19.8%       16.7%    50.0%        14.3%
political/social realities in Togo*
Not enough public disclosure of its
                                                      6.8%        23.5%         9.0%          8.3%            0.0%         28.6%             9.4%             12.1%       6.7%      5.0%        4.8%
work
Arrogant in its approach*                             11.0%       8.8%          6.3%          0.0%            14.3%         0.0%             9.4%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities*                  5.5%        14.7%         5.8%          1.7%            0.0%          0.0%             21.9%            0.0%        3.3%     10.0%        14.3%
The credibility of its
                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             2.2%        0.0%     10.0%        0.0%
knowledge/data*
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                                      21.9%       14.7%        30.2%         35.0%            14.3%        28.6%             25.0%            12.1%       26.7%     0.0%        40.5%
complex*
Not willing to honestly criticize
policies and reform efforts in the                    17.8%       17.6%         9.5%         25.0%            21.4%         0.0%             31.3%            15.4%       60.0%    40.0%        4.8%
country*
Too influenced by developed
                                                      23.3%        8.8%        24.9%         15.0%            57.1%         0.0%             6.3%             9.9%        16.7%    10.0%        45.2%
countries*
Imposing technocratic solutions
                                                      15.1%       32.4%        12.2%         15.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        3.3%     10.0%        4.8%
without regard to political realities*
World Bank Group’s processes too
                                                      8.2%         0.0%        11.6%          5.0%            0.0%         21.4%             0.0%             5.5%        6.7%      0.0%        21.4%
slow*
Too bureaucratic in its operational
                                                      15.1%        2.9%        13.2%          6.7%            0.0%         21.4%             12.5%            13.2%       0.0%     10.0%        7.1%
policies and procedures
Not aligned with other donors’ work*                  0.0%         5.9%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             15.6%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Not collaborating enough with non-
                                                      9.6%        14.7%         8.5%         26.7%            28.6%        28.6%             9.4%             40.7%       40.0%    10.0%        4.8%
state actors*
Not client focused*                                   0.0%         0.0%         1.6%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        7.1%
Its advice and strategies do not lend
themselves to practical problem                       4.1%         0.0%         0.0%          5.0%            0.0%          0.0%             12.5%            3.3%        0.0%     10.0%        11.9%
solving*
Not focused enough on issues that
are unique to post-conflict                           0.0%        14.7%         2.1%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             3.3%        0.0%      0.0%        4.8%
countries*
Inadequate number of World Bank
Group staff members located in the                    6.8%         0.0%         6.9%         11.7%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             16.5%       0.0%     10.0%        0.0%
country*
Other*                                                0.0%         0.0%        0.5%           5.0%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Don’t know*                                           11.0%        0.0%        16.4%          8.3%            14.3%        21.4%             0.0%             12.1%       0.0%      0.0%        4.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                     86
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Capacity development (state and
                                                      42.9%       26.5%        41.4%         41.7%            42.9%        50.0%             6.3%             40.7%       30.0%    30.0%        14.3%
semi-state institutions)*
Policy based lending/budget support
                                                      27.1%       38.2%        20.4%         18.3%            28.6%        21.4%             25.0%            16.5%       26.7%    10.0%        31.0%
to the Government
Knowledge products/services*                          2.9%        5.9%         5.2%          3.3%             35.7%        0.0%              6.3%             2.2%        6.7%     10.0%        4.8%
Investment lending*                                   64.3%       58.8%        69.1%         66.7%            50.0%        92.9%             93.8%            75.8%       76.7%    70.0%        78.6%
Technical assistance                                  12.9%       11.8%        14.1%         16.7%            0.0%         0.0%              6.3%             11.0%       16.7%    20.0%        14.3%
Trust Fund management*                                5.7%        0.0%         1.6%          11.7%            0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             7.7%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Co-financing arrangements*                            0.0%        5.9%         1.0%          0.0%             14.3%        0.0%              0.0%             7.7%        3.3%     0.0%         4.8%
Sector-wide approaches*                               11.4%       32.4%        31.4%         20.0%            14.3%        35.7%             40.6%            12.1%       20.0%    30.0%        21.4%
Emergency Recovery lending*                           24.3%       20.6%        5.8%          15.0%            7.1%         0.0%              12.5%            11.0%       20.0%    0.0%         14.3%
Other*                                                8.6%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             7.1%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     10.0%        0.0%
Don’t know                                            0.0%        0.0%         3.1%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             6.6%        0.0%     10.0%        4.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your
country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Academia/Think Tanks/Research
                                                      42.5%       26.5%        14.1%         16.7%            14.3%         0.0%             28.1%            2.2%        26.7%    80.0%        11.9%
Institutes*
Donor Community*                                      19.2%       8.8%         6.3%          10.0%            0.0%         42.9%             0.0%             5.6%        0.0%     0.0%         7.1%
Media*                                                6.8%        0.0%         1.0%          5.0%             0.0%         0.0%              18.8%            2.3%        40.0%    10.0%        9.5%
NGOs*                                                 11.0%       0.0%         15.2%         38.3%            0.0%         0.0%              15.6%            64.4%       30.0%    10.0%        33.3%
Local Government*                                     30.1%       26.5%        41.4%         20.0%            57.1%        42.9%             25.0%            22.2%       20.0%    15.0%        28.6%
Private Sector*                                       31.5%       20.6%        20.9%         40.0%            7.1%         0.0%              71.9%            18.9%       46.7%    30.0%        40.5%
Parliament*                                           8.2%        70.6%        1.6%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Community-Based Organizations*                        16.4%       11.8%        42.4%         38.3%            57.1%        14.3%             6.3%             38.9%       16.7%    10.0%        52.4%
Beneficiaries*                                        20.5%       8.8%         28.8%         15.0%            21.4%        21.4%             18.8%            21.1%       6.7%     45.0%        2.4%
Foundations*                                          0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations*                            0.0%        0.0%         1.6%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              9.4%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
UN and Regional Peace Keeping
                                                      0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Forces
Emerging Donors*                                      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%         21.4%             0.0%             5.6%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
UN Agencies*                                          2.7%        17.6%        2.6%          0.0%             21.4%        7.1%              0.0%             0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        9.5%
Regional Organizations*                               11.0%       8.8%         18.8%         10.0%            14.3%        50.0%             0.0%             10.0%       3.3%      0.0%        0.0%
Other                                                 0.0%        0.0%         1.0%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              6.3%             2.2%        3.3%      0.0%        4.8%
Don’t know                                            0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          3.3%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             3.3%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                     87
The World Bank                                                                                                                   Togo                                                                                                    Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Togo? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                        Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                      President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                      Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute        Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD           N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in    62    7.79   2.14   34   7.79   1.84   164   7.89   2.07    57   8.68   2.09   14   8.93    1.44    14   9.00   0.96   28    8.11   0.99   87   8.95   1.49   28   7.75    2.85    18    6.83   1.34   38   8.26    2.60
development in Togo*
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the      62    7.13   2.61   32   7.00   1.85   130   6.82   2.58    51   7.90   1.74   12   6.08    1.88    14   6.79   1.93   22    8.36   0.85   81   7.93   2.03   25   8.28    1.79    16    7.44   1.63   40   7.13    2.50
development priorities for Togo*
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are      60    7.57   2.06   26   7.19   1.30   135   7.36   2.55    52   8.06   2.30   12   7.42    1.00    13   8.38   0.51   22    8.00   1.98   78   8.10   2.17   26   6.92    2.77    16    7.56   1.32   39   7.87    2.69
realistic for Togo
The World Bank Group treats
clients and stakeholders in Togo      53    7.08   2.43   26   6.69   2.02   110   6.62   2.39    42   7.38   2.12   9    5.44    1.51    10   7.30   2.11   26    8.00   1.60   66   7.92   2.51   13   8.08    1.85    15    7.27   2.09   30   7.23    2.76
with respect*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Togo, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                        Office of the                                                                                                         Private Sector/
                                      President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                      Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute        Other
                                       N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD           N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness*                       52    6.85   1.93   28   6.04   1.77   67    6.06   2.22    42   5.83   1.86   9    4.78     1.09   10   4.40   1.27   16    6.13   1.86   43   7.14   2.25   24   5.54    2.65    4     5.50   1.73   17   6.12    1.58
Flexibility (in terms of the World
Bank Group’s products and             55    6.27   1.86   31   6.26   1.75   74    5.97   2.20    37   5.57   2.14   10   5.60     2.01   10   5.20   0.79   16    7.06   1.84   53   6.98   2.70   21   6.19    1.12    11    3.73   2.20   24   4.83    1.40
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                      57    6.39   1.69   29   5.86   1.92   84    6.26   2.28    38   5.53   2.19   10   4.70     1.83   11   4.91   1.14   20    6.75   1.45   54   6.81   2.30   23   7.35    1.58    9     4.11   2.76   16   4.75    1.48
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                      55    6.35   2.26   27   6.59   1.50   70    7.07   2.12    31   5.32   2.99   10   5.30     2.06   11   6.64   0.81   12    7.25   2.01   57   7.86   2.05   25   5.88    2.83    6     6.67   0.52   21   7.52    2.21
Openness*                             54    7.44   1.89   28   6.54   1.75   117   7.38   2.15    45   6.89   2.35   10   5.50     1.58   13   6.69   3.35   20    8.50   1.79   69   7.99   2.29   27   8.15    1.63    15    7.53   1.46   28   8.11    1.47
Staff accessibility*                  57    5.86   2.34   30   6.00   2.03   97    5.63   2.75    40   5.10   2.90   10   4.60     1.58   6    8.17   0.98   19    7.68   2.47   63   5.30   2.70   22   6.64    2.15    13    5.92   1.04   17   7.59    1.84
Straightforwardness and honesty*      50    5.98   2.58   26   7.19   1.44   98    7.02   2.22    43   7.12   2.47   7    7.71     1.25   6    7.83   1.47   23    9.00   1.17   66   8.53   1.66   19   7.58    1.12    9     5.67   2.00   23   6.87    2.63
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making       50    5.50   2.33   28   6.25   1.60   81    5.67   2.67    37   5.22   3.07   7    3.71     1.25   10   7.40   0.52   20    7.45   2.63   57   6.37   2.30   23   5.22    3.37    9     3.67   1.94   23   8.09    2.28
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with groups outside
                                      53    5.70   2.76   30   6.33   2.04   96    6.74   2.30    47   6.49   2.80   7    5.00     2.31   10   8.20   0.79   20    7.65   2.16   81   7.19   2.45   27   5.74    3.06    13    5.77   3.44   25   7.12    2.64
of the Government*
Collaboration with the Government     60    8.58   1.86   31   8.10   1.22   133   8.23   1.72    47   8.83   1.37   12   7.58     0.90   14   8.21   1.58   26    8.50   1.50   77   8.35   2.42   27   8.85    1.32    16    8.44   0.96   32   8.81    1.69
Collaboration with other
                                      57    7.74   1.76   26   7.27   0.96   91    7.75   1.88    32   8.03   1.88   3    5.67     1.16   14   9.14   0.66   13    8.00   2.38   50   7.96   1.96   23   8.04    1.69    10    7.80   2.10   21   8.86    2.08
development partners*
The speed in which it gets things
                                      64    6.66   1.74   30   6.77   1.96   110   7.33   2.12    47   8.34   1.81   12   6.08     1.68   11   8.00   0.45   17    8.18   1.55   74   7.42   2.33   22   6.91    2.89    9     6.33   2.12   26   8.23    1.53
accomplished on the ground*
Being a long-term partner             56    8.23   1.95   28   8.71   1.12   113   8.24   1.75    45   8.36   1.86   10   8.50     0.53   14   8.93   0.73   20    8.80   1.24   69   8.88   1.56   22   9.00    1.07    13    7.62   1.26   26   8.69    1.23
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                             88
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To be a more effective development partner in Togo, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?*
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
More local presence                                   62.3%       83.3%        69.8%         73.2%            71.4%        35.7%             71.4%            98.9%       77.8%    50.0%        71.8%
The current level of local presence is
                                                      14.5%       16.7%        17.0%         12.5%              -          42.9%             17.9%            1.1%        18.5%    25.0%        23.1%
adequate
Less local presence                                   13.0%          -         2.7%          3.6%               -            -                 -                 -          -        -            -
Don't know                                            10.1%          -         10.4%         10.7%            28.6%        21.4%             10.7%               -        3.7%     25.0%        5.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
The World Bank Group does not do
                                                      40.3%       41.2%        36.1%         21.7%            21.4%        35.7%             12.5%            32.2%       46.7%    45.0%        16.7%
adequate follow through/follow-up*
There is not an adequate level of
                                                      62.7%       58.8%        42.8%         31.7%            64.3%         0.0%             75.0%            59.8%       60.0%    65.0%        59.5%
citizen/civil society participation*
The World Bank Group is not
sensitive enough to political/social                  35.8%       44.1%        38.3%         35.0%            64.3%        28.6%             25.0%            24.1%       3.3%     40.0%        26.2%
realities on the ground*
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity
                                                      19.4%       26.5%        25.0%         26.7%            14.3%        21.4%             0.0%             34.5%       26.7%    20.0%        23.8%
in Government
Poor donor coordination*                              0.0%        20.6%         3.9%          1.7%            0.0%          0.0%             12.5%            0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        4.8%
The World Bank Group works too
                                                      9.0%         5.9%        14.4%         20.0%            7.1%         42.9%             9.4%             9.2%        0.0%      0.0%        40.5%
slowly*
The Government works inefficiently*                   19.4%       17.6%        12.8%         36.7%            14.3%         0.0%             34.4%            16.1%       26.7%    10.0%        14.3%
Political pressures and obstacles*                    26.9%       23.5%        31.7%         33.3%            57.1%         0.0%             40.6%            29.9%       33.3%    45.0%        14.3%
Reforms are not well thought out in
                                                      43.3%       20.6%        41.7%         18.3%            14.3%        14.3%             25.0%            26.4%       30.0%    30.0%        28.6%
light of country challenges*
Ongoing conflict and instability*                     13.4%       8.8%         14.4%         11.7%            21.4%        0.0%              0.0%             3.4%        0.0%     0.0%         7.1%
Inadequate funding*                                   14.9%       23.5%        10.6%         30.0%            14.3%        35.7%             34.4%            36.8%       20.0%    20.0%        50.0%
Other*                                                0.0%        0.0%         0.6%          5.0%             7.1%         21.4%             0.0%             4.6%        6.7%     15.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     89
The World Bank                                                                                                                  Togo                                                                                                   Country Survey 2013

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Togo? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                       Office of the                                                                                                        Private Sector/
                                     President/Prime         Office of      Employee of a        Consultant on                        Bilateral/           Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                              Academia/
                                     Minister/Minister   Parliamentarian      Ministry          WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency         Private Bank        Association           Media          Research Institute        Other
                                      N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                 N Mean SD          N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD           N    Mean    SD
Agriculture*                         65    9.23   1.20   34   9.21   0.73   178   9.44   1.28    56   8.84   1.91   12   8.92    1.24   14   7.50   2.68   32    9.34   0.90   88   9.38   1.08   29   9.41    1.05    20    8.80   1.01   42   9.29    1.27
Energy and extractives               65    8.26   1.59   26   8.58   1.42   132   8.25   2.01    46   7.78   2.33   11   7.55    1.44   13   8.23   0.83   26    8.12   1.61   73   7.30   2.56   25   8.16    1.93    16    7.94   2.14   37   7.62    2.54
Finance and markets*                 59    7.17   1.77   25   7.84   0.85   113   7.64   1.85    46   8.07   1.67   11   6.00    0.78   13   7.15   1.14   28    8.25   1.69   65   7.57   2.58   22   6.91    2.52    10    7.20   0.79   25   7.44    1.69
Health, nutrition, and population*   69    8.72   1.33   33   9.09   1.01   140   8.91   1.38    53   8.79   1.43   11   9.45    0.93   13   6.15   2.97   29    8.76   1.55   81   9.05   1.27   22   8.73    1.72    18    7.61   2.28   34   9.21    1.04
Transport and ICT*                   65    7.37   1.53   25   8.92   0.91   131   8.19   1.51    44   8.09   1.65   12   8.83    1.59   8    8.25   1.04   19    8.37   1.64   83   8.64   1.31   26   8.81    1.17    13    8.69   1.70   39   8.56    1.12
Water*                               65    8.77   1.52   30   8.77   1.63   140   8.99   1.23    55   8.36   1.99   12   8.75    1.14   13   7.92   1.50   22    9.27   1.16   86   8.67   1.75   26   8.81    1.27    18    6.94   2.94   35   9.00    0.87
Education*                           67    9.43   0.96   28   8.96   1.04   168   9.04   1.32    57   9.12   1.15   12   9.00    1.28   13   8.69   0.86   25    9.04   1.34   83   9.20   1.32   26   9.00    1.44    18    8.00   2.22   39   9.41    1.02
Environment and natural
                                     65    7.34   1.70   28   7.82   1.39   135   8.01   1.89    45   7.18   2.18   12   7.08    2.15   8    8.63   0.52   23    8.43   2.04   74   8.24   1.62   21   7.90    1.64    15    7.27   2.63   35   8.29    1.36
resources*
Governance                           65    8.66   1.61   28   8.46   1.43   154   8.71   1.83    54   8.93   1.62   12   8.00    1.65   13   8.62   0.65   21    8.71   1.01   85   8.34   2.60   28   9.11    1.13    18    8.78   2.16   34   7.94    2.06
Trade and competitiveness*           65    7.38   1.75   28   7.64   1.25   120   7.24   2.38    43   7.88   1.53   12   6.25    1.71   12   8.00   1.04   23    7.70   1.40   71   8.04   1.63   22   6.45    2.94    15    7.87   1.69   30   6.97    2.08
Macroeconomics and fiscal
                                     65    7.86   1.61   27   8.04   1.13   124   8.26   1.69    45   8.36   1.79   12   7.92    0.79   12   7.83   0.94   18    9.17   0.62   74   7.70   2.49   22   8.23    1.95    12    8.17   0.84   30   8.00    2.02
management
Poverty*                             65    9.22   1.22   33   9.52   0.71   149   9.39   0.83    49   9.31   1.28   10   9.40    0.70   13   9.00   1.00   22    9.36   0.95   81   9.48   0.94   23   7.48    3.29    19    9.37   0.96   33   9.21    0.82
Social protection and labor          62    8.10   1.75   25   7.72   1.14   134   8.35   1.41    51   8.06   1.62   10   8.00    0.82   12   7.83   1.12   19    8.47   0.96   77   8.26   1.71   19   7.68    2.24    15    6.87   2.20   33   8.09    1.63
Urban, rural, and social
                                     63    8.40   1.55   28   7.64   1.39   144   8.70   1.25    47   8.66   1.58   12   9.00    0.74   12   8.67   0.89   24    8.71   1.16   79   9.30   1.08   21   8.38    1.47    18    6.50   1.82   38   8.42    1.62
development*
Climate change*                      65    7.43   1.56   28   7.68   1.57   133   7.50   2.08    43   7.70   1.82   11   5.82    1.54   13   8.46   1.45   21    6.76   2.41   78   7.74   2.18   19   8.05    1.72    15    7.53   1.64   35   7.74    1.77
Gender*                              65    7.09   1.99   30   7.23   1.50   129   6.66   2.16    44   6.25   1.56   11   6.18    0.98   13   7.23   1.79   21    6.10   2.17   78   7.45   1.81   25   7.48    2.37    15    6.27   2.12   37   7.76    1.94
Jobs                                 63    8.92   1.14   28   8.39   1.07   148   8.84   1.57    52   8.94   1.41   12   8.17    1.85   13   8.54   1.81   22    8.82   0.80   81   9.12   1.34   27   8.96    2.07    15    8.07   2.71   40   8.93    2.02
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                            90
The World Bank                                                                                                                     Togo                                                                                                     Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                      Office of the                                                                                                             Private Sector/
                                    President/Prime          Office of       Employee of a          Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                               Academia/
                                    Minister/Minister    Parliamentarian       Ministry            WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association            Media          Research Institute         Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
Education*                          45    7.80   1.91    34    7.12   1.37   107     7.39   2.00    53   7.91   1.70   12   6.83     1.27   11   4.91   2.98   16    8.06   2.54   76   7.70   2.32    22   6.59    2.77    12    6.33   0.78    25   5.68    1.91
Health*                             42    7.57   1.80    29    7.55   1.53   93      7.53   1.74    45   6.87   1.93   10   6.50     0.97    7   5.57   1.99   16    8.19   1.38   71   7.58   2.12    16   5.56    2.56    10    5.60   1.43    23   6.22    2.09
Agricultural development*           43    8.14   1.46    28    7.04   0.58   133     7.50   2.12    54   6.96   2.37   10   6.10     1.29    9   6.44   2.35   18    7.61   2.17   73   7.58   1.76    19   7.47    1.47    20    6.70   0.92    30   5.87    2.46
Infrastructure (roads, water &
                                    59    7.78   1.54    34    7.15   1.31   104     6.83   2.35    45   6.98   1.89   10   5.70     1.57    9   7.22   2.11   16    7.88   1.96   71   6.92   1.88    25   7.72    2.76    18    6.61   1.82    27   6.26    1.66
sanitation, electricity)*
Community development*              37    7.08   2.05    25    6.96   1.49   96      7.03   2.31    48   7.04   2.87   11   5.36     1.86   10   5.60   2.37   14    6.93   1.82   80   7.51   2.32    21   8.00    1.38    2     7.00   0.00    21   4.76    2.10
Social protection*                  32    5.69   1.77    21    6.10   1.22   80      5.38   2.63    44   5.43   2.33   8    5.25     0.46    7   3.43   3.10    4    10.00 0.00    48   6.38   2.48    14   5.43    2.82    2     5.00   0.00    21   5.10    2.30
Trade*                              36    7.25   1.52    22    6.68   0.72   65      6.58   2.81    35   4.54   2.42   6    5.33     0.82    6   6.00   0.00   15    6.00   2.00   38   5.74   1.55    15   7.53    1.51    8     4.50   2.20    17   5.47    1.33
Transport*                          52    7.25   1.84    26    7.12   1.07   91      7.38   2.16    34   6.71   2.59   9    7.11     1.69   10   6.90   3.38   20    7.20   1.80   68   8.01   1.63    24   8.00    1.72    16    6.50   2.37    24   5.71    1.78
Telecommunications                  32    6.56   1.81    21    6.38   1.32   45      6.02   2.16    33   5.91   2.23   8    5.38     0.92    6   4.67   1.03   18    7.28   1.49   40   6.10   1.63    16   6.38    1.67    8     7.25   1.39    19   5.89    1.91
Private sector development and
                                    44    7.68   1.76    26    6.81   1.30   72      6.90   2.39    37   5.84   2.21   11   5.45     0.52    6   4.67   2.58   16    8.69   1.58   48   6.81   1.82    21   5.86    2.35    12    6.50   1.31    24   5.79    1.69
business climate*
Financial sector*                   41    7.61   1.58    18    7.00   0.84   67      7.63   2.04    31   6.32   2.30   10   6.80     1.32    7   4.57   2.07   13    6.85   2.08   54   7.22   2.26    15   6.20    1.97    10    5.80   2.04    19   6.84    1.02
Disaster management and climate
                                    47    7.13   2.10    26    6.12   1.48   61      6.28   1.83    31   5.97   2.89   7    4.71     0.49   10   6.40   2.22   11    8.18   1.83   63   7.27   2.30    15   8.00    1.51    6     6.33   1.37    19   7.26    1.05
change*
Energy*                             46    6.57   1.83    29    6.97   1.09   62      5.82   2.06    34   5.18   2.10   8    5.25     1.04   10   5.40   3.13   15    7.60   2.44   46   6.33   1.93    12   5.67    2.67    4     7.50   0.58    24   5.50    2.25
Extractive industries*              42    7.10   2.43    23    6.91   1.76   72      6.97   2.08    28   3.89   2.20   8    5.63     2.07    7   5.00   2.52    9    7.44   0.88   49   6.06   2.55    15   7.93    2.40    8     4.00   2.27    19   5.05    2.32
Public sector governance/reform*    54    7.54   2.50    26    7.58   1.50   114     7.10   2.48    37   6.11   3.04   12   6.58     1.68    8   5.88   2.03   14    8.36   1.99   73   6.59   2.46    21   5.95    3.11    13    6.54   2.30    23   5.83    2.44
Job creation/employment*            42    6.74   2.51    26    6.73   1.19   95      6.46   2.43    46   5.50   2.82   11   5.64     1.57    8   5.38   1.60   19    7.42   2.06   71   7.34   1.86    16   6.88    1.96    11    3.45   1.37    23   4.00    1.86
Global/regional integration         38    6.79   2.42    24    7.50   1.18   53      6.23   2.12    35   6.86   2.29   5    5.00     0.00    7   5.86   1.46   13    7.23   2.59   44   7.20   1.69     7   6.86    1.68    11    6.55   1.04    17   6.35    2.45
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Togo?*
                                                            Office of               Office of      Employee       Consultant on                            Bilateral/          Private Sector/        CSO/NGO/                      Academia/
                                                        President/Prime            Parliamen         of a         WBG Project/               Local        Multilateral        Financial Sector/       Association                    Research
Percentage of Respondents                               Minister/Minister            tarian         Ministry          PMU                 Government        Agency              Private Bank             /CBO            Media       Institute         Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington
                                                              62.5%                 76.5%           66.5%              58.3%                28.6%              71.4%               75.0%                49.4%            70.0%           60.0%         80.0%
D.C.)
In the country                                                16.7%                 8.8%            5.3%               18.3%                14.3%                                  12.5%                13.8%            10.0%           25.0%         14.3%
Don't know                                                    20.8%                 14.7%           28.2%              23.3%                57.1%              28.6%               12.5%                36.8%            20.0%           15.0%         5.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                      Office of the                                                                                                             Private Sector/
                                    President/Prime          Office of       Employee of a          Consultant on                        Bilateral/            Financial Sector/   CSO/NGO/CBO/                               Academia/
                                    Minister/Minister    Parliamentarian       Ministry            WBG Project/PMU Local Government Multilateral Agency          Private Bank        Association            Media          Research Institute         Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N Mean SD              N Mean SD       N Mean SD        N Mean SD                  N Mean SD          N Mean SD            N   Mean    SD      N Mean SD            N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve   57    7.18   2.05    31    6.90   1.35   141     7.05   2.12    53   7.08   2.12   12   6.08     1.24   11   6.18   1.78    26   7.23   2.34   87   8.45   1.48    23   7.61    1.83    17    5.88   0.93    32   8.06    1.54
development results in Togo?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                               91
The World Bank                                                                                                 Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Togo? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
                                                   Office of         Office of    Employee      Consultant on                       Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                               President/Prime      Parliamen       of a        WBG Project/             Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                      Minister/Minister      tarian       Ministry         PMU               Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Weekly                                                6.9%              -           1.6%              -                   -            -                 -              2.3%        13.3%      -            -
Monthly                                               27.8%             -           8.6%            13.8%                 -          28.6%             31.3%            11.5%       16.7%    40.0%        13.5%
A few times a year                                    30.6%           57.6%         26.3%           39.7%               57.1%        42.9%               -              44.8%       40.0%    60.0%        24.3%
Rarely                                                29.2%           42.4%         39.2%           37.9%               14.3%        28.6%             50.0%            29.9%       30.0%      -          13.5%
Never                                                 5.6%              -           24.2%           8.6%                28.6%          -               18.8%            11.5%         -        -          48.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                                               92
The World Bank                                                                                                  Togo                                                Country Survey 2013

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Togo, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                93
The World Bank                                                                                                 Togo                                                   Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Togo’s development challenges?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                               94
The World Bank                                                                                                 Togo                                                                                 Country Survey 2013

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Togo?*
                                                  Office of          Office of     Employee      Consultant on                      Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                              President/Prime       Parliamen        of a        WBG Project/            Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                     Minister/Minister       tarian        Ministry         PMU              Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute       Other
The World Bank Group takes too
                                                      5.6%               -           1.6%            3.3%                 -             -                 -             2.2%          -         -               -
much risk in Togo
The World Bank Group does not take
                                                      31.9%           47.1%         20.3%           31.7%               21.4%        14.3%             21.9%            24.4%       30.0%    50.0%           15.0%
enough risk in Togo
The World Bank Group’s approach to
                                                      19.4%           29.4%         12.8%           28.3%               21.4%        35.7%             6.3%             31.1%       23.3%       -            10.0%
risk is appropriate
Don't know                                            40.3%           23.5%         48.1%           26.7%               50.0%        50.0%             25.0%            35.6%       23.3%    40.0%           27.5%
Prefer not to answer                                  2.8%              -           17.1%           10.0%               7.1%           -               46.9%            6.7%        23.3%    10.0%           47.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                               95
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                                 Country Survey 2013

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute       Other
Provide more adequate data/
knowledge/statistics/figures on                       21.1%       20.6%        16.9%         10.0%            33.3%         7.1%             16.1%            18.4%       16.7%    65.0%           15.0%
Togo’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with
                                                      39.4%        8.8%        27.5%         33.3%            58.3%         0.0%             29.0%            25.3%       3.3%     15.0%           40.0%
Government clients*
Offer more innovative financial
                                                      11.3%       35.3%         8.5%         20.0%            8.3%         21.4%             6.5%             18.4%       26.7%    35.0%           0.0%
products*
Improve the competitiveness of its
                                                      7.0%         2.9%         5.8%         13.3%            0.0%         21.4%             0.0%             1.1%        13.3%     0.0%           10.0%
financing compared to markets*
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                      43.7%       32.4%        43.4%         48.3%            66.7%        35.7%             58.1%            65.5%       83.3%    55.0%           52.5%
Government*
Improve the quality of its experts as
                                                      8.5%         5.9%        11.6%          1.7%            0.0%          7.1%             0.0%             4.6%        0.0%     10.0%           0.0%
related to Togo’s specific challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge
                                                      5.6%         0.0%        10.1%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             19.4%            5.7%        3.3%      0.0%           5.0%
services*
Ensure greater selectivity in its work*               0.0%         0.0%         4.2%          1.7%            0.0%         28.6%             0.0%             2.3%        10.0%     0.0%           0.0%
Increase the level of capacity
                                                      33.8%       35.3%        34.4%         21.7%            0.0%         14.3%             25.8%            14.9%       13.3%    10.0%           10.0%
development in the country*
Reduce the complexity of obtaining
                                                      11.3%       44.1%        24.3%         40.0%            33.3%        42.9%             29.0%            27.6%       23.3%    10.0%           55.0%
World Bank Group financing*
Work faster*                                          14.1%        5.9%         1.6%          1.7%            0.0%         21.4%             16.1%            8.0%        0.0%      0.0%           7.5%
Increase the level of World Bank
                                                      4.2%         8.8%         4.2%          1.7%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             5.7%        0.0%      0.0%           0.0%
Group staffing in Togo’s office
Other                                                 0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             2.3%        0.0%      0.0%           5.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Togo, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
World Bank Group should offer more of in Togo?*
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute       Other
Financial services                                    12.9%        9.4%        12.8%         22.8%              -          21.4%             9.7%             31.9%       10.3%       -            14.3%
Knowledge products                                    15.7%        9.4%        6.9%          3.5%             7.1%         35.7%             12.9%            7.7%        24.1%       -            4.8%
Convening services                                    5.7%           -         7.4%            -              14.3%          -               12.9%            2.2%          -         -              -
None of the above                                       -            -         1.6%            -                -            -                 -                -           -         -              -
The combination is appropriate for
                                                      62.9%       75.0%        64.9%         59.6%            71.4%        42.9%             58.1%            57.1%       51.7%    100.0%          81.0%
Togo
Don't know                                            2.9%         6.3%         6.4%         14.0%            7.1%            -              6.5%             1.1%        13.8%       -               -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                     96
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

Please answer the following questions. (Choose no more than THREE for each)
Which THREE areas would benefit most from the World Bank Group playing a leading role among international partners in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Building social safety nets*                          23.3%       35.3%        19.6%         33.9%            0.0%         21.4%             6.3%             45.5%       7.7%     10.0%        40.5%
Strengthening public financial
                                                      58.9%       26.5%        57.6%         61.0%            85.7%        71.4%             78.1%            43.2%       76.9%    55.0%        78.6%
management*
Reducing violence                                     0.0%        0.0%         1.6%          0.0%             0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         4.8%
Increasing access to justice systems*                 17.8%       23.5%        17.4%         10.2%            14.3%         0.0%             9.4%             15.9%       30.8%    15.0%        0.0%
Strengthening security mechanisms                     1.4%        5.9%         2.2%          6.8%             0.0%          0.0%             6.3%             6.8%        3.8%     0.0%         0.0%
Strengthening conflict resolution
                                                      0.0%         0.0%         1.1%          0.0%            7.1%          0.0%             0.0%             4.5%        11.5%    10.0%        4.8%
mechanisms*
Increasing access to basic services*                  68.5%       35.3%        56.0%         57.6%            64.3%        42.9%             25.0%            67.0%       23.1%    55.0%        85.7%
Building capacity of state
                                                      42.5%       41.2%        38.6%         16.9%            0.0%         64.3%             46.9%            9.1%        34.6%    30.0%        14.3%
institutions*
Generating jobs*                                      54.8%       79.4%        55.4%         71.2%            71.4%        28.6%             65.6%            64.8%       61.5%    60.0%        38.1%
Improving livelihoods*                                5.5%        0.0%         20.1%         16.9%            14.3%        21.4%             28.1%            21.6%       26.9%    15.0%        11.9%
Increasing cohesion                                   2.7%        0.0%         7.6%          8.5%             0.0%         0.0%              9.4%             5.7%        7.7%     15.0%        4.8%
Stimulating dialogue to promote
                                                      20.5%       41.2%        17.4%         10.2%            28.6%        50.0%             18.8%            10.2%       15.4%    15.0%        9.5%
peace and stability*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which THREE areas below would benefit most from other donors in Togo?
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Building social safety nets                           32.9%       28.1%        31.3%         32.7%            42.9%         7.1%             7.7%             28.7%       35.7%    23.5%        22.0%
Strengthening public financial
                                                      38.4%       43.8%        30.7%         32.7%            0.0%         50.0%             26.9%            24.1%       17.9%    29.4%        9.8%
management*
Reducing violence*                                    4.1%        6.3%         5.7%          1.8%             0.0%         7.1%              0.0%             12.6%       0.0%     0.0%         0.0%
Increasing access to justice systems*                 30.1%       46.9%        44.3%         36.4%            57.1%        71.4%             38.5%            52.9%       78.6%    23.5%        63.4%
Strengthening security mechanisms                     8.2%        9.4%         13.1%         5.5%             0.0%         0.0%              19.2%            14.9%       3.6%     11.8%        0.0%
Strengthening conflict resolution
                                                      13.7%        3.1%        14.2%         23.6%            14.3%        21.4%             26.9%            14.9%       7.1%     11.8%        26.8%
mechanisms
Increasing access to basic services*                  35.6%       43.8%        20.5%         20.0%            7.1%         50.0%             23.1%            29.9%       50.0%    35.3%        29.3%
Building capacity of state
                                                      23.3%       25.0%        20.5%         14.5%            50.0%        14.3%             34.6%            37.9%       14.3%    11.8%        26.8%
institutions*
Generating jobs*                                      24.7%       6.3%         31.3%         20.0%            21.4%        42.9%             15.4%            18.4%       42.9%    35.3%        29.3%
Improving livelihoods*                                26.0%       0.0%         23.3%         32.7%            0.0%         0.0%              7.7%             17.2%       7.1%     41.2%        29.3%
Increasing cohesion*                                  8.2%        28.1%        23.3%         16.4%            50.0%        7.1%              50.0%            12.6%       10.7%    29.4%        4.9%
Stimulating dialogue to promote
                                                      46.6%       50.0%        26.1%         43.6%            57.1%        28.6%             38.5%            32.2%       28.6%    23.5%        26.8%
peace and stability*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                     97
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Local newspapers*                                     51.5%       44.1%        30.4%         33.9%            42.9%        70.0%             59.4%            35.2%       23.3%    20.0%        33.3%
International newspapers                              11.8%       0.0%         8.9%          8.9%             14.3%        20.0%             15.6%            3.3%        0.0%     10.0%        9.5%
Local radio*                                          17.6%       0.0%         23.6%         30.4%            21.4%        0.0%              0.0%             39.6%       20.0%    35.0%        40.5%
International radio*                                  0.0%        8.8%         23.6%         16.1%            21.4%        10.0%             28.1%            23.1%       10.0%    10.0%        11.9%
Local television*                                     41.2%       58.8%        41.4%         23.2%            42.9%        20.0%             25.0%            17.6%       40.0%    70.0%        33.3%
International television*                             1.5%        8.8%         20.4%         12.5%            14.3%        30.0%             9.4%             14.3%       10.0%    0.0%         19.0%
Periodicals*                                          7.4%        26.5%        3.1%          0.0%             0.0%         0.0%              0.0%             4.4%        13.3%    0.0%         4.8%
Internet*                                             54.4%       44.1%        42.4%         53.6%            28.6%        50.0%             46.9%            38.5%       73.3%    55.0%        38.1%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
                                                      2.9%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             2.2%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
YouTube, Flickr)
Blogs                                                 0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             3.3%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Mobile phones*                                        8.8%         0.0%         0.0%          3.6%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             11.0%       0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Instant messaging*                                    0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          3.6%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Other                                                 2.9%         8.8%         2.1%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             7.7%        3.3%      0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Blogs                                                 0.0%         0.0%         0.0%          0.0%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             1.1%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
Direct contact with World Bank
                                                      15.1%       17.6%        18.8%         19.0%            14.3%        50.0%             0.0%             24.2%       43.3%    25.0%        27.5%
Group*
e-Newsletters*                                        26.0%       11.8%        36.6%         34.5%            21.4%        28.6%             50.0%            30.8%       0.0%     25.0%        32.5%
Emails*                                               37.0%       14.7%        22.0%         27.6%            42.9%        35.7%             28.1%            47.3%       56.7%    30.0%        15.0%
World Bank Group’s
                                                      34.2%       67.6%        49.7%         53.4%            71.4%        57.1%             28.1%            41.8%       40.0%    50.0%        52.5%
seminars/workshops/conferences*
World Bank Group’s publications and
                                                      46.6%       52.9%        26.2%         13.8%            35.7%        21.4%             56.3%            23.1%       16.7%    45.0%        35.0%
other written materials*
Mobile phones*                                        11.0%        5.9%         1.0%          6.9%            0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             8.8%        3.3%      0.0%        0.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter,
                                                      1.4%         5.9%         3.1%          8.6%            14.3%         0.0%             0.0%             5.5%        0.0%      0.0%        0.0%
YouTube, Flickr)
World Bank Group’s website*                           28.8%       23.5%        35.1%         25.9%            0.0%          7.1%             31.3%            15.4%       40.0%    25.0%        20.0%
Other*                                                0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%          0.0%             0.0%             0.0%        0.0%     0.0%         10.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     98
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Yes                                                   21.9%       14.7%        9.7%          24.5%            21.4%        21.4%             20.7%            12.9%       46.7%    30.0%        5.4%
No                                                    78.1%       85.3%        90.3%         75.5%            78.6%        78.6%             79.3%            87.1%       53.3%    70.0%        94.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Yes                                                   23.5%       6.3%         5.7%          21.2%            9.1%         7.1%                -              2.6%        40.7%    23.5%          -
No                                                    76.5%       93.8%        94.3%         78.8%            90.9%        92.9%            100.0%            97.4%       59.3%    76.5%        100%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Yes                                                   80.0%      100.0%       100.0%         72.7%              -         100.0%                -            100.0%       90.9%    100.0%          -
No                                                    20.0%         -            -           27.3%           100.0%          -                  -               -         9.1%        -            -

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Yes                                                   90.4%      100.0%        92.3%         92.7%           100.0%       100.0%             90.3%            79.0%       96.4%    90.0%        65.0%
No                                                    9.6%          -          7.7%          7.3%               -            -               9.7%             21.0%       3.6%     10.0%        35.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Yes                                                   57.1%       44.1%        32.0%         57.1%            42.9%        61.5%             31.0%            30.4%       73.3%    70.6%        30.0%
No                                                    42.9%       55.9%        68.0%         42.9%            57.1%        38.5%             69.0%            69.6%       26.7%    29.4%        70.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     99
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?*
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
                                             President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
Percentage of Respondents                    Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
The World Bank Group’s country
                                                      35.4%       82.4%        50.0%         36.8%            83.3%        53.8%             52.9%            53.1%       57.7%    12.5%        21.4%
website
The World Bank Group’s main
                                                      64.6%       17.6%        50.0%         63.2%            16.7%        46.2%             47.1%            46.9%       42.3%    87.5%        78.6%
website
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     100
The World Bank                                                                                       Togo                                                                              Country Survey 2013

H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Togo? (Select all that apply)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
The World Bank (IBRD)*                                57.1%       24.1%        54.7%         68.4%            7.1%        100.0%             73.3%            74.7%       53.3%    55.0%        10.0%
International Finance Corporation
                                                      12.7%        6.9%        17.6%         12.3%            0.0%         46.2%             30.0%            9.6%        3.3%      0.0%        10.0%
(IFC)*
The Multilateral Investment
                                                      0.0%         6.9%        10.0%          0.0%            0.0%         15.4%             16.7%            14.5%       6.7%      0.0%        0.0%
Guarantee Agency (MIGA)*
None*                                                 36.5%       75.9%        42.9%         24.6%            92.9%         0.0%             26.7%            21.7%       46.7%    50.0%        80.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Office of        Office of   Employee    Consultant on                   Bilateral/     Private Sector/    CSO/NGO/              Academia/
Percentage of Respondents                    President/Prime     Parliamen      of a      WBG Project/         Local     Multilateral   Financial Sector/   Association            Research
(Responses Combined)                         Minister/Minister     tarian      Ministry       PMU           Government     Agency         Private Bank         /CBO       Media    Institute    Other
Observer*                                             40.3%       70.6%        44.8%         21.4%            36.4%        0.0%              9.4%             28.1%       10.3%    0.0%         45.5%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                    33.3%       14.7%        23.8%         25.0%            18.2%        60.0%             28.1%            21.3%       48.3%    50.0%        12.1%
Engage in World Bank Group
                                                      13.9%       32.4%        32.0%         32.1%            27.3%         0.0%             18.8%            51.7%       51.7%    40.0%        0.0%
related/sponsored events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my
                                                      61.1%       20.6%        42.0%         67.9%            54.5%       100.0%             40.6%            39.3%       41.4%    50.0%        57.6%
professional duties*
Use World Bank Group website for
                                                      11.1%       14.7%        16.0%         26.8%            36.4%         0.0%             37.5%            12.4%       24.1%    50.0%        39.4%
information, data, research, etc.*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                     101
The World Bank                                                 Togo                                               Country Survey 2013




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations
Lomé N=361            Outside Lomé N=219

A. General Issues Facing Togo
In general, how would you say that Togo is headed in...

Percentage of Respondents                                              Lomé                 Outside Lomé
The right direction                                                   79.7%                     83.1%
The wrong direction                                                   3.5%                      5.1%
Not sure                                                              16.8%                     11.8%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Togo. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Togo. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Lomé                  Outside Lomé
Social protection and labor                                            8.5%                     4.6%
Transport                                                             29.6%                     32.3%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                  9.6%                     7.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                       54.4%                     46.1%
Global/regional integration                                            1.1%                     1.8%
Gender equity                                                          0.8%                     2.8%
Private sector development*                                           24.2%                     11.1%
Water and sanitation*                                                  6.8%                     13.4%
Energy and mining                                                      2.8%                     2.8%
Regional conflict and tensions                                         0.6%                     0.0%
Job creation/employment                                               26.8%                     27.2%
Financial markets                                                      0.6%                     0.0%
Urban development                                                      4.8%                     2.3%
Environment, climate change, disaster management*                      2.8%                     11.5%
Equality of opportunity                                                7.9%                     7.8%
Health                                                                12.4%                     8.8%
Education*                                                            24.8%                     34.6%
Poverty reduction*                                                    16.9%                     25.8%
Social cohesion*                                                       2.5%                     0.0%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                         42.0%                     34.1%
Economic growth*                                                       7.0%                     2.8%
Law and justice                                                        4.2%                     7.4%
Regulatory framework                                                   0.0%                     0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                      8.2%                     12.0%
Natural resource management*                                           0.0%                     1.4%
Information and communications technology                              0.6%                     0.9%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                               102
The World Bank                                            Togo                                           Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Lomé                Outside Lomé
Water and sanitation                                             10.0%                  13.3%
Equality of opportunity                                          13.0%                  15.6%
Economic growth                                                  19.7%                  18.8%
Regional conflict and tensions                                    0.0%                  0.0%
Global/regional integration                                       0.0%                  0.9%
Gender equity                                                     1.4%                  2.3%
Urban development                                                 2.2%                  1.8%
Regulatory framework                                              0.0%                  0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                12.7%                  8.3%
Social protection and labor*                                     11.9%                  2.8%
Law and justice                                                   5.3%                  3.2%
Transport                                                        17.5%                  22.9%
Information and communications technology                         0.8%                  1.8%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                            0.6%                  8.3%
Private sector development*                                      30.5%                  17.9%
Energy and mining                                                 3.6%                  5.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                  34.1%                  42.2%
Social cohesion                                                   1.4%                  0.0%
Education                                                        21.9%                  24.3%
Natural resource management                                       2.8%                  2.3%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                  1.1%                  1.8%
Health                                                            8.3%                  5.0%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                    59.0%                  51.4%
Job creation/employment                                          40.2%                  44.0%
Financial markets                                                 1.9%                  3.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          103
The World Bank                                              Togo                                             Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Lomé                 Outside Lomé
Energy and mining                                                  21.3%                   19.7%
Gender equity                                                       0.8%                   2.3%
Equality of opportunity                                             4.7%                   6.4%
Global/regional integration                                         5.5%                   5.0%
Social protection and labor                                         1.9%                   0.5%
Regional conflict and tensions                                      0.0%                   0.0%
Urban development                                                   1.7%                   2.8%
Water and sanitation*                                               3.3%                   8.3%
Information and communications technology                           6.4%                   8.7%
Regulatory framework                                                1.4%                   1.4%
Social cohesion                                                     2.8%                   3.2%
Public sector governance/reform*                                   49.9%                   59.2%
Private sector development*                                        65.9%                   49.5%
Job creation/employment                                            19.7%                   21.1%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                      53.7%                   36.7%
Transport                                                          30.7%                   31.7%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                               2.2%                   4.6%
Education                                                           8.6%                   13.3%
Natural resource management                                         4.7%                   2.8%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                    0.8%                   2.8%
Health                                                              1.7%                   0.0%
Law and justice*                                                    2.8%                   6.4%
Local governance and institutions*                                  3.6%                   8.3%
Financial markets                                                   3.6%                   1.4%
*Significantly different between locations

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Lomé                 Outside Lomé
Better employment opportunities for young people                   28.8%                   28.0%
Better employment opportunities for women                           2.8%                   5.1%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor*                      15.4%                   30.3%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help
                                                                   9.4%                    14.3%
ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                25.4%                   21.1%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                               15.4%                   11.4%
A growing middle class*                                             7.5%                   1.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas            15.4%                   16.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas             3.8%                   1.1%
Consistent economic growth                                          8.2%                   8.6%
More reliable social safety net                                    11.0%                   9.1%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                    16.9%                   10.9%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                                   30.4%                   33.7%
opportunity
Better quality public services                                     8.8%                     9.1%
Other                                                              0.6%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            104
The World Bank                                                           Togo                                        Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between locations




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Togo, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its attention and resources in Togo?
(Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                             Lomé                 Outside Lomé
Agriculture                                                                     72.9%                    71.8%
Energy and extractives                                                           8.6%                    8.9%
Finance and markets                                                              0.0%                    0.9%
Health, nutrition, and population                                               27.1%                    22.5%
Transport and ICT                                                               13.9%                    19.2%
Water*                                                                           5.8%                    13.1%
Education*                                                                      35.5%                    46.5%
Environment and natural resources*                                               4.4%                    8.9%
Governance*                                                                     27.7%                    19.2%
Trade and competitiveness                                                        9.1%                    5.2%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management*                                            8.6%                    2.8%
Poverty                                                                         22.7%                    24.9%
Social protection and labor                                                      8.3%                    7.5%
Urban, rural, and social development                                            26.6%                    26.8%
Climate change                                                                   1.1%                    3.3%
Gender                                                                           1.4%                    2.3%
Jobs*                                                                           23.3%                    16.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                         105
The World Bank                                                          Togo                                Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Togo?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                       Lomé     Outside Lomé
Convening/facilitating                                                           4.5%       2.0%
Making data available                                                            3.0%       2.5%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                               10.4%       3.5%
Providing financial resources*                                                  35.2%       46.0%
Supporting capacity development                                                 15.5%       14.1%
Providing technical assistance                                                   0.9%       1.5%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                       5.4%       8.6%
Donor coordination                                                               2.7%       3.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                    1.5%       1.5%
Strategy formulation                                                            19.7%       17.2%
Other                                                                            1.2%       0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                       Lomé     Outside Lomé
Convening/facilitating                                                           5.1%       4.6%
Making data available*                                                           5.7%       2.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                 9.2%       6.1%
Providing financial resources                                                   14.3%       17.9%
Supporting capacity development                                                 10.1%       11.7%
Providing technical assistance                                                  11.3%       14.8%
Mobilizing third party financial resources*                                      4.8%       9.2%
Donor coordination                                                               4.5%       2.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                    4.5%       3.6%
Strategy formulation                                                            30.1%       28.1%
Other                                                                            0.6%       0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Togo’s efforts to achieve development results?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                        106
The World Bank                                                           Togo                               Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Togo. To what degree would Togo
benefit, if capacity building were to support…?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Togo?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Togo to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?




(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                         107
The World Bank                                              Togo                                         Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Togo? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Lomé              Outside Lomé
Staff too inaccessible*                                            2.2%                  8.2%
Not exploring alternative policy options                           3.3%                  1.4%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                   20.6%                20.1%
Togo
Not enough public disclosure of its work                            9.7%                10.5%
Arrogant in its approach*                                           7.2%                0.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                                 6.1%                6.4%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                               1.1%                0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex*                          26.5%                19.2%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                                   18.7%                17.8%
efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries                              21.7%                19.2%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                                   10.6%                 6.8%
political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                              7.5%                 10.0%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                   11.7%                 9.6%
procedures
Not aligned with other donors’ work*                                0.3%                2.7%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors*                    12.8%                26.9%
Not client focused                                                  0.3%                1.4%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to
                                                                   3.9%                  2.3%
practical problem solving
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-
                                                                   3.6%                  1.4%
conflict countries
Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members
                                                                   4.5%                 11.9%
located in the country*
Other                                                               0.6%                 0.5%
Don’t know                                                         10.9%                 8.2%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose
no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Lomé              Outside Lomé
Capacity development (state and semi-state institutions)           38.0%                34.2%
Policy based lending/budget support to the
                                                                   19.3%                28.8%
Government*
Knowledge products/services                                         6.1%                4.1%
Investment lending                                                 68.2%                75.8%
Technical assistance*                                              14.8%                6.8%
Trust Fund management                                               3.4%                4.6%
Co-financing arrangements                                           2.5%                3.2%
Sector-wide approaches*                                            28.2%                16.0%
Emergency Recovery lending                                         11.2%                13.7%
Other                                                               2.2%                0.5%
Don’t know                                                          2.0%                4.1%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            108
The World Bank                                                        Togo                                   Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                          Lomé      Outside Lomé
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes*                                     27.4%        7.8%
Donor Community*                                                              10.0%        5.0%
Media                                                                          7.2%        4.6%
NGOs*                                                                         17.5%        36.7%
Local Government                                                              29.4%        32.6%
Private Sector                                                                30.5%        22.9%
Parliament*                                                                    6.6%        2.3%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)*                                         24.9%        45.0%
Beneficiaries                                                                 21.1%        22.5%
Foundations                                                                    0.0%        0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                      1.1%        1.8%
UN and Regional Peace Keeping Forces                                           0.0%        0.0%
Emerging Donors                                                                1.1%        1.8%
UN Agencies                                                                    4.7%        1.8%
Regional Organizations (e.g., WAEMU, ECOWAS, African
                                                                              13.0%        10.6%
Union)
Other                                                                         1.7%          1.4%
Don’t know                                                                    0.6%          1.4%
*Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Togo?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                      109
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                          Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Togo, in terms of each of the following?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To be a more effective development partner in Togo, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                       Lomé                  Outside Lomé
More local presence                                                            66.5%                     84.5%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                20.1%                     6.5%
Less local presence                                                             3.8%                     1.0%
Don't know                                                                      9.6%                     8.0%
More local presence                                                            66.5%                     84.5%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                       110
The World Bank                                              Togo                                            Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Lomé                Outside Lomé
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                   36.7%                  26.8%
through/follow-up*
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                   51.4%                  50.7%
participation
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                   32.9%                  34.3%
political/social realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                24.3%                  25.4%
Poor donor coordination                                             3.5%                  4.2%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                              11.8%                  16.4%
The Government works inefficiently*                                14.5%                  23.0%
Political pressures and obstacles                                  32.4%                  26.3%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                   32.9%                  30.0%
challenges
Ongoing conflict and instability                                    9.0%                  8.5%
Inadequate funding*                                                17.6%                  33.3%
Other                                                               3.8%                  1.9%
*Significantly different between locations



C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Togo? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between locations



                                                            111
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                          Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between locations

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Togo?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                      Lomé                   Outside Lomé
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                      69.3%                      55.2%
In the country                                                                 9.2%                      14.6%
Don't know                                                                    21.5%                      30.2%
*Significantly different between locations




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                       112
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                          Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)
To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Togo?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                       Lomé                  Outside Lomé
Weekly                                                                          3.9%                     1.0%
Monthly                                                                        16.0%                     12.6%
A few times a year                                                             36.7%                     29.6%
Rarely                                                                         33.1%                     33.5%
Never                                                                          10.4%                     23.3%
*Significantly different between locations

In Togo, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                       113
The World Bank                                                           Togo                                   Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between locations


E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Togo’s development challenges?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations




                                                                         114
The World Bank                                              Togo                                            Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Togo?

Percentage of Respondents                                          Lomé                Outside Lomé
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Togo                    1.4%                  3.3%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Togo             28.6%                  22.2%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate             17.2%                  22.2%
Don't know                                                         39.4%                  33.5%
Prefer not to answer                                               13.3%                  18.9%




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Togo?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Lomé                Outside Lomé
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                                   23.2%                  11.0%
statistics/figures on Togo’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients*              24.6%                  33.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                           12.8%                  17.7%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared
                                                                   8.1%                    4.8%
to markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                     48.0%                  54.1%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Togo’s
                                                                   8.7%                    2.9%
specific challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge services                           5.9%                    7.2%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work*                            2.2%                    5.7%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                                   27.9%                  21.1%
country
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                   24.9%                  30.1%
financing
Work faster                                                        5.3%                    5.3%
Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Togo’s
                                                                   2.8%                    4.8%
office
Other                                                              0.6%                    1.0%
*Significantly different between locations

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Togo, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Togo?*

Percentage of Respondents                                          Lomé                Outside Lomé
Financial services                                                 10.3%                  25.9%
Knowledge products                                                 10.6%                  9.3%
Convening services                                                  6.0%                  1.9%
None of the above                                                     -                   1.4%
The combination is appropriate for Togo                            67.7%                  56.0%
Don't know                                                          5.4%                  5.6%
*Significantly different between locations



                                                            115
The World Bank                                            Togo                                          Country Survey 2013




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

Please answer the following questions. (Choose no more than THREE for each)
Which THREE areas would benefit most from the World Bank Group playing a leading role among international partners in
Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Lomé               Outside Lomé
Building social safety nets*                                     19.4%                 32.1%
Strengthening public financial management                        60.3%                 55.8%
Reducing violence                                                 0.9%                 1.9%
Increasing access to justice systems*                            17.7%                 11.2%
Strengthening security mechanisms*                                2.3%                 5.6%
Strengthening conflict resolution mechanisms                      2.3%                 2.8%
Increasing access to basic services                              54.3%                 59.1%
Building capacity of state institutions*                         36.6%                 21.4%
Generating jobs                                                  58.6%                 63.3%
Improving livelihoods                                            16.3%                 18.1%
Increasing cohesion                                               7.1%                 4.7%
Stimulating dialogue to promote peace and stability              16.6%                 20.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Which THREE areas below would benefit most from other donors in Togo?
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Lomé               Outside Lomé
Building social safety nets                                      30.9%                 26.7%
Strengthening public financial management                        29.1%                 29.5%
Reducing violence                                                 5.1%                 5.2%
Increasing access to justice systems*                            38.4%                 56.7%
Strengthening security mechanisms                                 7.8%                 12.9%
Strengthening conflict resolution mechanisms*                    13.5%                 20.5%
Increasing access to basic services                              27.9%                 28.6%
Building capacity of state institutions                          22.8%                 28.6%
Generating jobs*                                                 33.0%                 16.2%
Improving livelihoods                                            19.8%                 19.0%
Increasing cohesion                                              21.0%                 15.7%
Stimulating dialogue to promote peace and stability              36.0%                 30.5%
*Significantly different between locations

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Togo? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Lomé               Outside Lomé
Local newspapers                                                 35.1%                 39.3%
International newspapers                                          8.7%                 5.7%
Local radio*                                                     18.8%                 34.1%
International radio                                              15.2%                 21.3%
Local television*                                                39.6%                 28.0%
International television*                                        10.4%                 20.9%
Periodicals                                                       6.5%                 2.8%
Internet*                                                        55.6%                 30.3%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)           0.8%                 1.4%
Blogs                                                             0.3%                 0.9%
Mobile phones*                                                    2.0%                 5.2%
Instant messaging                                                 0.0%                 0.9%
Other                                                             2.8%                 3.3%
*Significantly different between locations



                                                          116
The World Bank                                             Togo                                           Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                              Lomé                Outside Lomé
Blogs                                                              0.0%                  0.5%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                              20.2%                  20.5%
e-Newsletters*                                                    34.1%                  25.1%
Emails                                                            31.3%                  30.2%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences*                41.0%                  57.7%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written
                                                                  34.3%                  24.2%
materials*
Mobile phones*                                                     2.8%                  6.5%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)            2.5%                  5.6%
World Bank Group’s website                                        28.8%                  26.0%
Other                                                              0.0%                  0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?

Percentage of Respondents                                         Lomé                Outside Lomé
Yes                                                               21.9%                  8.8%
No                                                                78.1%                  91.2%
*Significantly different between locations

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                         Lomé                Outside Lomé
Yes                                                               15.2%                  4.2%
No                                                                84.8%                  95.8%
*Significantly different between locations

Were you able to obtain this information?*

Percentage of Respondents                                         Lomé                Outside Lomé
Yes                                                               91.3%                  50.0%
No                                                                 8.7%                  50.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                         Lomé                Outside Lomé
Yes                                                               94.6%                  81.4%
No                                                                 5.4%                  18.6%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                         Lomé                Outside Lomé
Yes                                                               51.9%                  26.8%
No                                                                48.1%                  73.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           117
The World Bank                                                Togo                                          Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which do you primarily use?*

Percentage of Respondents                                            Lomé                  Outside Lomé
The World Bank Group’s country website                               38.8%                    66.3%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                  61.2%                    33.8%
*Significantly different between locations

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between locations



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Togo? (Select all that apply)

Percentage of Respondents                                            Lomé                  Outside Lomé
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                55.2%                    57.6%
International Finance Corporation (IFC)                              16.4%                    10.3%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                   7.7%                    8.4%
None                                                                 41.0%                    39.9%

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents                                            Lomé                  Outside Lomé
Observer                                                             34.4%                    36.3%
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                   29.6%                    20.4%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                     27.3%                    35.3%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                        48.2%                    45.8%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data,
                                                                     22.3%                    17.4%
research, etc.
*Significantly different between locations




                                                              118
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                   Country Survey 2013




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Collaborators
Collaborators N=329              Non-Collaborators N=254

A. General Issues Facing Togo
In general, how would you say that Togo is headed in...

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The right direction                                                           78.3%            84.3%
The wrong direction                                                            4.3%             4.3%
Not sure                                                                      17.4%            11.4%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Togo. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Togo. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators    Non-Collaborators
Social protection and labor                                                   7.4%              6.0%
Transport*                                                                   35.6%             24.9%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                        10.4%              6.0%
Public sector governance/reform*                                             47.5%             58.2%
Global/regional integration                                                   0.9%              1.2%
Gender equity                                                                 0.6%              2.4%
Private sector development                                                   20.6%             18.5%
Water and sanitation                                                          9.5%             10.8%
Energy and mining                                                             4.0%              2.4%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                0.0%              0.8%
Job creation/employment                                                      25.8%             27.7%
Financial markets                                                             0.6%              0.0%
Urban development                                                             4.3%              3.2%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                              7.1%              4.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                       7.4%              8.4%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable
                                                                              9.8%             10.8%
diseases)
Education                                                                     26.4%            30.1%
Poverty reduction*                                                            16.3%            24.5%
Social cohesion                                                                2.8%            0.8%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                                 39.9%            37.8%
Economic growth                                                                5.5%            5.2%
Law and justice                                                                6.1%            4.0%
Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%            0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                             10.1%            9.2%
Natural resource management                                                    0.9%            0.0%
Information and communications technology*                                     0.0%            1.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       119
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Water and sanitation                                                          9.4%            12.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                      12.2%            15.4%
Economic growth                                                              19.5%            18.5%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                0.0%             0.0%
Global/regional integration                                                   0.0%             0.8%
Gender equity                                                                 1.5%             2.0%
Urban development                                                             1.8%             2.4%
Regulatory framework                                                          0.0%             0.0%
Local governance and institutions                                            12.2%            11.0%
Social protection and labor                                                   6.7%            10.6%
Law and justice                                                               5.2%             3.1%
Transport*                                                                   23.4%            15.4%
Information and communications technology                                     0.6%             2.0%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                         4.3%             1.6%
Private sector development                                                   24.3%            27.2%
Energy and mining                                                             4.3%             2.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                              39.8%            34.6%
Social cohesion                                                               0.9%             0.8%
Education                                                                    22.8%            23.2%
Natural resource management                                                   2.7%             2.4%
Environment, climate change, disaster management*                             0.6%             2.8%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable
                                                                              9.1%             5.5%
diseases)
Agriculture, food security, rural development                                 57.4%           54.7%
Job creation/employment*                                                      37.1%           48.8%
Financial markets                                                              3.0%           0.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       120
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Energy and mining*                                                           17.0%            25.6%
Gender equity                                                                 0.6%             2.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                       6.1%             4.3%
Global/regional integration                                                   5.8%             3.9%
Social protection and labor                                                   1.8%             0.4%
Regional conflict and tensions                                                0.0%             0.0%
Urban development                                                             2.7%             1.2%
Water and sanitation*                                                         7.0%             3.1%
Information and communications technology                                     6.4%             7.5%
Regulatory framework*                                                         0.0%             3.1%
Social cohesion                                                               1.5%             2.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                              50.8%            55.1%
Private sector development                                                   59.6%            62.6%
Job creation/employment                                                      22.8%            18.1%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                                49.8%            44.5%
Transport                                                                    33.7%            29.5%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                         2.1%             3.9%
Education                                                                     9.4%            11.8%
Natural resource management*                                                  2.4%             5.9%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                              1.2%             2.0%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable
                                                                              1.2%             0.0%
diseases)
Law and justice                                                               3.6%             4.3%
Local governance and institutions*                                            8.2%             2.8%
Financial markets                                                             3.6%             1.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Better employment opportunities for young people                             30.8%            27.8%
Better employment opportunities for women                                     3.1%             3.5%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor*                                27.5%            12.1%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help
                                                                              11.5%           11.1%
ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                           20.3%           27.3%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                          13.9%           15.2%
A growing middle class                                                         3.7%           7.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas*                      18.6%           11.6%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                        2.7%           3.0%
Consistent economic growth                                                     8.1%           9.1%
More reliable social safety net                                                8.8%           10.1%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                               16.9%           12.6%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                                              27.8%           35.9%
opportunity
Better quality public services*                                               6.1%            12.1%
Other                                                                         0.0%            1.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       121
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                              Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Togo, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its attention and resources in Togo?
(Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators              Non-Collaborators
Agriculture                                                                   69.4%                       75.3%
Energy and extractives                                                         8.0%                       11.2%
Finance and markets                                                            0.6%                        0.0%
Health, nutrition, and population                                             27.2%                       22.7%
Transport and ICT                                                             15.6%                       15.5%
Water                                                                          9.5%                        7.6%
Education                                                                     36.7%                       41.0%
Environment and natural resources*                                             8.0%                        2.8%
Governance*                                                                   20.5%                       30.3%
Trade and competitiveness                                                      9.2%                        6.8%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management                                           6.7%                        5.6%
Poverty                                                                       27.2%                       20.3%
Social protection and labor*                                                  11.0%                        3.6%
Urban, rural, and social development                                          24.5%                       29.9%
Climate change                                                                 2.8%                        0.8%
Gender                                                                         1.5%                        2.0%
Jobs                                                                          19.9%                       22.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       122
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                             Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Togo?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators             Non-Collaborators
Convening/facilitating                                                         4.0%                       3.0%
Making data available*                                                         3.6%                       0.8%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                               7.6%                       7.6%
Providing financial resources                                                 40.7%                      38.1%
Supporting capacity development                                               14.9%                      15.7%
Providing technical assistance                                                 0.3%                       2.1%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                     7.3%                       5.5%
Donor coordination*                                                            4.3%                       0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                  1.0%                       2.1%
Strategy formulation*                                                         16.2%                      23.3%
Other*                                                                         0.0%                       1.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators             Non-Collaborators
Convening/facilitating*                                                        6.6%                       2.5%
Making data available                                                          4.3%                       3.8%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                             11.0%                       5.5%
Providing financial resources*                                                12.6%                      19.1%
Supporting capacity development                                               11.6%                      10.6%
Providing technical assistance                                                13.3%                      11.9%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                     8.0%                       4.2%
Donor coordination                                                             3.7%                       3.4%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                  3.3%                       5.1%
Strategy formulation*                                                         24.9%                      33.9%
Other                                                                          0.7%                       0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Togo’s efforts to achieve development results?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       123
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                                     Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Togo. To what degree would Togo
benefit, if capacity building were to support…?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Togo?




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Togo to help ensure better development results, looking forward,
how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?




(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




                                                                       124
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Togo? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Staff too inaccessible                                                        4.3%             3.1%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                      2.7%             2.4%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                              18.2%           23.6%
Togo
Not enough public disclosure of its work*                                      7.0%           13.0%
Arrogant in its approach                                                       6.1%           3.1%
Not aligned with country priorities                                            7.0%           5.5%
The credibility of its knowledge/data*                                         0.0%           1.6%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex*                                     28.9%           17.3%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform
                                                                              20.1%           16.5%
efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries*                                        15.2%           28.7%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to
                                                                              8.2%            12.6%
political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                         9.7%             7.5%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                              10.9%           10.6%
procedures
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                            1.5%           0.8%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors*                               20.1%           13.8%
Not client focused                                                             1.2%           0.0%
Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to
                                                                              2.7%             3.5%
practical problem solving
Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-
                                                                              3.3%             2.0%
conflict countries
Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members
                                                                              11.6%            1.6%
located in the country*
Other                                                                         1.2%            0.0%
Don’t know*                                                                   6.1%            14.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose
no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Capacity development (state and semi-state
                                                                              45.6%           26.3%
institutions)*
Policy based lending/budget support to the
                                                                              19.1%           29.5%
Government*
Knowledge products/services                                                    5.2%           5.2%
Investment lending                                                            71.4%           70.5%
Technical assistance                                                          10.9%           12.0%
Trust Fund management                                                          4.3%           2.8%
Co-financing arrangements                                                      3.0%           2.4%
Sector-wide approaches                                                        21.3%           27.1%
Emergency Recovery lending                                                    12.5%           12.4%
Other*                                                                         0.6%           2.8%
Don’t know*                                                                    0.9%           4.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       125
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                           Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators            Non-Collaborators
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                     17.3%                     23.6%
Donor Community*                                                             11.6%                      3.5%
Media                                                                         7.0%                      4.4%
NGOs                                                                         26.4%                     20.5%
Local Government*                                                            25.5%                     38.6%
Private Sector*                                                              32.8%                     21.7%
Parliament*                                                                   3.6%                      8.3%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                         30.1%                     36.6%
Beneficiaries                                                                21.3%                     22.0%
Foundations                                                                   0.0%                      0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                     0.6%                      1.6%
UN and Regional Peace Keeping Forces                                          0.0%                      0.0%
Emerging Donors*                                                              2.4%                      0.0%
UN Agencies*                                                                  0.6%                      6.7%
Regional Organizations (e.g., WAEMU, ECOWAS, African
                                                                              15.8%                       7.1%
Union)*
Other                                                                         1.8%                        1.2%
Don’t know*                                                                   1.5%                        0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Togo?




 (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       126
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                                     Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Togo, in terms of each of the following?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To be a more effective development partner in Togo, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators             Non-Collaborators
More local presence                                                          67.4%                      81.0%
The current level of local presence is adequate                              17.4%                      11.0%
Less local presence                                                           4.5%                       .8%
Don't know                                                                   10.6%                       7.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       127
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                              29.3%           38.0%
through/follow-up*
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                              48.3%           54.1%
participation
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                              29.6%           38.0%
political/social realities on the ground*
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                           26.8%           20.2%
Poor donor coordination                                                        3.1%           4.5%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                         16.2%           12.0%
The Government works inefficiently*                                           22.1%           13.2%
Political pressures and obstacles*                                            25.9%           35.1%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                              31.8%           31.4%
challenges
Ongoing conflict and instability*                                              5.9%           13.6%
Inadequate funding*                                                           29.0%           14.9%
Other                                                                          3.4%           2.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Togo? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



                                                                       128
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                                     Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Togo?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators             Non-Collaborators
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                     67.4%                      59.7%
In the country                                                               12.9%                       8.5%
Don't know                                                                   19.7%                      31.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       129
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                                     Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Togo?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators             Non-Collaborators
Weekly                                                                        4.1%                       1.2%
Monthly                                                                      20.3%                       8.5%
A few times a year                                                           36.9%                      32.1%
Rarely                                                                       30.6%                      34.6%
Never                                                                         8.1%                      23.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       130
The World Bank                                                           Togo                                                   Country Survey 2013




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Togo, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Togo’s development challenges?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         131
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                    Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Togo?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Togo                              2.8%             1.6%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Togo                       28.1%            25.1%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                       22.2%            15.9%
Don't know                                                                   34.6%            37.5%
Prefer not to answer                                                         12.3%            19.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                       132
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Togo?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/
                                                                              12.0%           27.9%
figures on Togo’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                          29.0%           25.5%
Offer more innovative financial products                                      14.8%           12.1%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared
                                                                              9.3%             3.6%
to markets*
Reach out more to groups outside of Government*                               44.4%           57.9%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Togo’s
                                                                              7.4%             5.7%
specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                      4.6%             6.9%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work*                                       1.9%             5.7%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                                              28.4%           21.1%
country*
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                              30.2%           25.5%
financing
Work faster                                                                   7.1%             4.5%
Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Togo’s
                                                                              4.6%             2.0%
office
Other                                                                         0.6%             0.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Togo, and taking into account its limited
level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Togo?

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Financial services                                                           18.3%            13.8%
Knowledge products                                                           10.5%             8.5%
Convening services                                                            3.1%             6.5%
None of the above                                                             .9%                -
The combination is appropriate for Togo                                      62.8%            64.4%
Don't know                                                                    4.3%             6.9%

Please answer the following questions. (Choose no more than THREE for each)
Which THREE areas would benefit most from the World Bank Group playing a leading role among international partners in
Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Building social safety nets                                                  27.6%            21.5%
Strengthening public financial management                                    57.4%            59.9%
Reducing violence                                                             1.5%             0.8%
Increasing access to justice systems                                         16.0%            14.0%
Strengthening security mechanisms                                             4.0%             1.2%
Strengthening conflict resolution mechanisms                                  2.8%             2.1%
Increasing access to basic services                                          59.5%            54.5%
Building capacity of state institutions                                      30.4%            32.6%
Generating jobs                                                              58.3%            61.2%
Improving livelihoods*                                                       12.9%            21.9%
Increasing cohesion*                                                          8.3%             3.7%
Stimulating dialogue to promote peace and stability*                         14.7%            21.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       133
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Togo (continued)

Which THREE areas below would benefit most from other donors in Togo?
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Building social safety nets                                                  26.6%            33.2%
Strengthening public financial management*                                   33.2%            24.6%
Reducing violence                                                             6.6%             3.3%
Increasing access to justice systems                                         43.8%            47.5%
Strengthening security mechanisms                                            11.5%             9.0%
Strengthening conflict resolution mechanisms                                 15.8%            17.6%
Increasing access to basic services                                          28.6%            25.8%
Building capacity of state institutions                                      23.0%            23.8%
Generating jobs*                                                             29.9%            22.1%
Improving livelihoods                                                        20.4%            19.3%
Increasing cohesion*                                                         14.5%            25.8%
Stimulating dialogue to promote peace and stability                          32.2%            36.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Togo? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Local newspapers                                                             34.8%            40.2%
International newspapers                                                      7.0%             8.7%
Local radio                                                                  23.1%            24.4%
International radio                                                          18.7%            15.0%
Local television*                                                            29.4%            42.9%
International television                                                     14.2%            13.8%
Periodicals*                                                                  1.6%             9.8%
Internet*                                                                    52.5%            39.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)*                      1.9%             0.0%
Blogs                                                                         0.9%             0.0%
Mobile phones                                                                 4.4%             1.6%
Instant messaging                                                             0.6%             0.0%
Other*                                                                        4.4%             1.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Blogs                                                                         0.3%             0.0%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                         18.3%            21.8%
e-Newsletters                                                                32.4%            27.8%
Emails*                                                                      36.1%            23.8%
World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences*                           42.2%            54.8%
World Bank Group’s publications and other written
                                                                              25.4%           37.7%
materials*
Mobile phones                                                                  4.6%           4.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                        4.6%           2.0%
World Bank Group’s website*                                                   32.1%           22.6%
Other                                                                          0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       134
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                          18.0%            17.0%
No                                                                           82.0%            83.0%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                          14.2%             7.1%
No                                                                           85.8%            92.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                          89.5%            75.0%
No                                                                           10.5%            25.0%

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                          89.7%            89.1%
No                                                                           10.3%            10.9%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                          49.8%            35.7%
No                                                                           50.2%            64.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which do you primarily use?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group’s country website                                       41.8%            53.9%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                          58.2%            46.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       135
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                  Country Survey 2013




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Togo? (Select all that apply)

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank (IBRD)*                                                       87.6%            14.8%
International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                                     22.8%             3.1%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)*                         11.4%             3.1%
None*                                                                         6.5%            85.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)

Percentage of Respondents                                                Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                                              17.8%           58.5%
conversations, etc.)*
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                             25.2%           28.4%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                              38.0%           19.5%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                64.5%           25.4%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data,
                                                                              14.6%           27.5%
research, etc.*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       136
The World Bank                                                         Togo                                Country Survey 2013




Appendix E: Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys1
FY11 N=589           FY14 N=608

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group




(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.




(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Togo?




(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Togo, in terms of each of the following?




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




1
    Only those questions with similar response options/scales could be included in these comparisons.



                                                                       137
The World Bank                                                        Togo                                         Country Survey 2013




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Togo? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
In Togo, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:




(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.




                                                                      138
The World Bank                                                Togo                                             Country Survey 2013




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




*Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.

G. Communication and Information Sharing
Do you have access to the Internet?*
Percentage of Respondents                                              FY11                 FY14
Yes                                                                   83.0%                88.8%
No                                                                    17.0%                11.3%
*Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
Percentage of Respondents                                              FY11                 FY14
Yes                                                                   46.8%                42.3%
No                                                                    53.2%                57.7%

Which do you primarily use?*
Percentage of Respondents                                              FY11                 FY14
The World Bank Group’s country website                                57.5%                46.8%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                   42.5%                53.2%
*Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 surveys.




                                                              139
The World Bank                                                                            Togo                                                                        Country Survey 2013



Appendix F: Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’ Specializations/Sectors

C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Togo? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between specializations




                                                                                          140
The World Bank                                                                              Togo                                                                         Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between specializations




                                                                                            141
The World Bank                                                      Togo                                                 Country Survey 2013


In instances where more than 10% of respondents come from a specific sector, additional analyses are
conducted to further examine their perceptions as opposed to those from other sectors. In the case of Togo,
there were 20% of respondents from the Agriculture/Rural Development/Food Security sector and 15% of
respondents from the Education sector.


Agriculture/Rural Development/Food Security Sector vs. Others
Agriculture/Rural Development/Food Security N=117                        All Others N=476

A. General Issues Facing Togo
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Togo. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important
development priorities in Togo. (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                  Agriculture/
Percentage of Respondents                                     Rural Development/
(Responses Combined)                                             Food Security               All Others
Agriculture, food security, rural development*                       60.9%                     33.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                      52.2%                     50.4%
Job creation/employment                                              26.1%                     26.8%
Transport                                                            25.2%                     31.1%
Private sector development                                           21.7%                     18.7%
Poverty reduction                                                    20.9%                     20.4%
Education*                                                           15.7%                     31.7%
Water and sanitation                                                 12.2%                      9.8%
Health                                                               10.4%                     11.3%
Social protection and labor                                          9.6%                       6.2%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                7.8%                       8.5%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                     7.0%                       6.0%
Equality of opportunity                                              6.1%                       8.5%
Law and justice                                                      6.1%                       5.3%
Economic growth                                                      5.2%                       4.9%
Local governance and institutions*                                   3.5%                      11.3%
Energy and mining                                                    2.6%                       3.8%
Global/regional integration                                          1.7%                       1.3%
Information and communications technology                            1.7%                       0.4%
Urban development                                                    0.9%                       4.5%
Natural resource management                                          0.9%                       0.4%
Gender equity                                                        0.0%                       1.9%
Regional conflict and tensions                                       0.0%                       0.4%
Financial markets                                                    0.0%                       0.4%
Social cohesion                                                      0.0%                       2.1%
Regulatory framework                                                 0.0%                       0.4%
*Significantly different between specializations




                                                                    142
The World Bank                                                Togo                                             Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                              Agriculture/
Percentage of Respondents                                 Rural Development/
(Responses Combined)                                         Food Security              All Others
Agriculture, food security, rural development*                   66.7%                     53.3%
Public sector governance/reform*                                 50.4%                     33.5%
Job creation/employment                                          40.2%                     42.7%
Economic growth                                                  18.8%                     18.7%
Private sector development*                                      17.1%                     27.8%
Transport                                                        16.2%                     19.8%
Education*                                                       14.5%                     24.6%
Water and sanitation                                             12.8%                     11.2%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable
                                                                 11.1%                     6.9%
diseases)
Local governance and institutions                                10.3%                     11.6%
Equality of opportunity                                          10.3%                     14.9%
Social protection and labor                                       7.7%                     8.4%
Law and justice                                                   6.8%                     4.0%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                            6.8%                     2.5%
Financial markets*                                                5.1%                     1.7%
Energy and mining                                                 2.6%                     4.4%
Natural resource management                                       1.7%                     2.7%
Urban development                                                 0.9%                     2.3%
Regional conflict and tensions                                    0.0%                     0.0%
Global/regional integration                                       0.0%                     0.4%
Gender equity                                                     0.0%                     2.1%
Regulatory framework                                              0.0%                     0.0%
Information and communications technology                         0.0%                     1.9%
Social cohesion                                                   0.0%                     1.1%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                  0.0%                     1.9%
*Significantly different between specializations




                                                              143
The World Bank                                                Togo                                             Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating
economic growth in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                              Agriculture/
Percentage of Respondents                                Rural Development/
(Responses Combined)                                         Food Security           All Others
Agriculture, food security, rural development*                   72.6%                 41.3%
Public sector governance/reform*                                 59.8%                 49.3%
Private sector development                                       53.8%                 61.7%
Transport                                                        30.8%                 31.2%
Energy and mining                                                17.1%                 22.3%
Education                                                        12.0%                 10.3%
Job creation/employment*                                         9.4%                  23.8%
Water and sanitation                                             6.8%                   4.8%
Information and communications technology                        5.1%                   7.8%
Health*                                                          5.1%                   0.0%
Financial markets                                                4.3%                   2.3%
Equality of opportunity                                          3.4%                   6.1%
Social protection and labor                                      3.4%                   1.1%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                 3.4%                   1.1%
Global/regional integration                                      2.6%                   5.9%
Urban development                                                2.6%                   1.9%
Local governance and institutions                                2.6%                   6.3%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                            1.7%                   3.2%
Law and justice                                                  1.7%                   4.8%
Gender equity                                                    0.0%                   1.7%
Regional conflict and tensions                                   0.0%                   0.0%
Regulatory framework                                             0.0%                   1.7%
Social cohesion*                                                 0.0%                   3.6%
Natural resource management*                                     0.0%                   4.8%
*Significantly different between specializations



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Togo, in which sectoral areas do
you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its attention and resources in Togo?
                                                               Agriculture/
Percentage of Respondents                                  Rural Development/
(Responses Combined)                                          Food Security             All Others
Agriculture*                                                      83.8%                   68.9%
Poverty                                                           30.8%                   22.6%
Governance                                                        29.9%                   22.8%
Education*                                                        28.2%                   40.4%
Urban, rural, and social development                              28.2%                   26.4%
Jobs                                                              18.8%                   23.0%
Health, nutrition, and population*                                16.2%                   27.2%
Transport and ICT                                                 12.0%                   16.2%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management*                             11.1%                    5.5%
Environment and natural resources                                 9.4%                     5.5%
Water                                                             8.5%                     8.3%
Energy and extractives                                            6.8%                    10.2%
Trade and competitiveness                                         6.0%                     8.5%
Climate change                                                    3.4%                     1.5%
Gender                                                            3.4%                     1.3%
Finance and markets*                                              1.7%                     0.0%
Social protection and labor*                                      1.7%                     9.4%
*Significantly different between specializations




                                                              144
The World Bank                                                 Togo                                              Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Togo?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between specializations




                                                               145
The World Bank                                                 Togo                                               Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between specializations




                                                                146
The World Bank                                                      Togo                                                 Country Survey 2013



Education Sector vs. Others
Education N=87             All Others N=506

A. General Issues Facing Togo
Listed below are a number of development priorities in Togo. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important
development priorities in Togo. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Education                 All Others
Education*                                                           67.8%                     21.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                      47.1%                     51.4%
Agriculture, food security, rural development                        32.2%                     39.8%
Transport                                                            29.9%                     29.9%
Job creation/employment                                              24.1%                     27.1%
Poverty reduction                                                    16.1%                     21.3%
Private sector development                                           14.9%                     20.1%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable
                                                                      13.8%                    10.6%
diseases)
Local governance and institutions                                     10.3%                    9.6%
Economic growth*                                                      9.2%                     4.2%
Water and sanitation                                                  5.7%                     11.0%
Equality of opportunity                                               5.7%                     8.4%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                                 4.6%                     9.0%
Urban development                                                     4.6%                     3.6%
Law and justice                                                       4.6%                     5.6%
Social protection and labor                                           3.4%                     7.4%
Energy and mining                                                     3.4%                     3.6%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                      2.3%                     6.8%
Global/regional integration                                           0.0%                     1.6%
Gender equity                                                         0.0%                     1.8%
Regional conflict and tensions                                        0.0%                     0.4%
Financial markets                                                     0.0%                     0.4%
Social cohesion                                                       0.0%                     2.0%
Regulatory framework                                                  0.0%                     0.4%
Natural resource management                                           0.0%                     0.6%
Information and communications technology                             0.0%                     0.8%
*Significantly different between specializations




                                                                    147
The World Bank                                                Togo                                             Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do
you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Education               All Others
Agriculture, food security, rural development                   62.1%                   54.9%
Education*                                                      59.8%                   16.2%
Job creation/employment                                         34.5%                   43.6%
Public sector governance/reform*                                25.3%                   38.8%
Private sector development                                      24.1%                   25.9%
Transport                                                       16.1%                   19.6%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable
                                                                16.1%                   6.3%
diseases)*
Economic growth                                                 12.6%                   19.8%
Local governance and institutions                               9.2%                    11.7%
Social protection and labor                                     9.2%                    8.1%
Energy and mining*                                              9.2%                    3.2%
Equality of opportunity                                         8.0%                    15.0%
Water and sanitation                                            6.9%                    12.3%
Natural resource management*                                    5.7%                    2.0%
Law and justice                                                 1.1%                    5.1%
Regional conflict and tensions                                  0.0%                    0.0%
Global/regional integration                                     0.0%                    0.4%
Gender equity                                                   0.0%                    2.0%
Urban development                                               0.0%                    2.4%
Regulatory framework                                            0.0%                    0.0%
Information and communications technology                       0.0%                    1.8%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction                           0.0%                    4.0%
Social cohesion                                                 0.0%                    1.0%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                0.0%                    1.8%
Financial markets                                               0.0%                    2.8%
*Significantly different between specializations




                                                              148
The World Bank                                                Togo                                             Country Survey 2013


A. General Issues Facing Togo (continued)
Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating
economic growth in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Education              All Others
Public sector governance/reform                                 55.2%                  50.7%
Private sector development*                                     48.3%                  62.2%
Transport                                                       39.1%                  29.7%
Agriculture, food security, rural development*                  34.5%                  49.7%
Education*                                                      20.7%                   8.9%
Job creation/employment                                         20.7%                  21.0%
Information and communications technology*                      12.6%                   6.3%
Energy and mining*                                              12.6%                  22.8%
Natural resource management*                                    12.6%                   2.4%
Local governance and institutions                               8.0%                    5.1%
Security/stabilization/reconstruction*                          6.9%                    2.2%
Equality of opportunity                                         5.7%                    5.5%
Social protection and labor                                     3.4%                    1.2%
Social cohesion                                                 3.4%                    2.8%
Regulatory framework                                            3.4%                    1.0%
Global/regional integration                                     2.3%                    5.7%
Water and sanitation                                            2.3%                    5.7%
Law and justice                                                 1.1%                    4.8%
Financial markets                                               1.1%                    3.0%
Gender equity                                                   0.0%                    1.6%
Regional conflict and tensions                                  0.0%                    0.0%
Urban development                                               0.0%                    2.4%
Environment, climate change, disaster management                0.0%                    1.8%
Health (including communicable/non-communicable
                                                                0.0%                   1.2%
diseases)
*Significantly different between specializations



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Togo, in which sectoral areas do
you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its attention and resources in Togo?
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Education              All Others
Agriculture                                                     74.7%                  71.4%
Education*                                                      66.7%                  33.0%
Health, nutrition, and population*                              36.8%                  23.0%
Governance                                                      27.6%                  23.6%
Urban, rural, and social development                            21.8%                  27.6%
Jobs                                                            19.5%                  22.6%
Poverty                                                         18.4%                  25.2%
Social protection and labor                                     10.3%                   7.4%
Energy and extractives                                          6.9%                   10.0%
Transport and ICT*                                              6.9%                   16.8%
Trade and competitiveness                                       4.6%                    8.6%
Macroeconomics and fiscal management                            3.4%                    7.2%
Water*                                                          2.3%                    9.4%
Finance and markets                                             0.0%                    0.4%
Environment and natural resources*                              0.0%                    7.4%
Climate change                                                  0.0%                    2.2%
Gender                                                          0.0%                    2.0%
*Significantly different between specializations




                                                              149
The World Bank                                                 Togo                                              Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Togo?
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




*Significantly different between specializations




                                                               150
The World Bank                                                 Togo                                               Country Survey 2013


C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Togo?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




*Significantly different between specializations




                                                                151
The World Bank                                                            Togo         Country Survey 2013



Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the Bank




 Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.
                                                                                 152
The World Bank                                        Togo           Country Survey 2013



Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group




*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                             153
The World Bank                                        Togo                                    Country Survey 2013



Appendix I: Togo FY 2014 Questionnaire




                             World Bank Group Client Survey FY14 – Togo


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Togo or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Togo, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Togo.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING TOGO

 A1. In general would you say that Togo is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                      154
The World Bank                                              Togo                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Togo.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Togo?
 (Choose no more than THREE) -- Kindly read to the end before making your choices
       Social protection and labor (e.g., pensions,
  1                                                          14    Environment, climate change, disaster management
       targeted social assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)      15    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
                                                                   Health (including communicable/non-communicable
  3    Security/stabilization/reconstruction                 16
                                                                   diseases)
       Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
       effectiveness, public financial management, public
  4                                                          17    Education
       expenditure, fiscal system reform, good
       governance, anti-corruption)
  5    Global/regional integration                           18    Poverty reduction
  6    Gender equity                                         19    Social cohesion
       Private sector development (trade,
  7    competitiveness, business climate, foreign direct     20    Agriculture, food security, rural development
       investment)
  8    Water and sanitation                                  21    Economic growth
  9    Energy and mining                                     22    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10    Regional conflict and tensions                        23    Regulatory framework
 11    Job creation/employment                               24    Local governance and institutions
 12    Financial markets                                     25    Natural resource management
 13    Urban development                                     26    Information and communications technology




                                                            155
The World Bank                                                Togo                                           Country Survey 2013




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE) -- Kindly read to the end before making
 your choices
  1   Water and sanitation                                     14    Security/stabilization/reconstruction
                                                                     Private sector development (trade, competitiveness,
  2   Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                   15
                                                                     business climate, foreign direct investment)
  3   Economic growth                                          16    Energy and mining
                                                                     Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
                                                                     effectiveness, public financial management, public
  4   Regional conflict and tensions                           17
                                                                     expenditure, fiscal system reform, good governance,
                                                                     anti-corruption)
  5   Global/regional integration                              18    Social cohesion
  6   Gender equity                                            19    Education
  7   Urban development                                        20    Natural resource management
  8   Regulatory framework                                     21    Environment, climate change, disaster management
                                                                     Health (including communicable/non-communicable
  9   Local governance and institutions                        22
                                                                     diseases)
      Social protection and labor (e.g., pensions, targeted
 10                                                            23    Agriculture, food security, rural development
      social assistance)
 11   Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                  24    Job creation/employment
 12   Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
                                                               25    Financial markets
 13   Information and communications technology




                                                              156
The World Bank                                                Togo                                               Country Survey 2013



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Togo? (Choose no more than THREE) -- Kindly read to the end before making your
 choices
                                                                    Private sector development (trade, competitiveness,
  1    Energy and mining                                     13
                                                                    business climate, foreign direct investment)
  2    Gender equity                                         14     Job creation/employment
  3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                15     Agriculture, food security, rural development
  4    Global/regional integration                           16     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
       Social protection and labor (e.g., pensions,
  5                                                          17     Security/stabilization/reconstruction
       targeted social assistance)
  6    Regional conflict and tensions                        18     Education
  7    Urban development                                     19     Natural resource management
  8    Water and sanitation                                  20     Environment, climate change, disaster management
                                                                    Health (including communicable/non-communicable
  9    Information and communications technology             21
                                                                    diseases)
 10    Regulatory framework                                  22     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11    Social cohesion                                       23     Local governance and institutions
       Public sector governance/reform (i.e.,
       government effectiveness, public financial
 12                                                          24     Financial markets
       management, public expenditure, fiscal system
       reform, good governance, anti-corruption)


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following TWO
 best illustrate how this would be achieved in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
 Kindly read to the end before making your choices
  1    Better employment opportunities for young people
  2    Better employment opportunities for women
  3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
  4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
  5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
  6    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
  7    A growing middle class
  8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
  9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 10    Consistent economic growth
 11    More reliable social safety net
 12    Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13    Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14    Better quality public services
 15    Other (please specify):_____________________________________




                                                                  157
The World Bank                                             Togo                                                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Togo?
          1             2         3        4           5            6          7        8           9               10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                         Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Togo.
          1             2     3       4        5   6       7        8          9              10                    

 Not effective at all                                                                       Very effective      Don't know



 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Togo solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2     3       4        5   6       7        8          9            10                      
                                                                                    To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                            Don't know
                                                                                                 degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in Togo, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources
 (financial and knowledge services) in Togo? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Agriculture                                             10       Trade and competitiveness
  2    Energy and extractives                                  11       Macroeconomics and fiscal management
  3    Finance and markets                                     12       Poverty
  4    Health, nutrition, and population                       13       Social protection and labor
  5    Transport and ICT                                       14       Urban, rural, and social development
  6    Water                                                   15       Climate change
  7    Education                                               16       Gender
  8    Environment and natural resources
                                                               17       Jobs
  9    Governance




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                           158
The World Bank                                             Togo                                                 Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Togo?
                                                                      Greatest Value           Second Greatest Value
                                                             (Choose only ONE)                 (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                            
 2     Making data available                                                                             
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                  
 4     Providing financial resources                                                                     
       Supporting capacity development (state and semi-
 5                                                                                                       
       state institutions)
 6     Providing technical assistance                                                                    
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                        
 8     Donor coordination                                                                                
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (e.g., South-South
 9                                                                                                       
       knowledge sharing)
 10    Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)                                                      
 11    Other (please specify): ________________________                                                  


 How effectively do the World Bank Group’s activities below support Togo’s efforts to achieve
 development results?
                                                              Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                              at all                                       effective   know
  B6    Convening/facilitating                                    1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  B7    Making data available                                     1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  B8    Policy advice, studies, analyses                          1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  B9    Providing financial resources                             1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 B10    Providing technical assistance                            1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 B11    Mobilizing third party financial resources                1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 B12    Donor coordination                                        1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 B13                                                              1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        knowledge sharing)
 B14    Strategy formulation (e.g., PRSP assistance)              1    2      3    4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                           159
The World Bank                                                Togo                                                 Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Togo. To which
 degree would Togo benefit, if capacity building were to support...?
                                                                     To no                                 To a very
                                                                                                                          Don't
                                                                     degree                               significant
                                                                                                                          know
                                                                     at all                                  degree
        Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
 B15    media) to help them more effectively engage and              1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        participate in development efforts
        The public sector, related to implementation of
 B16                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        specific development projects on the ground
        The public sector, related to changing institutions
 B17                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        (organizations or sociopolitical conditions)
        The private sector, related to institutional and policy
 B18                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        change
        The legislative branch, to help them more effectively
 B19                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        debate and consider development programs


 How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
 each of the following areas in Togo? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed
 below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                  Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                  at all                                      effective   know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B20                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B21                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B22                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        achieve development goals)


 When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Togo to help ensure better development
 results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
 please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                  Not important                               Very        Don't
                                                                  at all                                  important       know
        Project implementation (or other organizational
 B23                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        strengthening)
        Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B24                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        into development)
        Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B25                                                                 1    2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
        achieve development goals)




                                                              160
The World Bank                                                Togo                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B26. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO) -- Kindly read to the end before making
 your choices
 1    Staff too inaccessible
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Togo
 4    Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not aligned with country priorities
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 9    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 10   Too influenced by developed countries
 11   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 12   World Bank Group’s processes too slow
 13   Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 14   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 15   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 16   Not client focused
 17   Its advice and strategies do not lend themselves to practical problem solving
 18   Not focused enough on issues that are unique to post-conflict countries
 19   Inadequate number of World Bank Group staff members located in the country
 20   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 21   Don’t know


 B27. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Togo? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Capacity development (state and semi-state institutions)
  2    Policy based lending/budget support to the Government
  3    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
  4    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
  5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
  6    Trust Fund management
  7    Co-financing arrangements (i.e., with other donors)
  8    Sector-wide approaches
  9    Emergency Recovery lending
 10    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 11    Don’t know




                                                               161
The World Bank                                               Togo                                           Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B28. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which
 TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 2     Donor community
 3     Media
 4     NGOs
 5     Local Government
 6     Private sector
 7     Parliament
 8     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 9     Beneficiaries
 10    Foundations
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    UN and regional peace keeping forces
 13    Emerging donors
 14    UN agencies
 15    Regional organizations (e.g., WAEMU, ECOWAS, African Union)
 16    Other (please specify): __________________________
 17    Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Togo?
                                                                Strongly                                Strongly    Don't
                                                                disagree                                   agree    know
        Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B29                                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10       
        relevant role in development in Togo
        The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B30                                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10       
        consider the development priorities for Togo
        The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B31                                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10       
        strategies that are realistic for Togo
        The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B32                                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10       
        stakeholders in Togo with respect




                                                             162
The World Bank                                                     Togo                                             Country Survey 2013



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Togo, in terms of each of
 the following?
                                                                      To no                                    To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't
                                                                      degree at                               significant
                                                                                                                            know
                                                                      all                                        degree
 B33     Responsiveness                                                   1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the institution’s products and
 B34                                                                      1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B35                                                                      1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         circumstances)
 B36     Being inclusive                                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       

 B37     Openness (sharing data and other information)                    1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       

 B38     Staff accessibility                                              1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       

 B39     Straightforwardness and honesty                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B40     Group who are making decisions important to my                   1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         work
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B41                                                                      1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B42     Collaboration with the Government                                1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
 B43     Collaboration with other donors                                  1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B44                                                                      1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       
         the ground
 B45     Being a long-term partner                                        1   2     3   4   5   6   7     8   9     10       


 B46. To be a more effective development partner in Togo, do you believe that the World Bank Group
 should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                        Less local presence       Don't know
                                           presence is adequate

 B47. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which THREE of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 3     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5     Poor donor coordination
 6     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 7     The Government works inefficiently
 8     Political pressures and obstacles
 9     Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 10    Ongoing conflict and instability
 11    Inadequate funding
 12    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                   163
The World Bank                                      Togo                                        Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Togo?
                                                       Not important                           Very    Don't
                                                       at all                              important   know

  1    Agriculture                                         1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  2    Energy and extractives                              1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  3    Finance and markets                                 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  4    Health, nutrition, and population                   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  5    Transport and ICT                                   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  6    Water                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  7    Education                                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  8    Environment and natural resources                   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
  9    Governance                                          1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 10    Trade and competitiveness                           1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 11    Macroeconomics and fiscal management                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 12    Poverty                                             1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 13    Social protection and labor                         1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 14    Urban, rural, and social development                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 15    Climate change                                      1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 16    Gender                                              1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      
 17    Jobs                                                1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9    10      




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                    164
The World Bank                                                   Togo                                                Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Togo? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the
 sectors listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                    Not effective                                   Very    Don't
                                                                    at all                                      effective   know

  1    Education                                                        1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  2    Health                                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  3    Agricultural development                                         1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  4    Infrastructure (roads, water & sanitation, electricity)          1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  5    Community development                                            1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  6    Social protection                                                1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  7    Trade                                                            1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  8    Transport                                                        1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
  9    Telecommunications                                               1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 10    Private sector development and business climate                  1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 11    Financial sector (banks, microfinance, etc.)                     1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       Disaster management and climate change
 12                                                                     1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       (mitigation, adaptation)
 13    Energy                                                           1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 14    Extractive industries                                            1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       Public sector governance/reform (i.e., government
 15    effectiveness, public financial management, public               1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform, anti-corruption)
 16    Job creation/employment                                          1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      
 17    Global/regional integration                                      1   2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9        10      




                                                                 165
The World Bank                                                          Togo                                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Togo?
 (Select only ONE response)
  1    At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
  2    In the country
  3    Don’t know



 C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in Togo?
         1              2       3       4       5       6           7          8       9                   10                     
 To no degree at                                                                                            To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't know
 all                                                                                               significant degree


 C5. To what extent does the World Bank Group help to build/strengthen existing country systems
 (e.g., procurement, financial management, etc.) in Togo?
         1              2       3       4       5       6           7          8       9                   10                     
 To no degree at                                                                                            To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't know
 all                                                                                               significant degree



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Togo?
                                                                Strongly                                                  Strongly      Don't
                                                                disagree                                                     agree      know
       The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
       (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
 C6                                                             1        2         3   4       5       6    7        8    9     10        
       Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of
       Togo
       The World Bank Group meets Togo’s needs
 C7    for knowledge services (e.g., research,                  1        2         3   4       5       6    7        8    9     10        
       analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C8. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold the
 institution accountable for achieving results in Togo?
             1              2       3       4       5       6           7          8       9                    10                   
                                                                                                              To a very
 To no degree at all                                                                                                           Don't know
                                                                                                     significant degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                        166
The World Bank                                                        Togo                                                  Country Survey 2013



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
 you do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never


 In Togo, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                             To no                                                   To a very
                                                                                                                                  Don't
                                                             degree at                                              significant
                                                                                                                                  know
                                                             all                                                       degree
  D2     Are timely                                           1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D3                                                          1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Togo's development
  D4                                                          1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         priorities
  D5     Lead to practical solutions                          1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D6                                                          1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D7                                                          1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         good practices
  D8     Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                 1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     

  D9     Are adequately disseminated                          1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
 D10     Are translated enough into local language            1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         Are adaptable to Togo’s specific
 D11     development challenges and country                   1          2       3       4   5     6        7   8    9      10     
         circumstances


 D12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group’s knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3    4     5       6            7          8       9                 10                    
 Not significant at all                                                                          Very significant        Don't know



 D13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities?
          1               2       3    4         5       6        7          8       9              10                       
 Very low                                                                                    Very high technical
                                                                                                                         Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                       quality




                                                                      167
The World Bank                                               Togo                                   Country Survey 2013



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/
 advisory work contribute to solving Togo’s development challenges?
                                                        To no                                To a very
                                                                                                           Don't
                                                        degree at                           significant
                                                                                                           know
                                                        all                                    degree
       Conceptualization (understanding and framing
 E1                                                      1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       the problem)
 E2    Design (appraising and planning the solutions)    1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       Implementation (Executing, carrying out,
 E3    monitoring and making appropriate                 1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
       adjustments)
 E4    Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)     1      2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      



 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                        Strongly                                Strongly   Don't
                                                        disagree                                   agree   know
        The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E5                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        promptly
        The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E6    and evaluates the projects and programs it      1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E7                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        reviews are done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
  E8                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
  E9                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        lending are reasonable
        The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
 E10                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        in Togo
        Working with the World Bank Group
 E11                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        increases Togo’s institutional capacity
        The World Bank Group ensures consistency
 E12                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        and continuity through staff changes
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
 E13                                                    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
        of them
        The World Bank Group provides effective
 E14    implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1      2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9       10      
        projects)




                                                             168
The World Bank                                               Togo                                     Country Survey 2013



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 E15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Togo?
 (Select only one response)
 1    The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Togo
 2    The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Togo
 3    The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
 4    Don’t know
 5    Prefer not to answer


 E16. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group is adequately staffed in Togo?
         1          2        3    4       5      6       7          8   9           10                  
 To no degree at                                                            To a very significant
                                                                                                    Don't know
 all                                                                                     degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             169
The World Bank                                               Togo                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN TOGO
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Togo? (Choose no more than TWO) -- Kindly read to the end before making your
 choices
 1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Togo’s economy
 2    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
 3    Offer more innovative financial products
 4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
 5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
 6    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Togo’s specific challenges
 7    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 8    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 9    Increase the level of capacity development in the country
 10   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 11   Work faster
 12   Increase the level of World Bank Group staffing in Togo’s office
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Togo, and
 taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
 World Bank Group should offer more of in Togo? (Select only ONE response)
  1    Financial services
  2    Knowledge products
  3    Convening services
  4    None of the above
  5    The combination is appropriate for Togo
  6    Don’t know




                                                              170
The World Bank                                         Togo                                        Country Survey 2013



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN TOGO

 F3. Please answer the following questions:
                                                  A. Which THREE areas below would       B. Which THREE areas
 Choose no more than THREE for each               benefit most from the World Bank     below would benefit most
 column                                           Group playing a leading role among     from other donors in
                                                    international partners in Togo?             Togo?
 1    Building social safety nets                                                               
 2    Strengthening public financial management                                                 
 3    Reducing violence                                                                         
 4    Increasing access to justice systems                                                      
 5    Strengthening security mechanisms                                                         
      Strengthening conflict resolution
 6                                                                                              
      mechanisms
 7    Increasing access to basic services                                                       
 8    Building capacity of state institutions                                                   
 9    Generating jobs                                                                           
 10   Improving livelihoods                                                                     
 11   Increasing cohesion                                                                       
      Stimulating dialogue to promote peace and
 12                                                                                             
      stability




                                                       171
The World Bank                                                  Togo                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Togo?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Blogs
 2    Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Emails
 5    World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials
 7    Mobile phones
 8    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 9    World Bank Group’s website
 10   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 G3                                                                                                    Yes        No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G4                                                                                                    Yes        No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                       Yes        No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                             Yes        No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                          Yes        No




                                                                172
The World Bank                                               Togo                                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use? (Select only ONE response)
 1     The World Bank Group’s country website (www.banquemondiale.org/togo or www.worldbank.org/togo)
 2     The World Bank Group’s main website (www.worldbank.org)


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                    Strongly                           Strongly   Don't
                                                                    disagree                              agree   know
         I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than
 G9                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         I did a few years ago
         I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G10     navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank       1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         Group website)
         I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 G11     websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         Bank Group website)
         The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G12     Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) are valuable sources   1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         of information about the institution
         When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G13     know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         them, etc.)
         The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G14                                                                1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             173
The World Bank                                              Togo                                         Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?         (Select only ONE response)
 Kindly read to the end before making your choices
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 12   Civil Society Organization, NGO, Association, Community Based Organization
 13   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 14   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 15   Trade Union
 16   Faith-Based Group
 17   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 18   Youth organizations
 19   Judiciary Branch
 20   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
                                                            Natural resource management / environmental
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security   11
                                                            sustainability
                                                            Private sector development / foreign direct
 2    Climate change / disaster management             12
                                                            investment
                                                            Public sector governance / public financial
 3    Education                                        13
                                                            management / anti-corruption
 4    Energy                                           14   Social protection
 5    Financial markets / banking                      15   Transport
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity          16   Urban development
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                     17   Water and sanitation
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology        18   Generalist
 9    Job creation/employment
                                                       19   Other (please specify): _________________________
 10   Law and justice / regulatory framework




                                                            174
The World Bank                                                Togo                          Country Survey 2013



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Togo? (Select
 all that apply)
 1    The World Bank (IBRD/IDA) 
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    None


 H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Togo?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H6. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Lomé (capital city)
 2    Outside Lomé




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               175
