                              96139




        Turkey
  The World Bank Group
Country Opinion Survey FY14

      Report of Findings
         June 2014
The World Bank Group                        Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



Acknowledgements
The Turkey Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of the
World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group (PORG)
team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica Cameron,
Svetlana Markova and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data support. The
report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP).
PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Turkey country team and the local
fielding agency OLGU ARASTIRMA. In particular, PORG is grateful to Ina-Marlene
Ruthenberg (Country Program Coordinator) and Tunya Celasin (Senior External Affairs Officer)
for their ongoing support throughout the Country Opinion Survey process.




                                              1
The World Bank Group                                   Turkey                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5

         IV. General Issues Facing Turkey.....................................................11

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................18

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ......................................27

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................34

       VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................38

         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey .................45

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................51

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................57




                                                          2
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
       Assist the World Bank Group in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
        Turkey perceive the World Bank Group;
       Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Turkey regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Turkey;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank Group in Turkey;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and results,
               project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
               communication and information sharing in Turkey; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank Group’s future role in Turkey.
       Use data to help inform Turkey country team’s strategy.


II. Methodology
In February–April 2014, 742 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Turkey were invited to
provide their opinions on the World Bank Group’s assistance to the country by participating in a
country survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from the office of the President; the office
of the Prime Minister; the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of
ministries, ministerial departments, or implementation agencies; consultants/contractors working
on World Bank Group-supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs)
overseeing implementation of a project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies;
multilateral agencies; private sector organizations; private foundations; the financial
sector/private banks; NGOs; community-based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent
government institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia/research institutes/think
tanks; and the judiciary branch. A total of 279 stakeholders participated in the survey (38%
response rate).
Respondents either completed questionnaires with a representative from the fielding agency or
they received the questionnaire via courier or email and returned it accordingly. Respondents
were asked about: general issues facing Turkey; their overall attitudes toward the World Bank
Group (WBG); the WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities;
working with the WBG; the WBG’s future role in Turkey; and the WBG’s communication and
information sharing in Turkey. In addition, every country that engages in the Country Survey
must include specific indicator questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual
Corporate Scorecard. These questions are identified throughout the survey report.
A. General Issues Facing Turkey: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Turkey is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the top three most important
   development priorities in the country, which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty
   and generating economic growth in Turkey, and how “shared prosperity? would be best
   achieved in Turkey.




                                                3
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (WBG): Respondents were asked to rate
   their familiarity with the WBG, the WBG’s effectiveness in Turkey, WBG staff preparedness
   to help Turkey solve its development challenges, their agreement with various statements
   regarding the WBG’s work, and the extent to which the WBG is an effective development
   partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the WBG’s greatest values and weaknesses,
   the most effective instruments in helping reduce poverty in Turkey, with which stakeholder
   groups the WBG should collaborate more, and in which sectoral areas the WBG should focus
   most of its resources (financial and knowledge services).
C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to
   which the WBG’s work helps achieve development results in Turkey, the extent to which the
   WBG meets Turkey’s needs for knowledge services and financial instruments, the
   importance of the WBG being involved in twenty-seven areas of development and the
   WBG’s level of effectiveness across twenty-three development areas.
D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult WBG’s knowledge work and activities and to rate the
   effectiveness and quality of the WBG’s knowledge, including how significant of a
   contribution it makes to development results and its technical quality.
E. Working with the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their level of
   agreement with a series of statements regarding working with the WBG, such as the WBG’s
   “Safeguard Policy? requirements being reasonable.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey: Respondents were asked to indicate
   what the WBG should do to make itself of greater value in Turkey and which services the
   WBG should offer more of in the country.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, and their usage and evaluation of
   the WBG’s websites and social media channels. Respondents were also asked about their
   awareness of the WBG’s Access to Information policy, past information requests from the
   WBG, and their level of agreement that they use more data from the WBG as a result of the
   WBG’s Open Data policy.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they professionally collaborate with the WBG, their exposure to the
   WBG in Turkey, which WBG agencies they work with, and their geographic location.

When possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country survey were
compared to responses from 236 respondents (32% response rate) who completed the survey in
FY ’11, the 169 respondents (40% response rate) who completed the country survey in FY ’05,
and the 208 respondents (66% response rate) who completed the country survey in FY ’02.
Notations and/or charts are included when these comparisons were possible.




                                               4
The World Bank Group                        Turkey                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
       For further analyses, the few consultants working on WBG-supported projects were
        combined with respondents from PMUs; the few respondents from private foundations
        and were combined with those from NGOs; respondents from multilateral agencies were
        combined with those from bilateral agencies; and the few respondents from local
        government and independent government institutions were included in the “Other?
        category.




                                              5
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Key comparisons across respondents’ specializations can be found in the Appendix F (see
        page 123).




                                               6
The World Bank Group                            Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The majority of respondents were from Ankara. Only significant geographic location
        differences in ratings of indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this report.
        All geographic locations comparisons can be found in the Appendix C (see page 92).




                                                  7
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the World Bank Group

       Differences in responding, based on collaboration with the World Bank Group in Turkey,
        can be found in the Appendix D (see page 106).




                                               8
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Exposure to the World Bank Group

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on exposure to the World Bank
        Group in Turkey, can be found in the Appendix G (see page 137). Please note that where
        these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall views of the
        WBG, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                                9
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of familiarity
        with the WBG compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (7.3).
       Employees of ministries, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs, and
        respondents from private sector organizations had the highest levels of familiarity with
        the World Bank Group in Turkey whereas respondents from NGOs/private foundations,
        academia, and the media had significantly lower levels of familiarity.
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group were significantly,
        strongly correlated with their perceptions of the World Bank Group’s overall
        effectiveness in Turkey, and significantly, moderately correlated with the World Bank
        Group’s ability to help achieve development results and agreement that the World Bank
        Group currently plays a relevant role in development in Turkey.




                                                10
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Turkey

Turkey Heading in the Right Direction

       A majority of employees of ministries and respondents from trade unions and a plurality
        of respondents from other organizations indicated that Turkey is headed in the right
        direction.
       A majority of respondents from the media and academia indicated that Turkey is headed
        in the wrong direction.
       A majority of respondents from private sector organizations indicated that they were not
        sure whether Turkey was headed in the right or wrong direction.
       Respondents from NGOs/private foundations were evenly split between Turkey being
        headed in the right direction and Turkey being headed in the wrong direction.
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and the financial sector/private banks
        were evenly split between Turkey being headed in the right direction and not being sure
        whether Turkey was headed in the right or wrong direction.
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs were split between Turkey being headed
        in the wrong direction and not being sure whether Turkey was headed in the right or
        wrong direction.




                                                11
The World Bank Group           Turkey          Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Development Priority




                                12
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Development Priority (continued)

       There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in what they considered the
        most important development priorities facing Turkey.
            o A majority of employees of ministries and respondents from private sector
              organizations, the financial sector/private banks, academia, and other
              organizations indicated that education quality was the most important
              development priority facing Turkey.
            o Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from NGOs/
              private foundations and the media were significantly more likely to indicate that
              law and justice was one of the most important development priorities facing
              Turkey compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from private sector organizations and the media were significantly
              more likely to indicate that anti-corruption was one of the most important
              development priorities facing Turkey compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from private sector organizations were significantly more likely to
              indicate that regulatory framework for private sector development was one of the
              most important development priorities facing Turkey compared to respondents
              from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from the financial sector/private banks were significantly more
              likely to indicate that competitiveness was one of the most important development
              priorities compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate that
              income inequality, economic growth, and foreign direct investment were the most
              important development priorities facing Turkey compared to respondents from
              other stakeholder groups.




                                                13
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that rural development and more job
        opportunities in the formal sector would contribute most to poverty reduction in Turkey.




                                               14
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth

       Respondents from NGOs/private foundations were significantly more likely to indicate
        that foreign direct investment would contribute most to generating economic growth in
        Turkey compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that trade and exports would contribute most to generating economic growth in Turkey
        whereas respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG were significantly more
        likely to indicate that education quality would contribute most.




                                               15
The World Bank Group            Turkey         Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity?




                                 16
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Achieving “Shared Prosperity? (continued)

       There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in what they considered the
        best way to achieve “shared prosperity? in Turkey.
            o Employees of ministries and respondents from academia were significantly more
              likely to indicate that better employment opportunities for young people would
              achieve “shared prosperity? compared to respondents from other stakeholder
              groups.
            o Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and the media were significantly
              more likely to indicate that better employment opportunities for women would
              achieve “shared prosperity? compared to respondents from other stakeholder
              groups.
            o Respondents from private sector organizations were significantly more likely to
              indicate that better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas would achieve
              “shared prosperity? compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate that a
              more reliable social safety net would achieve “shared prosperity? compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.


       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not collaborate with the
        WBG both indicated that the best ways to achieve “shared prosperity? in Turkey were
        education and training that better ensure job opportunity and consistent economic growth.
        However, respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to
        indicate a more reliable social safety net and greater equity of fiscal policy would help
        achieve “shared prosperity? whereas respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG
        were significantly more likely to indicate better employment opportunities for young
        people and better entrepreneurial opportunities would help achieve “shared prosperity?
        in Turkey.




                                                17
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.


Focusing World Bank Group Resources




                                               18
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Focusing World Bank Group Resources (continued)

       There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in what they considered the
        areas that the WBG should focus its resources in Turkey.
            o A majority of employees of ministries and respondents from private sector
              organizations, academia, and other organizations indicated that the WBG should
              focus its resources on education quality in Turkey.
            o Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs were significantly more likely to
              indicate that the WBG should focus its resources on income inequality in Turkey
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more likely to
              indicate that the WBG should focus its resources on competitiveness in Turkey
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and trade unions were
              significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should focus its resources on
              poverty reduction compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from the financial sector/private banks, NGOs/private foundations,
              and trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should
              focus its resources on rural and regional development in Turkey compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from private sector organizations were significantly more likely to
              indicate that the WBG should focus its resources on energy and agricultural
              development compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from the media, trade unions, academia, and other organizations
              were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should focus on job
              creation/employment compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                               19
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (6.4).
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and private sector organizations gave
        the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in Turkey whereas respondents from the
        media gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from private sector organizations
        and NGOs/private foundations gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the
        WBG’s work achieves development results in Turkey whereas respondents from trade
        unions, the media, academia, and other organizations gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Ankara gave significantly higher ratings for the extent to
        which the WBG’s work achieves development results in Turkey compared to respondents
        from Ankara. Respondents across geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings
        for the WBG’s effectiveness in Turkey.
       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG gave statistically similar ratings for the
        extent to which the WBG’s work achieves development results in Turkey and for the
        WBG’s effectiveness in Turkey as respondents who indicated that they did not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                               20
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies gave the highest ratings for the extent to
        which the WBG’s staff is well prepared to help Turkey solve its most complicated
        development challenges whereas consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and
        respondents from trade unions had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Ankara gave significantly higher ratings for the extent to
        which the WBG’s staff is well prepared to help Turkey solve its most complicated
        development challenges compared to respondents from Ankara.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG and those who do not collaborate gave
        statistically similar ratings for the extent to which the World Bank Group’s staff is well
        prepared to help Turkey solve its most complicated development challenges.




                                                 21
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions

       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and private sector organizations gave
        the highest ratings across all of the country survey indicator questions whereas
        respondents from trade unions, the media, and other organizations gave significantly
        lower ratings. Responses for individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be
        found in the Appendix H (see page 138).




                                               22
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the WBG’s greatest value to
        Turkey was its knowledge, advice, and technical assistance (36%), supporting the
        development of project implementation capacity (28%), and financial resources (25%).
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were more likely to indicate that policy
        advice/studies/analyses and financial resources were the WBG’s greatest values whereas
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG were more likely to indicate that
        capacity development and technical assistance were the WBG’s greatest values.




                                               23
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
WBG Activities: Effectiveness
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and private sector organizations gave
        the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s policy advice/studies/analyses
        whereas consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and academia gave the highest
        ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s financial resources whereas respondents from
        trade unions gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from NGOs/private foundations gave the highest ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s mobilizing third party financial resources whereas
        respondents from the financial sector/private banks, trade unions, and other organizations
        gave significantly lower ratings.
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs gave the highest ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s donor coordination whereas respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies, trade unions, and other organizations gave significantly
        lower ratings.
       Respondents from NGOs/private foundations gave the highest ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s linkage to non-Bank expertise whereas respondents from the
        financial sector/private banks and trade unions gave significantly lower ratings.




                                                 24
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       Respondents in the FY ’11 country survey indicated that the WBG’s greatest weakness in
        its work in Turkey was its processes being too slow and complex (47%) and not having
        enough interaction with stakeholders outside of government (30%).




                                              25
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness (continued)

       There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in what they considered the
        WBG’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Turkey.
            o Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from private
              sector organizations, the financial sector/private banks, and trade unions were
              significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is being
              too slow and bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from private sector organizations were significantly more likely to
              indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is not enough public disclosure of its
              work compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs were significantly more likely to
              indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is imposing technocratic solutions
              without regard to political realities compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies were significantly more likely to
              indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is being too influenced by developed
              countries compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            o Respondents from trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate that the
              WBG’s greatest weakness is its staff being too inaccessible compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.


       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG’s greatest weakness is being too slow and bureaucratic in its operational
        policies and procedures and imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
        realities compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were
        significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is not exploring
        alternative policy options.




                                                26
The World Bank Group           Turkey       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                27
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among nineteen of these
        twenty-seven areas of development. Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and
        the media tended to give the highest importance ratings across these areas whereas
        respondents from trade unions and other organizations tended to give significantly lower
        importance ratings. Ratings across all areas by stakeholder groups can be found in the
        Appendix B (see page 73). Those areas with significant stakeholder group differences
        were:
             “Anti-corruption?;
             “Transport?;
             “Competitiveness?;
             “Law and justice?;
             “Environmental sustainability?;
             “Communicable/non-communicable diseases?;
             “Poverty reduction?;
             “Gender equity?;
             “Water and sanitation?;
             “Economic growth?;
             “Energy?;
             “Disaster management?;
             “Public sector governance/reform?;
             “Financial markets and savings?;
             “Income inequality?;
             “Health?;
             “Social protection?;
             “Climate change?; and
             “Agricultural development?.


       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher importance ratings
        for “Transport?, “Water and sanitation?, and “Climate change? compared to respondents
        who do not collaborate with the WBG. Ratings across all areas by collaboration can be
        found in the Appendix D (see page 106).




                                                28
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher importance ratings
        across all areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’11 country survey. It
        should be noted; however, that in the FY ’11 survey, these questions were asked with a
        slightly different instruction (“When thinking about some important challenges that
        Turkey might face in the future, on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning not useful at all, 10
        meaning very useful, how useful will it be for the World Bank to work with Turkey
        in…?).




                                                29
The World Bank Group              Turkey           Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas




                                   30
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Please note the complete breakdown of respondents’ effectiveness ratings for the WBG’s
        work in these development areas can be found in the Appendix. In addition to the
        aggregate mean ratings for each area, respondents who indicated that they “Don’t Know?
        are reported in Appendix A (see page 58), suggesting that primarily informed
        stakeholders responded to these questions. A complete breakdown by stakeholder groups
        can be found in Appendix B (see page 73), by geographic locations in Appendix C (see
        page 92), by WBG-collaborators in Appendix D (see page 106), and by respondents’
        specializations/sectors in Appendix E (see page 123).

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among twelve of these
        twenty-three areas of development. For the most part, respondents from private sector
        organizations and NGOs/private foundations tended to give the highest ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness across these areas whereas respondents from trade unions and
        academia tended to give significantly lower effectiveness ratings. Those areas with
        significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Transport?;
             “Environmental sustainability?;
             “Poverty reduction?;
             “Gender equity?;
             “Water and sanitation?;
             “Energy?;
             “Job creation/employment?;
             “Income inequality?;
             “Health?;
             “Rural and regional development?;
             “Social protection?; and
             “Climate change?.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness at “Gender equity?, “Water and sanitation?, and “Climate change?
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate. In contrast, respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness
        at:
             “Foreign direct investment?;
             “Economic growth?;
             “Public sector governance/reform?;
             “Job creation/employment?;
             “Income inequality?; and
             “Rural and regional development?.



                                                31
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness across nearly all areas that could be compared to respondents from
        the FY ’11 country survey. Statistically significant differences are noted in the chart.




                                                32
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Turkey, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the twenty-three specific
areas of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results increase.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Turkey. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
             The WBG’s effectiveness at foreign direct investment; and
             The WBG’s effectiveness at health.

       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Turkey, suggesting that ratings of
        effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
        help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
        analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at competitiveness;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at environmental sustainability;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at transport; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at regulatory framework for private sector
                 development.




                                                 33
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Turkey

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the WBG currently plays a relevant role in development in Turkey and that the WBG
        is aligned with their development priorities compared to respondents from the FY ’11
        country survey (5.1 and 5.5, respectively).
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and private sector had the highest levels
        of agreement that the WBG currently plays a relevant role in development in Turkey and
        that the WBG is aligned with their development priorities whereas respondents from the
        media and trade unions had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies and private sector also had the highest levels of agreement
        that the WBG supports programs and strategies that are realistic for Turkey whereas
        respondents from trade unions had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents from Outside Ankara had significantly higher levels of agreement that the
        WBG currently plays a relevant role in development in Turkey compared to respondents
        from Ankara.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the WBG currently plays a relevant role in development in Turkey, that the WBG is
        aligned with their development priorities, and that the WBG supports programs and
        strategies that are realistic for Turkey compared to respondents who do not collaborate
        with the WBG.




                                                 34
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their levels of agreement that the
        WBG’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements and conditions on its lending are reasonable,
        that the WBG takes decisions quickly, that working with the WBG increases institutional
        capacity, that the WBG ensures consistency and continuity through staff changes, and
        that, where country systems are adequate, the WBG makes appropriate use of them. For
        the most part, respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies tended to have the highest
        levels of agreement across these areas whereas consultants on WBG-supported
        projects/PMUs and respondents from trade unions and academia tended to have
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the WBG effectively monitors and evaluates the projects it supports compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who had significantly higher levels of
        agreement that the WBG takes decisions quickly.




                                                35
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner
       There were significant stakeholder group differences in their ratings of the WBG’s
        responsiveness, flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances), being inclusive,
        staff accessibility, straightforwardness and honesty, ease of access to the WBG people
        making decisions important to their work, and collaboration with other donors. For the
        most part, consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from private
        sector organizations tended to have the highest ratings across these areas whereas and
        respondents from trade unions tended to have significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from Outside Ankara gave significantly higher ratings for the WBG’s staff
        accessibility and being a long-term partner compared to respondents from Ankara.




                                                36
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       Respondents who indicated that they collaborated with the World Bank Group gave
        higher ratings across most of these aspects of the WBG being an effective development
        partner compared to respondents who indicated that they did not collaborate. Those
        differences that reached statistical significance are noted in the chart.




                                               37
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities

       Employees of ministries and respondents from private sector organizations and trade
        unions indicated the most frequent usage of WBG knowledge work and activities
        whereas consultants on WBG-supported projects and respondents from other
        organizations indicated significantly less frequent usage.




                                               38
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Turkey’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from private sector organizations had the highest levels of agreement that
        the World Bank Group meets Turkey’s needs for knowledge services whereas consultants
        on WBG-supported projects/PMUs had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents across geographic locations, as well as those who collaborate with the WBG
        and those who do not, had statistically similar levels of agreement that the World Bank
        Group meets Turkey’s needs for knowledge services.




                                               39
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but two of
        these aspects of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities (“Are timely? and “Are
        accessible? were the only two non-significant aspects). For the most part, respondents
        from private sector organizations and bilateral/multilateral agencies tended to give the
        highest ratings across these areas whereas respondents from academia and other
        organizations tended to give significantly lower effectiveness ratings.




                                                 40
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from NGOs/private foundations and private sector organizations had the
        highest ratings regarding the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge
        work and activities whereas respondents from trade unions and other organizations had
        significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents across geographic locations, as well as those who collaborate with the WBG
        and those who do not, had statistically similar ratings regarding the significance of the
        contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work.




                                               41
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations, as well as those who
        collaborate with the WBG and those who do not, had statistically similar ratings
        regarding the technical quality of the WBG’s knowledge work.




                                               42
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)
Most Effective Instruments
   There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in what they considered the most
    effective WBG instruments in reducing poverty in Turkey.
     o Consultants on WBG projects/PMUs, employees of ministries, and respondents from
         NGOs/private foundations and media were significantly more likely to indicate the
         WBG’s investment lending compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
     o Respondents from private sector were significantly more likely to indicate the WBG’s
         technical assistance compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
     o Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, private sector, NGOs/private
         foundations, academia, and other organizations were significantly more likely to say the
         WBG’s capacity development compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
     o Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and trade unions were significantly
         more likely to indicate that the WBG’s policy based lending/budget support to the
         Government was most effective compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
     o Respondents from trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate the WBG’s
         Trust Fund management compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
   Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that
    the WBG’s policy based lending/budget support and Trust Fund management were most
    effective compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               43
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Turkey’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from private sector organizations and bilateral/multilateral agencies had the
        highest levels of agreement that the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the
        needs of Turkey whereas consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents
        from trade unions had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents across all geographic locations, as well as those who collaborate with the
        WBG and those who do not, had statistically similar levels of agreement that the World
        Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Turkey.




                                                44
The World Bank Group               Turkey      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value




                                    45
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey
(continued)

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value (continued)
       There were some interesting stakeholder group differences in what they indicated the
        WBG should do to make itself of greater value in Turkey.
        o Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs were significantly more likely to
          indicate that the WBG should improve the competitiveness of its financing compared
          to markets and improve the quality of its experts as related to Turkey’s specific
          challenges compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
        o Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies and NGOs/private foundations were
          significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should reach out more to groups
          outside of Government compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
        o Respondents from private sector organizations were significantly more likely to
          indicate that the WBG should increase the level of capacity development in Turkey
          compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
        o Respondents from private sector organizations, the financial sector/private banks, and
          trade unions were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should reduce
          the complexity of obtaining WBG financing compared to respondents from other
          stakeholder groups.
        o Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and trade unions were
          significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should offer more innovative
          financial products compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
        o Respondents from academia and other organizations were significantly more likely to
          indicate that the WBG should provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/
          figures on Turkey’s economy compared to respondents from other stakeholder
          groups.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG should improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets,
        improve the quality of its experts as related to Turkey’s specific challenges, and reduce
        the complexity of obtaining WBG financing whereas respondents who do not collaborate
        with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should provide
        more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Turkey’s economy and offer more
        innovative knowledge services




                                                46
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey (continued)

Capacity Building

       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs gave the highest ratings for the extent to
        which Turkey would benefit from WBG capacity building support to groups outside of
        government whereas respondents from other organizations gave significantly lower
        ratings.
       Respondents from academia gave the highest ratings for the extent to which Turkey
        would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the public sector, related to
        implementation of specific development projects, whereas respondents from private
        sector organizations gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from academia and private sector organizations gave the highest ratings for
        the extent to which Turkey would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the
        public sector, related to changing institutions, whereas employees of ministries gave
        significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from academia gave the highest ratings for the extent to which Turkey
        would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the private sector whereas
        consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs gave significantly lower ratings.




                                               47
The World Bank Group          Turkey             Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey (continued)

Local Presence in Turkey




                               48
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey (continued)

Focusing Services

       Respondents from the financial sector/private banks and the media were significantly
        more likely to indicate that the WBG should offer more financial services in Turkey
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents from academia were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG
        should offer more knowledge products compared to respondents from other stakeholder
        groups.
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from private sector
        organizations were significantly more likely to indicate that the combination of services
        is appropriate compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                49
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey (continued)

Collaborating with Stakeholders in Turkey
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs indicated that the WBG should
        collaborate more with local government and CBOs. Respondents from private sector
        organizations and academia indicated that the WBG should collaborate more with
        academia. Respondents from the media indicated that the WBG should collaborate more
        with the media. Respondents from NGOs/private foundations indicated that the WBG
        should collaborate more with NGOs. Respondents from the financial sector/private
        banks and the media indicate that the WBG should collaborate more with the private
        sector. Respondents from trade unions indicated that the WBG should collaborate more
        with the Parliament. Respondents from private sector organizations indicated that the
        WBG should collaborate more with beneficiaries.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG should collaborate more with the local government compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                              50
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness

Information Sources

       Although the majority of respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they
        utilized the Internet for their economic and social development information, consultants
        on WBG-supported projects/PMUs were more likely to utilize local newspapers and
        respondents from the media were more likely to utilize local newspapers and local
        television. In addition, respondents from private sector organizations, NGOs/private
        foundations, and the financial sector/private banks were significantly more likely to
        utilize local newspapers than respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they utilized international newspapers for their economic and social development
        information compared to those who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were
        significantly more likely to utilize the Internet.




                                                51
The World Bank Group                         Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)
Access to Information
       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, trade unions, and academia were
        significantly more likely to be aware of the WBG’s access to information policy
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




       Respondents from bilateral/multilateral agencies, trade unions, and the media were
        significantly more likely to have requested information from the WBG in the past year
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        requested information compared to respondents who do not collaborate.




                                               52
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Respondents from NGOs/private foundations had the highest levels of agreement that
        they utilize the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago whereas
        respondents from private sector organizations and the financial sector/private banks had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they utilize the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




Internet Access

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar rates of Internet access
        as respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (99%).
       Two respondents from the media indicated that they did not have access to the Internet,
        significantly less Internet access than any other stakeholder group.




                                                 53
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar rates of usage for the
        WBG’s website as respondents from the FY ’11 country survey (83%).
       The majority of respondents across most stakeholder groups indicated that they had used
        the WBG’s website, except for respondents from other organizations who indicated
        significantly lower rates of usage than respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                 54
The World Bank Group                          Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website/Social Media Evaluation
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that they find the WBG’s website easy to navigate compared to respondents from the
        FY ’11 country survey (6.9).
       Respondents from NGOs/private foundations had the highest levels of agreement that
        they find the WBG’s website easy to navigate whereas respondents from the financial
        sector/private banks had significantly lower levels of agreement. Consultants on WBG-
        supported projects/PMUs had the highest levels of agreement that they find the
        information on the WBG’s website useful whereas respondents from the financial
        sector/private banks, the media, trade unions, and other organizations had significantly
        lower levels of agreement. Respondents from NGOs/private foundations had the highest
        levels of agreement that the WBG’s social media channels are valuable information
        sources whereas respondents from academia had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they find the information on the WBG’s website useful and that the WBG’s social
        media channels are valuable information sources compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                               55
The World Bank Group                           Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it and that the
        WBG is responsive to their information requests compared to respondents from the
        FY ’11 country survey (6.6 and 7.1, respectively).
       Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from private sector
        organizations had the highest levels of agreement that when they need information from
        the WBG they know how to find it whereas respondents from bilateral/multilateral
        agencies, trade unions, and academia had significantly lower levels of agreement.
        Consultants on WBG-supported projects/PMUs and respondents from private sector
        organizations and NGOs/private foundations had the highest levels of agreement that the
        WBG is responsive to their information requests whereas respondents from
        bilateral/multilateral agencies and academia had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it and that the
        WBG is responsive to their information requests compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                56
The World Bank Group                                Turkey                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 58

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 73

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations............. 92

          D. Responses to All Questions among WBG Collaborators
             and Non-Collaborators ............................................................... 106

          E. Responses to Questions across Country Surveys ........................ 120

          F. Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’
             Specializations/Sectors ............................................................... 123

          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ....... 137

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 138

          I. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2014 Turkey Questionnaire ....................................................... 139


                                                  TURKEY




                                                      57
The World Bank Group                                 Turkey                           Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=278)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Turkey
                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Turkey is headed in...?                                    (N=265)
The right direction                                                                          40.8%
The wrong direction                                                                          30.9%
Not sure                                                                                     28.3%
2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Turkey.
   Please identify which of the following you consider the most important         Percentage of Respondents
   development priorities in Turkey. (Choose no more than THREE)                  (Responses Combined; N=275)
Education quality                                                                            55.3%
Law and justice                                                                              29.1%
Job creation/employment                                                                      26.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                              17.5%
Competitiveness                                                                              17.1%
Energy                                                                                       16.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                                              16.4%
Economic growth                                                                              16.4%
Income inequality                                                                            16.0%
Rural and regional development                                                               15.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                                 7.6%
Urban development and planning                                                               6.9%
Gender equity                                                                                6.2%
Financial markets and savings                                                                5.5%
Poverty reduction                                                                            5.5%
Agricultural development                                                                     5.5%
Trade and exports                                                                            5.5%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                                          5.5%
Social protection                                                                            5.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                                    4.7%
Health                                                                                       4.7%
Transport                                                                                    2.2%
Climate change                                                                               1.5%
Disaster management                                                                          0.7%
Migration                                                                                    0.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                         0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                       0.0%




                                                       58
The World Bank Group                                  Turkey                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Turkey?                        Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=274)
Job creation/employment                                                                  47.4%
Income inequality                                                                        44.9%
Economic growth                                                                          42.0%
Rural and regional development                                                           38.0%
Education quality                                                                        35.4%
Social protection                                                                        13.9%
Agricultural development                                                                 12.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                          11.3%
Migration                                                                                6.6%
Competitiveness                                                                          5.1%
Gender equity                                                                            4.4%
Law and justice                                                                          4.4%
Energy                                                                                   4.0%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                                      3.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          3.3%
Trade and exports                                                                        2.6%
Urban development and planning                                                           2.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                                2.2%
Health                                                                                   2.2%
Water and sanitation                                                                     0.7%
Financial markets and savings                                                            0.7%
Environmental sustainability                                                             0.4%
Disaster management                                                                      0.4%
Climate change                                                                           0.0%
Transport                                                                                0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                   0.0%




                                                       59
The World Bank Group                              Turkey                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth   Percentage of Respondents
   in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)                                     (Responses Combined; N=275)
Education quality                                                                       37.8%
Trade and exports                                                                       31.6%
Job creation/employment                                                                 28.7%
Energy                                                                                  28.4%
Competitiveness                                                                         27.6%
Rural and regional development                                                          25.5%
Financial markets and savings                                                           22.5%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                                     14.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                               10.9%
Agricultural development                                                                10.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                                         9.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                         8.7%
Law and justice                                                                         6.9%
Gender equity                                                                           5.5%
Income inequality                                                                       4.7%
Migration                                                                               3.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                            2.9%
Urban development and planning                                                          2.5%
Social protection                                                                       2.2%
Transport                                                                               1.8%
Disaster management                                                                     1.5%
Climate change                                                                          0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                    0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  0.0%
Health                                                                                  0.0%




                                                    60
The World Bank Group                                           Turkey                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

5. When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country,
   which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved                   Percentage of Respondents
   in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (Responses Combined; N=266)
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                            42.5%
Consistent economic growth                                                                           34.2%
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                     19.2%
A growing middle class                                                                               14.7%
More reliable social safety net                                                                      13.5%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                   10.9%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                                                 10.9%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                      10.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                              10.5%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                            10.2%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                         6.4%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                                  5.3%
Other                                                                                                2.3%
Better quality public services                                                                       1.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                              0.8%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                          N         DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Turkey?
                                                                                     275        0       6.67     2.50
    (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


Overall Effectiveness                                                                N         DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                     259        14      6.86     2.07
   effectiveness in Turkey.* (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                   N         DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Turkey solve its most
                                                                                     240        34      6.48     2.17
    complicated development challenges?*
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                61
The World Bank Group                                  Turkey                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
   on development results in Turkey, in which sectoral areas do you believe the
   World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and             Percentage of Respondents
   knowledge services) in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)                     (Responses Combined; N=275)
Education quality                                                                              45.5%
Job creation/employment                                                                        28.7%
Economic growth                                                                                28.0%
Rural and regional development                                                                 25.8%
Competitiveness                                                                                18.9%
Energy                                                                                         16.7%
Poverty reduction                                                                              14.9%
Income inequality                                                                              14.2%
Agricultural development                                                                       13.1%
Transport                                                                                      11.6%
Trade and exports                                                                              10.9%
Gender equity                                                                                  8.0%
Law and justice                                                                                6.5%
Urban development and planning                                                                 6.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                                                5.1%
Financial markets and savings                                                                  5.1%
Anti-corruption                                                                                5.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                                   4.7%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                                            4.7%
Social protection                                                                              4.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                                      3.3%
Health                                                                                         3.3%
Disaster management                                                                            2.2%
Migration                                                                                      1.5%
Climate change                                                                                 1.1%
Water and sanitation                                                                           0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                         0.0%


5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which              Percentage of Respondents (N=245)
                                                                                   nd
   activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity   Greatest     2 Greatest
   is of second greatest value in Turkey?                             Value         Value            Combined
Capacity development                                                  19.2%         28.5%              47.7%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                      27.3%         15.7%              43.1%
Financial resources                                                   27.8%         14.5%              42.2%
Technical assistance                                                  14.7%         17.9%              32.6%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                            1.2%          10.2%              11.4%
Convening/facilitating                                                5.3%          1.7%               7.0%
Donor coordination                                                    0.4%          4.3%               4.7%
Data                                                                  2.0%          2.6%               4.6%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                         0.4%          3.8%               4.2%
Other                                                                 0.8%          0.4%               1.2%




                                                        62
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support                       Effectiveness
Turkey’s efforts to achieve development results?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                     N         DK     Mean       SD
6.   Convening/Facilitating                                                     161       98      5.70     2.11
7.   Data                                                                       203       56      6.93     1.72
8.   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                           221       39      7.27     1.71
9.   Financial resources                                                        239       27      7.12     1.82
10. Technical assistance                                                        222       39      7.13     1.81
11. Mobilizing third party financial resources                                  193       63      6.51     2.16
12. Donor coordination                                                          159       94      6.12     2.40
13. Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                               144      111      6.04     2.72

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number                      Degree
of ways in Turkey. To what degree would Turkey benefit, if capacity
building were to support…?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                        N         DK     Mean       SD
14. Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                                247       22      7.15     2.13
    more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
15. The public sector, related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                253       11      7.43     1.83
    projects on the ground
16. The public sector, related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                                243       22      6.65     2.40
    sociopolitical conditions)
17. The private sector, related to institutional and policy change              245       19      7.22     1.97

18. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest         Percentage of Respondents
    WEAKNESSES in its work in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)                       (Responses Combined; N=274)
Too slow and bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                            27.0%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                        23.4%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                           16.8%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Turkey                                15.0%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                  12.8%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                        11.7%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                           11.7%
Not client focused                                                                              10.9%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                    10.2%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                          9.5%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                             7.7%
Don’t know                                                                                      7.7%
Other                                                                                           5.5%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                        3.3%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                           1.8%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                             1.1%




                                                            63
The World Bank Group                                 Turkey                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

19. Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the
    MOST effective in promoting economic development in Turkey?                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                        (Responses Combined; N=270)
Investment lending                                                                             38.1%
Technical assistance                                                                           33.0%
Capacity development                                                                           29.6%
Policy based lending/budget support to the Government                                          26.3%
Knowledge products/services                                                                    18.9%
Trust Fund management                                                                          10.7%
Other                                                                                          5.9%
Don’t know                                                                                     4.8%
South-South knowledge exchange                                                                 1.5%

20. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development         Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                         (Responses Combined; N=272)
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                       40.8%
Private Sector                                                                                 34.9%
NGOs                                                                                           21.0%
Community-Based Organizations                                                                  19.1%
Local Government                                                                               18.0%
Parliament                                                                                     14.7%
Beneficiaries                                                                                  12.5%
Media                                                                                          10.3%
Other                                                                                          4.0%
Donor Community                                                                                2.2%
Foundations                                                                                    0.4%
Don’t know                                                                                     0.4%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                      0.0%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the                  Level of Agreement
World Bank Group’s work in Turkey?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N        DK     Mean       SD
21. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                               252       21      5.90     2.26
    development in Turkey*
22. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                               250       18      6.56     2.22
    development priorities for Turkey*
23. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                               234       35      6.47     2.24
    realistic for Turkey
24. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Turkey with
                                                                               228       40      7.36     2.22
    respect




                                                        64
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner                    Degree
in Turkey, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                        N        DK      Mean       SD
25. Responsiveness*                                                            233       32      6.49      1.95
26. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services) *   218       46       6.10     1.95
27. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                  226       39       5.98     2.08
28. Being inclusive*                                                           223       38       6.60     1.99
29. Openness (sharing data and other information)*                             232       29       7.33     1.89
30. Staff accessibility*                                                       227       38       7.00     2.30
31. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                           222       40       7.72     2.00
32. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                               207       55       6.74     2.46
    decisions important to my work
33. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government*                       194       68       6.46     1.86
34. Collaboration with the Government*                                         203       60       7.58     1.74
35. Collaboration with other donors*                                           158       104      6.89     2.01
36. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*              201       59       6.32     1.93
37. Being a long-term partner                                                  203       62       7.89     2.00

38. To be a more effective development partner in Turkey, do you believe that        Percentage of Respondents
    the World Bank Group should have…?                                                         (N=267)
More local presence                                                                            68.2%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                20.6%
Less local presence                                                                             .4%
Don't know                                                                                     10.9%




                                                            65
The World Bank Group                                 Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results

1.    In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be          Importance
      involved in the following areas of development in Turkey?
      (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                            N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                       223    43      7.41      2.33
2.    Migration                                                             222    41      7.17      2.24
3.    Transport                                                             236    27      6.69      2.23
4.    Competitiveness                                                       217    45       7.89     2.01
5.    Law and justice                                                       205    61       7.59     2.33
6.    Urban development and planning                                        219    46       8.11     1.78
7.    Environmental sustainability                                          245    21       8.24     1.67
8.    Regulatory framework for private sector development                   221    43       7.66     1.87
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                192    70       6.02     2.11
10.   Poverty reduction                                                     236    25       7.99     1.70
11.   Gender equity                                                         217    45       7.42     2.45
12.   Foreign direct investment                                             197    57       7.27     2.34
13.   Water and sanitation                                                  210    52       6.69     2.02
14.   Trade and exports                                                     228    33       7.67     2.12
15.   Economic growth                                                       236    28       8.14     1.82
16.   Energy                                                                245    20       7.90     1.88
17.   Disaster management                                                   229    30       7.42     1.68
18.   Public sector governance/reform                                       227    36       7.87     2.05
19.   Job creation/employment                                               237    29       8.30     1.64
20.   Financial markets and savings                                         238    24       7.49     2.11
21.   Income inequality                                                     215    50       7.82     1.94
22.   Health                                                                204    58       7.28     2.03
23.   Rural and regional development                                        229    23       7.71     1.90
24.   Education quality                                                     231    33       8.02     2.02
25.   Social protection                                                     204    58       7.00     2.30
26.   Climate change                                                        229    32       7.07     2.44
27.   Agricultural development                                              241    21       7.67     1.88




                                                       66
The World Bank Group                                             Turkey            Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2.    How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of             Effectiveness
      the work it does in the following areas of development in Turkey?
      (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                             N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Migration                                                               98    167     4.68      2.07
2.    Transport                                                              120    138     5.50      2.67
3.    Competitiveness                                                        133    127     6.94      1.92
4.    Urban development and planning                                         116    142      6.32     1.97
5.    Environmental sustainability                                           153    107      6.92     1.99
6.    Regulatory framework for private sector development                    145    114      6.29     2.19
7.    Poverty reduction                                                      153    107      5.65     2.12
8.    Gender equity                                                          135    125      5.31     2.79
9.    Foreign direct investment                                              136    123      6.48     2.11
10.   Water and sanitation                                                   128    131      5.63     2.46
11.   Trade and exports                                                      143    116      6.71     1.84
12.   Economic growth                                                        184     78      6.93     2.02
13.   Energy                                                                 181     79      6.72     2.29
14.   Disaster management                                                    129    132      6.94     2.28
15.   Public sector governance/reform                                        154    106      6.45     1.79
16.   Job creation/employment                                                171     90      6.27     2.19
17.   Financial markets and savings                                          148    105      6.80     1.99
18.   Income inequality                                                      151    111      5.46     2.60
19.   Health                                                                 136    122      5.68     2.43
20.   Rural and regional development                                         164     95      6.12     2.21
21.   Education quality                                                      150    112      5.44     2.46
22. Social protection                                                        113    146      4.95     2.34
23. Climate change                                                           148    113      5.72     2.50


Achieving Development Results                                                N      DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
    development results in Turkey?*                                          245    29       6.10     1.86
      (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Turkey? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)         N      DK      Mean       SD
4. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
                                                                             239    34       6.13     2.17
    Development Policy Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of Turkey*
5. The World Bank Group meets Turkey’s needs for knowledge services
                                                                             250    20       6.32     2.03
    (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*




                                                                  67
The World Bank Group                                           Turkey             Country Opinion Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work          Percentage of Respondents
    and activities in the work you do?                                                (N=274)
Weekly                                                                                    8.0%
Monthly                                                                                  28.1%
A few times a year                                                                       39.8%
Rarely                                                                                   20.4%
Never                                                                                     3.6%

In Turkey, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s                  Degree
knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                     N      DK      Mean      SD
2.   Are timely                                                             214     50      7.04     1.55
3.   Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                            222     42       6.70    2.05
     preparation
4.   Are relevant to Turkey's development priorities                        230     29       6.75    1.99
5.   Lead to practical solutions                                            222     36       5.87    1.91
6.   Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                   238     26       7.24    1.98
7.   Are source of relevant information on global good practices            239     29       7.44    2.03
8.   Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                   234     28       7.28    1.99
9. Are adequately disseminated                                              195     61       5.90    2.19
10. Are translated enough into local language                               204     58       6.19    2.53
11. Are adaptable to Turkey’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                            224     42       6.24    2.25
    circumstances*


Overall Evaluations                                                          N      DK      Mean      SD
12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results in    256     17       6.25    1.79
    your country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities?*                                 252     22       7.44    1.66
     (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                 68
The World Bank Group                                    Turkey                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


E. Working with the World Bank Group

                                                                                        Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                           N        DK     Mean       SD
1.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                198       70     6.37      1.96
2.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects
                                                                                  222       46      7.63     1.51
     and programs it supports
3.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                                  205       65      6.58     2.13
     fashion
4.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                                  153      113      6.43     2.08
     reasonable
5.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable              186       81      6.45     2.06
6.  The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Turkey                        191       77      6.72     2.01
7.  Working with the World Bank Group increases Turkey’s institutional
                                                                                  226       44      7.25     1.84
    capacity
8. The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                  130      137      6.78     1.83
    changes
9. Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                  156      112      6.51     2.11
    appropriate use of them*
10. The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                199       68      7.39     1.73



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey

1.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of             Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)                                  (Responses Combined; N=274)
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                    38.3%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                         29.6%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                     24.1%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Turkey’s economy                       22.6%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)               16.1%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Turkey’s specific challenges                     12.4%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                          10.6%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                          10.2%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                  8.4%
Other                                                                                             3.3%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                       2.9%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                            2.2%
Work faster                                                                                       2.2%

2.  When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
    offers in Turkey, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which
    ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer               Percentage of Respondents
    more of in Turkey? (Select only ONE response)                                                (N=261)
Financial services                                                                                35.6%
Knowledge products                                                                                30.3%
The combination is appropriate for Turkey                                                         13.4%
Convening services                                                                                12.6%
Don't know                                                                                        6.1%
None of the above                                                                                 1.9%


                                                          69
The World Bank Group                                  Turkey                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social              Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)                        (Responses Combined; N=275)
Internet                                                                                      77.1%
Local newspapers                                                                              44.0%
Local television                                                                              18.2%
International newspapers                                                                      10.2%
Other                                                                                         8.4%
International television                                                                      6.9%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       5.8%
Periodicals                                                                                   4.0%
Local radio                                                                                   1.8%
Blogs                                                                                         0.4%
Mobile phones                                                                                 0.4%
Instant messaging                                                                             0.4%
International radio                                                                           0.0%

2.    Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy
      under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                                      (N=270)
Yes                                                                                          27.0%
No                                                                                           73.0%

3.    Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities   Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                                      (N=264)
Yes                                                                                          16.7%
No                                                                                           83.3%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
4. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                 (N=32)
Yes                                                                                          96.9%
No                                                                                           3.1%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
5. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                       (N=251)
Yes                                                                                          99.2%
No                                                                                            .8%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?                                        (N=256)
Yes                                                                                          79.7%
No                                                                                           20.3%




                                                        70
The World Bank Group                                  Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                    Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                   N         DK     Mean       SD
7.   I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few
                                                                           243       17      5.27     2.78
     years ago
8.   I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.              207       25      6.31     2.05
9. I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.       211       23      7.36     1.71
10. The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                           124      133      5.56     2.75
    information about the institution.
11. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                           241       19      6.78     2.68
    find it.
12. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                           186       69      6.78     2.82
    inquiries.



H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                  Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                      (N=268)
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department, Implementation Agency                      32.1%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                     17.9%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                              7.5%
Other                                                                                      6.7%
NGO                                                                                        6.0%
PMU                                                                                        5.6%
Multilateral Agency                                                                        5.6%
Private Sector Organization                                                                5.2%
Bilateral Agency                                                                           3.7%
Media                                                                                      3.7%
Trade Union                                                                                3.4%
Independent Government Institution                                                         1.1%
Local Government Office or Staff                                                            .7%
Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported project/program                 .4%
Private Foundation                                                                          .4%




                                                        71
The World Bank Group                                  Turkey                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                       (N=258)
Other                                                                                      20.5%
Financial markets/banking                                                                  15.1%
Education                                                                                  14.7%
Private sector development/foreign direct investment                                       7.8%
Public sector governance/public financial management/anti-corruption                       7.0%
Energy                                                                                     5.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                    5.0%
Generalist                                                                                 5.0%
Natural resource management/environmental sustainability                                   4.7%
Social protection                                                                          2.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                       2.7%
Agriculture/rural development/food security                                                2.3%
Gender equity/equality of opportunity                                                      2.3%
Information and communications technology                                                  1.9%
Law and justice/regulatory framework                                                       1.2%
Transport                                                                                   .8%
Urban development                                                                           .8%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group   Percentage of Respondents
   in your country?                                                                       (N=275)
Yes                                                                                        43.3%
No                                                                                         56.7%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in   Percentage of Respondents
  Turkey? (Select all that apply)                                                         (N=256)
The World Bank (IBRD)                                                                      57.4%
None                                                                                       37.9%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                16.0%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                        3.1%

5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank      Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)                                              (N=269)
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                              51.7%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                          42.4%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                             21.2%
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)                  19.7%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                         16.0%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
6. Which best represents your geographic location?                                        (N=276)
Ankara                                                                                     73.6%
Outside Ankara                                                                             26.4%




                                                        72
The World Bank Group                                                                    Turkey                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

Employee of a Ministry N=86  Consultant on WBG project/PMU N=16  Bilateral/Multilateral Agency N=25  Private Sector N=14
Financial Sector/Private Bank N=20  NGO/Private Foundation N=17  Media N=10  Trade Union N=9  Academia N=48  Other N=23

A. General Issues Facing Turkey

In general, how would you say that Turkey is headed in...?*
                                                  Employee     Consultant on    Bilateral/                   Financial       NGO/
                                                      of a    WBG-Supported    Multilateral      Private      Sector/       Private            Trade
Percentage of Respondents                          Ministry    Project/PMU       Agency          Sector    Private Bank   Foundation   Media   Union   Academia       Other
The right direction                                  59.3%        25.0%           40.0%          21.4%         35.0%        47.1%      10.0%   50.0%    17.8%         47.6%
The wrong direction                                  16.0%        37.5%           16.0%          21.4%         30.0%        47.1%      70.0%   37.5%    51.1%         28.6%
Not sure                                             24.7%        37.5%           44.0%          57.1%         35.0%         5.9%      20.0%   12.5%    31.1%         23.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                        73
The World Bank Group                                                                             Turkey                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Turkey. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Turkey. (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                      Employee      Consultant on        Bilateral/                   Financial         NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                                of a      WBG-Supported        Multilateral      Private      Sector/         Private                   Trade
(Responses Combined)                                   Ministry     Project/PMU           Agency          Sector    Private Bank     Foundation      Media       Union       Academia        Other
Social protection                                       1.2%            6.3%               16.0%           0.0%         0.0%            5.9%         20.0%       0.0%          6.3%          8.7%
Transport                                               3.5%            0.0%               12.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                         14.1%          25.0%               24.0%          14.3%         10.0%          11.8%         0.0%        0.0%         16.7%          21.7%
Gender equity                                           5.9%            0.0%                8.0%           7.1%         5.0%           23.5%         10.0%       0.0%          2.1%          8.7%
Foreign direct investment*                              2.4%            6.3%                8.0%           0.0%         0.0%            5.9%         0.0%        44.4%         0.0%          8.7%
Water and sanitation                                    0.0%            0.0%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                        12.9%          12.5%                8.0%          57.1%         0.0%           23.5%         50.0%       11.1%        22.9%          4.3%
Job creation/employment                                 28.2%          18.8%               24.0%          14.3%         30.0%          23.5%         10.0%       33.3%        35.4%          26.1%
Rural and regional development*                         17.6%          37.5%               24.0%           0.0%         45.0%          29.4%         10.0%       11.1%         0.0%          0.0%
Financial markets and savings                           10.6%           0.0%                0.0%          21.4%         5.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          4.2%          0.0%
Urban development and planning                          9.4%            0.0%               12.0%          14.3%         5.0%            5.9%         20.0%       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Environmental sustainability*                           7.1%            0.0%               24.0%           0.0%         0.0%           11.8%         0.0%        11.1%         4.2%          4.3%
Income inequality*                                      16.5%           6.3%                4.0%           0.0%         0.0%           11.8%         20.0%       77.8%        16.7%          34.8%
Health*                                                 0.0%            0.0%                0.0%          14.3%         25.0%           0.0%         0.0%        0.0%         12.5%          0.0%
Education quality*                                      58.8%          43.8%               36.0%          50.0%         75.0%          29.4%         30.0%       0.0%         70.8%          65.2%
Poverty reduction*                                      4.7%            0.0%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           11.8%         0.0%        0.0%          8.3%          21.7%
Energy*                                                 30.6%          18.8%               24.0%          14.3%         5.0%            0.0%         30.0%       11.1%         4.2%          4.3%
Climate change                                          1.2%            0.0%                8.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          2.1%          0.0%
Agricultural development*                               5.9%           12.5%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%           23.5%         0.0%        0.0%          4.2%          8.7%
Trade and exports                                       4.7%           18.8%                0.0%           7.1%         5.0%            0.0%         0.0%        11.1%         6.3%          8.7%
Competitiveness*                                        16.5%          18.8%               24.0%           7.1%         60.0%          11.8%         20.0%       0.0%          6.3%          13.0%
Economic growth*                                        14.1%          12.5%               24.0%           0.0%         10.0%          29.4%         20.0%       55.6%        18.8%          8.7%
Law and justice                                         28.2%          56.3%               20.0%          14.3%         15.0%          35.3%         50.0%       33.3%        37.5%          21.7%
Regulatory framework for private sector dev.*           5.9%            0.0%                0.0%          42.9%         5.0%            5.9%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          8.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                  0.0%            0.0%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Disaster management*                                    0.0%            0.0%                0.0%          14.3%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Migration*                                              0.0%            0.0%                0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          8.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                  74
The World Bank Group                                                                      Turkey                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                  Employee     Consultant on       Bilateral/                Financial        NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                            of a     WBG-Supported Multilateral        Private       Sector/        Private                 Trade
(Responses Combined)                               Ministry    Project/PMU          Agency      Sector     Private Bank    Foundation     Media      Union     Academia       Other
Water and sanitation                                0.0%            0.0%              4.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        10.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Income inequality*                                  29.4%           62.5%            56.0%       71.4%         55.0%         29.4%        40.0%      87.5%      43.8%         69.6%
Economic growth*                                    58.8%           25.0%            44.0%       28.6%         60.0%         41.2%        40.0%      62.5%      22.9%         26.1%
Climate change                                      0.0%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Gender equity                                       1.2%            6.3%              0.0%       7.1%          0.0%           5.9%         0.0%      0.0%       10.4%         13.0%
Rural and regional development                      44.7%           31.3%            28.0%       7.1%          50.0%         58.8%        40.0%      37.5%      31.3%         21.7%
Urban development and planning                      0.0%            6.3%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           5.9%        10.0%      0.0%        0.0%         4.3%
Regulatory framework for private sector
                                                    5.9%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          10.0%         11.8%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         4.3%
development
Social protection                                   9.4%            18.8%            32.0%       21.4%         5.0%           5.9%        10.0%      25.0%      14.6%         13.0%
Law and justice                                     7.1%            6.3%              0.0%       7.1%          5.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        4.2%         4.3%
Transport                                           0.0%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Competitiveness*                                    4.7%            0.0%             20.0%       0.0%          5.0%           0.0%        10.0%      12.5%       0.0%         4.3%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases              0.0%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Migration                                           8.2%            0.0%             16.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        10.0%      0.0%       12.5%         0.0%
Anti-corruption                                     12.9%           12.5%            24.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%        20.0%      0.0%       12.5%         17.4%
Foreign direct investment*                          1.2%            25.0%             4.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Education quality*                                  47.1%           6.3%             28.0%       14.3%         35.0%         17.6%         0.0%      0.0%       62.5%         30.4%
Energy                                              3.5%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          11.8%        10.0%      0.0%        2.1%         0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                     4.7%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%          17.6%         0.0%      0.0%        2.1%         4.3%
Environmental sustainability                        0.0%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           5.9%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Disaster management                                 1.2%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Health                                              1.2%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           5.9%         0.0%      0.0%        6.3%         4.3%
Agricultural development*                           8.2%            6.3%             16.0%       50.0%         10.0%         23.5%         0.0%      0.0%        4.2%         17.4%
Job creation/employment*                            38.8%           87.5%            28.0%       85.7%         60.0%         52.9%        80.0%      62.5%      31.3%         47.8%
Financial markets and savings                       1.2%            0.0%              0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           5.9%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Trade and exports                                   4.7%            0.0%              0.0%       7.1%          5.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        2.1%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          75
The World Bank Group                                                                      Turkey                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                 Employee      Consultant on     Bilateral/                 Financial       NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                            of a     WBG-Supported Multilateral       Private       Sector/       Private                  Trade
(Responses Combined)                              Ministry     Project/PMU        Agency       Sector     Private Bank   Foundation     Media      Union      Academia       Other
Energy*                                            33.3%          31.3%             8.0%       57.1%          20.0%         17.6%       60.0%      12.5%        18.8%        34.8%
Gender equity                                       3.6%           0.0%            16.0%        0.0%          0.0%          5.9%        20.0%       0.0%        10.4%         0.0%
Income inequality*                                  1.2%           6.3%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          5.9%        20.0%       0.0%        6.3%         21.7%
Social protection                                   3.6%           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        6.3%          0.0%
Climate change                                      0.0%           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Anti-corruption                                     4.8%           6.3%            24.0%        7.1%          0.0%          11.8%       20.0%       0.0%        12.5%         4.3%
Disaster management                                 4.8%           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Rural and regional development*                    32.1%          50.0%             4.0%        7.1%          45.0%         23.5%       30.0%      62.5%        0.0%         21.7%
Foreign direct investment*                          6.0%           6.3%            24.0%       21.4%          5.0%          47.1%       10.0%      12.5%        6.3%          4.3%
Urban development and planning                      3.6%           6.3%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        10.0%       0.0%        4.2%          0.0%
Water and sanitation                                0.0%           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Education quality*                                 42.9%           6.3%            24.0%       57.1%          20.0%         35.3%       20.0%      25.0%        62.5%        30.4%
Migration*                                          2.4%           0.0%            20.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        20.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Regulatory framework for private sector
                                                   15.5%          18.8%             8.0%        7.1%          15.0%         35.3%       10.0%       0.0%        6.3%         30.4%
development
Communicable/non-communicable diseases              0.0%           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Trade and exports*                                 33.3%          62.5%            44.0%       14.3%          60.0%         5.9%        10.0%      50.0%        16.7%        39.1%
Public sector governance/reform                    13.1%           0.0%             4.0%        7.1%          5.0%          17.6%       10.0%      25.0%        8.3%          4.3%
Job creation/employment*                           22.6%          50.0%            12.0%       50.0%          30.0%         17.6%       10.0%      12.5%        37.5%        26.1%
Agricultural development*                           9.5%          37.5%             0.0%        7.1%          0.0%          11.8%        0.0%       0.0%        6.3%         26.1%
Transport                                           2.4%           0.0%             0.0%        7.1%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          8.7%
Environmental sustainability                        2.4%           0.0%             0.0%        7.1%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        10.4%         0.0%
Health                                              0.0%           0.0%             0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Law and justice*                                    2.4%           0.0%            20.0%        0.0%          0.0%          11.8%        0.0%      25.0%        16.7%         0.0%
Competitiveness*                                   38.1%          12.5%            48.0%       21.4%          40.0%         11.8%       30.0%       0.0%        12.5%        30.4%
Financial markets and savings*                     20.2%           6.3%            40.0%       28.6%          60.0%         29.4%        0.0%      50.0%        10.4%        17.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          76
The World Bank Group                                                                                              Turkey                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                    Employee      Consultant on        Bilateral/                 Financial       NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                              of a     WBG-Supported Multilateral         Private         Sector/       Private                  Trade
(Responses Combined)                                 Ministry     Project/PMU           Agency     Sector       Private Bank   Foundation      Media      Union      Academia                                                  Other
Better employment opportunities for young
                                                      23.8%           0.0%                0.0%      7.1%            0.0%         20.0%         10.0%      12.5%        34.8%                                                   18.2%
people*
Better employment opportunities for women*            6.3%            0.0%               36.0%      0.0%            0.0%         13.3%         30.0%      0.0%         10.9%                                                   13.6%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor*         1.3%            18.8%               4.0%      0.0%            5.0%         26.7%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%                                                   22.7%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to
                                                      10.0%           12.5%               8.0%      0.0%            0.0%         13.3%         30.0%      12.5%        19.6%                                                   9.1%
help ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens   6.3%            6.3%                4.0%     14.3%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          8.7%                                                   4.5%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities*                 21.3%           0.0%                4.0%      0.0%            5.0%         20.0%         0.0%       0.0%         10.9%                                                   9.1%
A growing middle class                                21.3%           18.8%               4.0%      7.1%            10.0%         6.7%         30.0%      12.5%         8.7%                                                   22.7%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural
                                                      11.3%           0.0%                0.0%     50.0%            10.0%        13.3%         10.0%      0.0%          8.7%                                                   13.6%
areas*
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                      1.3%            0.0%                0.0%      0.0%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%          2.2%                                                   0.0%
areas
Consistent economic growth*                           37.5%           50.0%              60.0%     28.6%            45.0%        33.3%         40.0%      25.0%        17.4%                                                   27.3%
More reliable social safety net*                      12.5%           25.0%               8.0%      7.1%            30.0%         6.7%         0.0%       50.0%        13.0%                                                   4.5%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                       11.3%           25.0%              20.0%      0.0%            10.0%         6.7%         20.0%      0.0%          2.2%                                                   22.7%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                      32.5%           37.5%              52.0%     85.7%            85.0%        26.7%         30.0%      50.0%        34.8%                                                   31.8%
opportunity*
Better quality public services                        2.5%            6.3%                0.0%      0.0%            0.0%          6.7%         0.0%       0.0%          0.0%                                                   0.0%
Other*                                                0.0%            0.0%                0.0%      0.0%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       25.0%         8.7%                                                   0.0%
Significantly different between stakeholder groups



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
                                     Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                                Academia/
                                       Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation             Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work
of the World Bank Group in           86   7.52   1.96    16   7.50   2.50   25   6.80   2.78   14   7.36   2.24   20       6.70   1.17   17   6.06   2.90   10   4.50    2.12   9   6.56   1.24    47    5.36     2.87    23   6.35    2.93
Turkey?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                     Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                                Academia/
                                       Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation             Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N    Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank         84   7.24   1.79    14   6.14   2.03   25   7.76   2.07   14   7.57   2.38   20       7.00   1.12   14   5.93   2.67   8    5.50    2.20   9   6.67   1.41    44    6.34     1.77    20   6.65    2.64
Group’s effectiveness in Turkey.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                  77
The World Bank Group                                                                                             Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

                                    Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                      Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute          Other
                                    N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N   Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Turkey solve its   77   6.70   2.05    15   4.87   1.73   24   7.25   2.05   14   6.86   1.88   16       6.00   1.63   14   6.86   2.63   5   6.20    2.17   6   3.83   0.98    42    6.69     2.09   19    6.05   2.76
most complicated development
challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Turkey, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most
of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                      Employee     Consultant on     Bilateral/            Financial         NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                                of a     WBG-Supported     Multilateral Private    Sector/         Private                 Trade
(Responses Combined)                                   Ministry    Project/PMU        Agency     Sector  Private Bank    Foundation      Media      Union     Academia      Other
Social protection                                       2.3%           6.3%             8.0%      0.0%       0.0%            0.0%        20.0%      11.1%       6.3%         0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                         8.1%           0.0%             8.0%      7.1%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%        17.4%
Transport                                               10.5%         25.0%             4.0%      0.0%       5.0%           11.8%        20.0%      0.0%        20.8%       13.0%
Poverty reduction*                                      12.8%          6.3%             0.0%      7.1%       50.0%          11.8%        20.0%      44.4%       8.3%        26.1%
Gender equity                                           7.0%           6.3%            16.0%      7.1%       0.0%            5.9%        20.0%      0.0%        8.3%        13.0%
Competitiveness*                                        29.1%          0.0%            52.0%     14.3%       25.0%          11.8%        10.0%      0.0%        2.1%         8.7%
Rural and regional development*                         22.1%         18.8%            20.0%      7.1%       65.0%          58.8%        30.0%      44.4%       8.3%        17.4%
Foreign direct investment                               5.8%           0.0%             0.0%      0.0%       0.0%            5.9%        10.0%      0.0%        2.1%         4.3%
Water and sanitation                                    0.0%           0.0%             4.0%      0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Energy*                                                 27.9%         31.3%             0.0%     50.0%       10.0%          17.6%         0.0%      0.0%        2.1%        13.0%
Job creation/employment*                                15.1%         31.3%            32.0%     14.3%       10.0%          35.3%        50.0%      44.4%       47.9%       43.5%
Financial markets and savings*                          2.3%           6.3%            20.0%     14.3%       15.0%           0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         4.3%
Urban development and planning                          7.0%           6.3%            12.0%     14.3%       5.0%            5.9%        10.0%      0.0%        2.1%         4.3%
Environmental sustainability                            4.7%           6.3%             0.0%      7.1%       15.0%           5.9%         0.0%      0.0%        6.3%         0.0%
Income inequality*                                      5.8%          50.0%             0.0%     14.3%       5.0%           23.5%        10.0%      11.1%       16.7%       39.1%
Health                                                  7.0%           0.0%             0.0%      0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        6.3%         0.0%
Education quality                                       50.0%         43.8%            40.0%     64.3%       35.0%          29.4%        10.0%      44.4%       50.0%       43.5%
Climate change*                                         0.0%           0.0%            12.0%      0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Agricultural development*                               16.3%          6.3%             0.0%     50.0%       20.0%          17.6%         0.0%      0.0%        4.2%         4.3%
Trade and exports                                       8.1%           6.3%            24.0%      0.0%       5.0%            5.9%        10.0%      0.0%        18.8%       17.4%
Economic growth                                         26.7%         43.8%             8.0%     14.3%       30.0%          23.5%        40.0%      55.6%       37.5%       21.7%
Law and justice                                         7.0%           0.0%             0.0%      0.0%       0.0%           11.8%        10.0%      0.0%        16.7%        4.3%
Regulatory framework for private sector dev.            5.8%           0.0%             0.0%      0.0%       5.0%           11.8%        10.0%      0.0%        8.3%         0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                  0.0%           0.0%             0.0%      0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                        3.5%           0.0%            20.0%      0.0%       0.0%            5.9%        10.0%      22.2%       2.1%         4.3%
Migration                                               2.3%           0.0%             0.0%      7.1%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        2.1%         0.0%
Disaster management                                     7.0%           0.0%             0.0%      0.0%       0.0%            0.0%         0.0%      0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                 78
The World Bank Group                                                                         Turkey                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Turkey?
                                                 Employee       Consultant on        Bilateral/                Financial          NGO/
Greatest Value                                      of a       WBG-Supported Multilateral         Private       Sector/          Private                   Trade
Percentage of Respondents                         Ministry       Project/PMU          Agency       Sector    Private Bank      Foundation      Media       Union   Academia       Other
Convening/facilitating*                            2.4%             12.5%               0.0%        7.1%         0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       12.5%     6.9%         25.0%
Data                                               1.2%              0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         5.0%             7.1%          0.0%       0.0%      3.4%         5.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                  25.6%            12.5%              52.2%       14.3%         20.0%            42.9%        33.3%       25.0%    41.4%         10.0%
Financial resources*                               30.5%            62.5%               0.0%        0.0%         30.0%            35.7%        33.3%       0.0%     24.1%         35.0%
Capacity development*                              23.2%             0.0%              47.8%        7.1%         10.0%            7.1%         33.3%       12.5%    17.2%         15.0%
Technical assistance*                              13.4%            12.5%               0.0%       64.3%         35.0%            7.1%          0.0%       50.0%     0.0%         10.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources         2.4%              0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      3.4%         0.0%
Donor coordination                                 0.0%              0.0%               0.0%        7.1%         0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%         0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                      0.0%              0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      3.4%         0.0%
Other                                              0.0%              0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         0.0%             0.0%          0.0%       0.0%      0.0%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


 nd                                                   Employee     Consultant on     Bilateral/                   Financial       NGO/
2 Greatest Value                                         of a     WBG-Supported     Multilateral      Private      Sector/       Private                  Trade
Percentage of Respondents                              Ministry    Project/PMU        Agency          Sector    Private Bank   Foundation     Media       Union    Academia       Other
Convening/facilitating                                  2.5%           0.0%             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          7.1%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%         5.0%
Data                                                    1.3%           0.0%             0.0%           7.7%         0.0%          7.1%        11.1%       0.0%       3.8%         5.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                       13.8%         18.8%             0.0%           7.7%         40.0%        14.3%        33.3%       80.0%      3.8%         10.0%
Financial resources*                                    15.0%         12.5%            43.5%           0.0%         15.0%         7.1%        22.2%       20.0%      3.8%         10.0%
Capacity development*                                   25.0%         31.3%             0.0%          61.5%         35.0%        42.9%        22.2%       0.0%      38.5%         20.0%
Technical assistance                                    23.8%         12.5%            21.7%           7.7%         5.0%         21.4%        11.1%       0.0%      19.2%         20.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources              8.8%           0.0%            26.1%          15.4%         5.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%      15.4%         20.0%
Donor coordination                                      7.5%           0.0%             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          7.1%        0.0%        0.0%       7.7%         5.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*                          1.3%          25.0%             4.3%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       7.7%         5.0%
Other                                                   1.3%           0.0%             0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%        0.0%        0.0%       0.0%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                             79
The World Bank Group                                                                                                Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Turkey’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                       Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                         Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                       N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Convening/facilitating                 54   5.81   1.87    11   5.18   2.09   15   5.33   1.50   8    6.88   1.73   10       6.00   2.16   7    5.00   1.63   3   4.67    2.08   5   6.20   3.27    29    6.00     2.04    13   4.23    3.19
Data                                   63   7.02   1.59    13   6.46   1.71   23   6.78   1.48   7    7.43   1.99   18       6.44   2.06   9    7.33   2.06   5   7.00    1.23   8   8.00   1.31    37    6.97     2.08    13   6.85    1.46
Policy advice, studies, analyses*      67   7.43   1.60    13   5.46   1.94   24   7.83   0.82   14   7.93   1.49   19       7.37   1.46   11   7.18   2.09   6   7.67    1.21   8   7.38   2.00    38    7.29     1.80    14   6.43    2.34
Financial resources*                   79   7.19   1.65    16   6.56   2.13   23   6.52   1.53   14   7.43   1.28   20       7.95   1.23   12   7.25   1.91   7   6.86    1.57   8   5.88   2.10    35    7.80     2.01    18   6.39    2.45
Technical assistance                   76   7.20   1.84    13   7.15   1.95   18   6.78   1.40   12   8.17   0.94   19       6.68   0.82   11   7.27   2.20   5   6.40    1.52   8   6.63   2.20    37    7.54     1.99    16   6.13    2.34
Mobilizing third party financial
                                       58   6.69   1.89    12   6.25   2.22   24   6.46   1.87   13   6.38   1.12   15       5.20   2.21   9    8.00   1.41   4   7.50    0.58   8   4.88   3.64    29    7.38     2.40    15   5.40    2.13
resources*
Donor coordination*                    52   5.98   2.03    9    7.67   2.24   17   4.88   2.37   11   7.27   1.27    9       5.22   2.39   9    7.00   1.50   3   5.67    3.22   6   3.17   3.25    26    7.27     2.57    11   4.91    2.02
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*         44   6.11   2.47    11   6.36   2.29   15   4.93   2.46   7    5.57   2.94    9       3.78   2.82   7    8.57   0.98   2   5.50    2.12   6   3.17   3.25    29    7.31     2.38    8    5.13    3.56
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Turkey. To what degree would Turkey benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                       Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                         Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                       N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Groups outside of government
(e.g., civil society, media) to help
them more effectively engage and       76   6.67   1.87    15   8.27   1.91   19   7.26   2.16   12   6.67   1.37   20       6.80   2.40   15   7.80   2.43   9   6.89    1.62   9   7.00   2.18    46    8.04     2.37    19   6.32    2.14
participate in development
efforts*
The public sector , related to
implementation of specific
                                       83   7.31   1.79    16   7.69   1.78   19   7.32   1.67   12   6.25   0.87   20       7.90   0.64   16   7.31   2.18   7   7.00    1.41   9   6.56   2.13    45    8.11     2.05    19   6.68    2.21
development projects on the
ground*
The public sector , related to
changing institutions
                                       75   5.75   2.52    16   6.13   1.54   20   7.55   1.54   12   7.83   1.27   20       6.75   2.05   14   6.36   2.37   7   6.14    2.55   9   6.11   2.42    46    7.89     2.58    17   6.47    2.55
(organizations or sociopolitical
conditions)*
The private sector , related to
                                       81   6.89   2.01    15   7.60   0.74   20   6.20   2.98   12   6.75   1.49   20       7.45   1.15   16   6.50   1.93   7   7.57    1.40   9   7.56   1.24    41    8.12     2.14    17   7.29    1.57
institutional and policy change*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                    80
The World Bank Group                                                                     Turkey                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                   Employee      Consultant on    Bilateral/                  Financial       NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                             of a     WBG-Supported Multilateral        Private       Sector/       Private            Trade
(Responses Combined)                                Ministry     Project/PMU       Agency         Sector    Private Bank   Foundation   Media   Union   Academia        Other
Staff too inaccessible*                               8.3%           0.0%            4.0%          7.1%         30.0%         0.0%      0.0%    55.6%    12.5%          0.0%
Not exploring alternative policy options             11.9%           6.3%           20.0%          0.0%         0.0%          5.9%      10.0%   33.3%    18.8%          8.7%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social
                                                     20.2%           12.5%           0.0%          7.1%         15.0%         11.8%     10.0%   22.2%     4.2%         39.1%
realities in Turkey*
Not enough public disclosure of its work*            27.4%           6.3%            8.0%         57.1%         15.0%         29.4%     30.0%   11.1%    20.8%         17.4%
Arrogant in its approach*                             1.2%           0.0%            0.0%          7.1%         0.0%          0.0%      20.0%   0.0%     4.2%          13.0%
Not aligned with country priorities                   6.0%           12.5%           0.0%          0.0%         15.0%         23.5%     0.0%    0.0%     10.4%         0.0%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                 1.2%           0.0%            0.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      10.0%   0.0%     2.1%          8.7%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and
                                                     10.7%           12.5%          20.0%         21.4%         0.0%          11.8%     0.0%    0.0%     14.6%          0.0%
reform efforts in the country
Too influenced by developed countries*               15.5%           25.0%          44.0%         14.3%         10.0%         11.8%     30.0%   11.1%     8.3%         17.4%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard
                                                     15.5%           56.3%           0.0%          0.0%         10.0%         0.0%      20.0%   0.0%     10.4%          4.3%
to political realities*
Too slow and bureaucratic in its operational
                                                     19.0%           43.8%          32.0%         57.1%         70.0%         29.4%     0.0%    44.4%    16.7%         17.4%
policies and procedures*
Not aligned with other donors’ work                   1.2%           0.0%            8.0%          0.0%         0.0%          0.0%      0.0%    0.0%     0.0%          0.0%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors        8.3%           6.3%           20.0%          7.1%         20.0%         17.6%     20.0%   0.0%     16.7%         0.0%
Not client focused                                   10.7%           6.3%           24.0%          0.0%         5.0%          5.9%      20.0%   11.1%    10.4%         17.4%
Other                                                 8.3%           6.3%            8.0%          0.0%         0.0%          11.8%     0.0%    0.0%     4.2%          4.3%
Don’t know*                                           6.0%           0.0%            0.0%          0.0%         5.0%          17.6%     0.0%    0.0%     12.5%         21.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Employee     Consultant on       Bilateral/                  Financial      NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                           of a     WBG-Supported Multilateral          Private       Sector/      Private             Trade
(Responses Combined)                              Ministry    Project/PMU          Agency        Sector     Private Bank  Foundation    Media   Union   Academia       Other
Capacity development*                              24.7%         12.5%              44.0%        57.1%          10.0%        35.7%      10.0%   0.0%     37.5%         34.8%
Policy based lending/budget support to the
                                                   32.9%         37.5%               4.0%        14.3%          50.0%        28.6%      30.0%   55.6%    10.4%         30.4%
Government*
Knowledge products/services                        14.1%          0.0%              36.0%         7.1%          25.0%        7.1%       20.0%   22.2%    27.1%         21.7%
Investment lending*                                51.8%         68.8%              36.0%        28.6%          40.0%        50.0%      60.0%   11.1%    14.6%         26.1%
Technical assistance*                              27.1%         50.0%              32.0%        78.6%          25.0%        21.4%      30.0%   22.2%    31.3%         43.5%
Trust Fund management*                             10.6%         18.8%               0.0%         7.1%          30.0%        0.0%       0.0%    55.6%    10.4%         0.0%
South-South knowledge exchange                     2.4%           0.0%               0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         0.0%       0.0%    0.0%     4.2%          0.0%
Other                                              7.1%           6.3%               0.0%         0.0%          0.0%         14.3%      0.0%    11.1%    6.3%          13.0%
Don’t know                                         4.7%           0.0%               4.0%         0.0%          0.0%         14.3%      0.0%    0.0%     10.4%         4.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                         81
The World Bank Group                                                                                              Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your
country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                      Employee     Consultant on       Bilateral/                  Financial       NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                                of a    WBG-Supported Multilateral         Private         Sector/       Private                Trade
(Responses Combined)                                   Ministry    Project/PMU          Agency       Sector      Private Bank   Foundation     Media     Union      Academia      Other
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes*               30.2%           25.0%            44.0%       78.6%           35.0%        14.3%        40.0%     11.1%        78.7%       30.4%
Donor Community*                                        0.0%            12.5%            12.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%         0.0%        4.3%
Media*                                                  11.6%           6.3%              8.0%        0.0%           5.0%          7.1%        50.0%     11.1%        6.4%        17.4%
NGOs*                                                   18.6%           25.0%            16.0%        0.0%           5.0%         57.1%        20.0%     0.0%         34.0%       26.1%
Local Government*                                       12.8%           56.3%            12.0%        7.1%           20.0%        42.9%        30.0%     11.1%        8.5%        17.4%
Private Sector*                                         47.7%           6.3%             44.0%       28.6%           55.0%        35.7%        50.0%     44.4%        4.3%        30.4%
Parliament*                                             20.9%           0.0%             16.0%       14.3%           30.0%         7.1%        0.0%      55.6%        2.1%        8.7%
Community-Based Organizations*                          19.8%           43.8%            16.0%        7.1%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      22.2%        34.0%       21.7%
Beneficiaries*                                          12.8%           6.3%              0.0%       50.0%           20.0%        14.3%        10.0%     0.0%         6.4%        17.4%
Foundations                                             1.2%            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations                               0.0%            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
Other*                                                  4.7%            0.0%             16.0%        0.0%           15.0%         0.0%        0.0%      0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
Don’t know                                              1.2%            0.0%              0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%      0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Turkey? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                     Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                       Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in   83   5.73   2.14    15   6.47   2.20   23   7.00   0.80   14   7.07   1.39   20       6.15   1.57   15   6.27   2.82   7   4.43    1.90   8   4.00   1.31    41    5.41     2.71    19   5.26    3.07
development in Turkey*
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the     81   6.74   2.19    15   6.87   2.42   24   7.88   1.04   14   7.29   0.99   20       7.05   1.32   15   6.27   2.99   6   4.83    1.47   8   4.75   1.75    41    5.73     2.35    19   5.68    2.83
development priorities for Turkey*
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are     79   6.71   2.08    15   6.20   2.48   23   7.91   0.95   7    7.57   1.27   20       7.05   1.32   13   5.54   3.05   6   5.67    1.51   8   4.50   1.93    38    5.74     2.34    18   5.61    3.05
realistic for Turkey*
The World Bank Group treats
clients and stakeholders in Turkey   81   7.48   2.03    14   7.07   2.73   23   7.70   2.62   14   8.29   1.07   20       7.60   1.10   14   7.14   2.85   4   5.25    1.71   8   5.75   2.05    26    7.12     2.63    17   7.00    2.65
with respect
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                  82
The World Bank Group                                                                                               Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Turkey, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                      Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                        Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Responsiveness*                       77   6.57   1.67    15   5.93   2.28   23   7.96   1.30   14   7.00   1.04   20       6.45   1.19   13   6.62   2.63   3   7.00    3.00   8   5.00   0.00    38    5.68     2.30    17   6.00    2.50
Flexibility (in terms of the World
                                      73   5.97   1.68    15   6.13   2.33   23   7.09   1.88   13   7.00   1.58   20       6.15   1.18   12   5.92   2.84   4   7.25    2.50   7   5.57   1.51    31    5.71     2.07    15   4.47    2.00
Bank Group’s products and
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                      74   6.42   1.61    12   4.83   2.17   23   6.83   2.21   14   5.79   1.31   20       5.85   1.39   12   5.58   3.09   4   7.50    2.65   9   5.67   1.00    35    5.40     2.32    16   5.06    2.54
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                      77   6.44   1.77    12   6.17   2.04   21   6.71   0.78   14   8.00   1.57   19       5.74   1.52   15   6.33   2.97   3   5.33    1.16   9   5.33   1.66    32    7.50     2.27    16   5.88    2.03
Openness                              78   7.64   1.81    15   6.73   1.44   23   7.65   0.49   14   7.36   1.01   20       7.50   1.36   12   6.92   3.06   5   7.00    1.58   9   7.22   1.20    34    6.82     2.68    17   6.71    2.14
Staff accessibility*                  80   7.40   1.85    15   8.27   2.09   19   7.63   1.54   14   7.86   1.17   17       6.65   2.00   13   6.69   3.07   4   6.75    1.26   9   6.11   1.45    32    5.66     3.44    17   6.29    2.57
Straightforwardness and honesty*      75   7.51   1.93    15   7.87   2.07   23   8.57   0.90   14   9.14   1.10   20       7.55   1.23   13   8.23   2.49   4   7.25    1.50   9   7.44   1.33    27    6.85     2.85    17   7.29    2.39
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making       76   7.17   1.95    11   8.18   2.40   19   7.47   0.96   13   7.85   1.35   15       6.13   1.77   13   5.77   3.92   3   6.00    2.65   7   5.14   1.68    30    5.63     3.06    16   5.69    3.32
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with groups outside
                                      63   6.54   1.42    9    6.22   1.48   16   7.06   1.77   7    5.00   2.89   17       6.06   0.97   13   5.92   3.25   4   6.75    0.96   9   5.22   1.39    38    6.74     2.09    14   6.57    1.65
of the Government
Collaboration with the Government     68   7.35   1.64    14   8.36   1.15   18   8.00   0.49   7    5.86   3.58   17       7.47   0.87   10   6.80   2.74   5   7.40    1.34   9   7.67   1.66    34    7.88     1.98    16   7.94    1.69
Collaboration with other donors*      56   7.20   1.78    10   7.70   1.49   14   5.79   1.58   5    5.20   3.90   10       6.30   1.06   9    5.67   3.12   3   4.67    1.53   5   6.20   2.59    29    7.45     1.79    13   7.00    1.63
The speed in which it gets things
                                      68   6.65   1.86    11   4.73   2.28   23   7.09   0.73   12   6.00   2.37   15       6.20   1.01   9    6.22   2.86   4   6.50    1.29   5   5.60   1.67    33    6.06     2.49    16   6.00    1.32
accomplished on the ground
Being a long-term partner             74   7.82   1.76    13   8.31   1.70   23   8.91   1.04   13   8.08   3.28   16       7.38   1.15   10   8.00   2.79   5   8.40    1.52   5   6.60   2.30    26    7.96     2.22    13   7.00    2.58
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To be a more effective development partner in Turkey, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?*
                                                  Employee       Consultant on      Bilateral/               Financial                                          NGO/
                                                     of a      WBG-Supported Multilateral        Private      Sector/                                          Private                      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                          Ministry      Project/PMU         Agency      Sector    Private Bank                                      Foundation         Media       Union         Academia             Other
More local presence                                 57.3%           81.3%             68.0%      85.7%         85.0%                                           64.7%            80.0%       87.5%          68.1%               56.5%
The current level of local presence is adequate     30.5%           18.8%             28.0%       7.1%         15.0%                                           11.8%              -         12.5%          12.8%               30.4%
Less local presence                                    -               -                 -          -            -                                                -               -           -             2.1%                 -
Don't know                                          12.2%              -               4.0%       7.1%           -                                             23.5%            20.0%         -            17.0%               13.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                   83
The World Bank Group                                                                                            Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Turkey? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                   Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                     Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                   N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Anti-corruption*                   68   6.54   2.08    13   6.92   1.85   20   9.65   0.88    6   7.67   2.07   16       6.00   2.71   14   8.07   1.73   9   8.78    2.64   9   6.33   2.24    46    8.33     2.12    20   7.05    2.21
Migration                          69   6.90   2.21    11   7.73   2.10   19   8.05   2.09    7   7.00   1.92   16       6.63   3.03   14   6.93   2.20   8   7.50    3.16   9   7.11   2.67    44    7.41     1.96    18   7.22    2.16
Transport*                         75   7.24   1.82    15   7.40   2.35   23   5.87   1.77   12   7.17   0.84   20       7.55   1.00   14   6.50   2.59   7   5.14    3.24   9   7.44   1.42    39    5.23     2.98    19   7.05    1.96
Competitiveness*                   64   7.70   2.07    11   7.00   2.19   23   8.87   0.82   6    8.17   1.84   19       8.21   1.58   12   7.83   2.21   6   9.33    1.03   8   8.38   1.41    46    8.13     2.01    19   6.53    2.32
Law and justice*                   58   7.19   2.25    9    7.22   2.17   20   9.00   2.10   7    7.57   2.23   16       6.44   2.39   13   8.46   1.51   7   8.86    2.27   9   6.11   2.62    44    8.14     2.01    19   7.11    2.66
Urban development and planning     66   7.74   1.81    16   8.88   1.59   19   7.74   1.85   7    8.57   1.13   17       8.82   1.07   13   7.92   1.44   8   7.38    3.11   9   7.22   2.28    41    8.34     1.78    18   8.44    1.42
Environmental sustainability*      77   8.05   1.60    16   9.25   1.00   23   7.87   1.66   12   8.08   1.17   19       9.00   0.75   15   8.60   1.30   6   7.33    3.67   9   7.22   2.77    43    8.23     1.84    20   8.15    1.39
Regulatory framework for private
                                   64   7.30   1.61    11   7.73   1.74   23   7.09   2.64   7    7.86   1.86   20       7.90   1.37   12   8.33   1.16   8   7.63    2.93   8   7.88   1.25    47    8.11     2.07    18   7.72    1.45
sector development
Communicable/non-communicable
                                   59   6.56   2.03    13   7.15   2.12   19   4.84   1.54   5    6.40   1.67   16       7.00   1.59   9    4.89   2.93   6   6.50    3.27   8   5.75   0.71    39    5.21     1.94    16   6.31    2.06
diseases*
Poverty reduction*                 74   7.81   1.52    12   8.33   1.67   23   8.26   1.91   12   8.08   1.24   20       8.30   1.30   15   7.80   2.34   7   9.43    0.79   8   6.75   2.71    43    8.37     1.40    20   7.40    1.90
Gender equity*                     67   7.46   2.21    16   7.88   1.20   19   9.26   0.73   6    8.83   0.98   17       7.24   2.75   14   7.50   2.96   7   9.00    1.53   8   7.75   1.75    43    5.86     3.04    17   7.71    1.45
Foreign direct investment          55   7.40   2.08    11   7.18   2.48   19   6.32   2.47   7    8.43   1.81   17       8.29   1.36   12   8.00   2.49   7   7.14    3.19   9   7.11   2.67    39    7.03     2.49    18   7.00    2.35
Water and sanitation*              62   6.85   1.94    16   7.69   2.18   19   5.89   1.82   7    7.14   1.46   17       8.24   1.25   12   6.33   2.27   7   5.57    3.31   9   7.22   1.39    37    5.54     1.82    17   6.59    1.54
Trade and exports                  70   7.83   1.62    15   7.47   2.45   23   6.74   2.83    7   8.14   1.07   19       8.05   1.22   13   8.08   1.66   7   7.71    3.15   9   7.56   2.13    39    8.41     2.35    19   6.53    2.53
Economic growth*                   71   8.44   1.24    15   7.87   2.45   23   8.00   1.78   12   8.50   0.91   20       8.20   1.15   14   7.86   1.83   8   9.00    1.41   9   7.11   2.67    41    8.54     1.98    20   6.95    2.50
Energy*                            77   8.00   1.41    16   8.50   2.48   23   7.30   2.34   12   8.58   0.67   20       8.75   1.48   14   8.21   1.42   8   7.38    3.07   9   7.67   2.55    40    7.20     1.91    19   7.58    2.27
Disaster management*               71   7.34   1.47    16   7.63   1.89   23   6.87   1.46   7    7.86   1.46   18       7.61   1.15   14   6.79   2.29   7   7.86    1.77   9   6.22   1.92    39    8.26     1.74    18   7.17    1.76
Public sector governance/reform*   72   7.89   1.95    12   7.42   2.97   19   9.05   0.91   14   8.07   0.62   17       6.65   2.37   15   8.47   1.13   8   9.25    1.39   8   6.88   1.73    40    8.10     2.02    19   6.58    2.82
Job creation/employment            75   8.16   1.56    16   7.88   1.63   24   8.88   1.26   7    8.57   1.40   19       8.53   1.07   14   8.21   1.48   9   8.78    1.72   9   7.78   1.79    42    8.48     1.85    19   7.95    2.07
Financial markets and savings*     69   7.65   1.72    16   7.00   2.00   23   6.13   2.82   14   7.86   1.35   20       7.65   2.11   14   7.43   1.70   7   6.86    3.34   8   8.00   1.41    46    8.37     1.96    18   6.72    2.40
Income inequality*                 65   7.52   1.96    12   8.17   1.47   19   8.63   1.12   7    7.86   1.22   16       7.69   1.40   13   8.00   1.47   8   8.13    3.23   9   4.78   2.49    45    8.40     1.62    18   8.00    1.94
Health*                            59   7.51   1.73    13   7.77   2.42   19   8.53   1.31   7    8.00   0.82   16       7.69   1.08   13   7.23   1.96   7   6.14    3.53   9   5.89   1.97    41    6.56     2.48    17   7.12    1.62
Rural and regional development     75   7.63   1.68    16   7.63   2.31   18   8.11   0.83   7    8.86   0.69   19       8.32   0.95   14   7.64   2.27   7   6.86    3.13   9   6.89   3.02    39    7.82     1.93    18   6.94    2.60
Education quality                  66   8.02   1.74    16   7.69   2.21   23   8.74   1.84   7    8.29   1.50   19       8.11   1.76   13   8.00   1.58   8   7.38    3.54   9   7.44   2.19    45    8.44     2.04    18   6.56    2.62
Social protection*                 62   6.94   1.94    12   6.75   1.49   19   9.16   0.77   6    7.67   1.97   16       6.13   2.71   13   6.54   2.73   7   6.29    3.59   8   5.63   2.39    41    7.07     2.52    17   6.76    2.20
Climate change*                    72   7.63   1.94    16   8.13   2.45   19   6.05   2.17   13   7.92   0.49   17       8.18   1.07   15   6.53   2.64   6   7.17    3.55   8   6.63   2.62    37    5.27     3.26    19   7.11    2.03
Agricultural development*          74   7.28   1.99    15   7.67   1.99   23   7.83   1.53   14   7.93   0.48   20       8.00   1.12   14   8.07   1.73   7   8.00    3.32   8   7.13   1.89    41    8.37     1.64    18   6.33    2.54
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                84
The World Bank Group                                                                                             Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Turkey? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                    Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                      Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                    N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Migration                           29   4.24   2.13     3   4.00   1.73    2   3.00   0.00    3   6.67   3.22    8       3.25   0.46   6    5.17   2.04                      7   3.57   0.79    28    5.11     1.73     8   5.63    3.16
Transport*                          35   5.83   2.33    10   7.10   2.89   10   6.00   1.76    5   6.60   2.30   14       4.86   2.07   5    7.80   0.45   3   7.67 2.08      6   3.83   1.33    27    3.93     3.05     5   6.60    3.51
Competitiveness                     44   6.95   1.78     9   5.44   1.01   15   7.00   2.04    4   8.75   0.50   10       6.50   1.72   7    7.86   0.90   3   7.67 2.08      3   7.00   1.73    29    7.03     2.20     8   6.50    2.88
Urban development and planning      39   6.44   1.83    11   6.91   2.59    8   7.75   1.17    4   7.00   1.83    5       5.00   2.24   5    6.20   1.10   1   6.00   .       4   6.50   1.73    28    5.75     1.74    10   5.90    2.85
Environmental sustainability*       44   6.95   1.82    12   7.50   2.78   12   7.92   0.79   12   7.33   0.89   18       7.39   1.50   7    8.43   1.13   1   10.00  .       8   6.50   1.07    27    5.67     1.64    11   5.91    3.62
Regulatory framework for private
                                    44   6.27   1.97    6    5.00   1.27   14   6.00   2.91   7    7.14   1.95   16       6.19   2.11   8    7.63   1.51   2   8.50    0.71   7   5.57   2.37    30    6.57     1.76    10   5.10    3.51
sector development
Poverty reduction*                  51   6.35   1.98     8   5.25   2.49    9   5.56   0.53    3   7.00   2.00   16       5.88   1.03    9   5.33   2.35   5   5.80    2.95   8   4.38   1.51    32    4.59     2.17    11   6.00    2.90
Gender equity*                      41   6.46   2.31     9   5.33   2.06    6   4.33   0.82    4   8.25   0.96   14       6.29   2.49    7   5.71   2.50   4   4.00    1.41   7   5.86   2.85    33    3.24     2.71     9   4.89    3.62
Foreign direct investment           45   6.31   2.00     9   6.11   1.54    9   6.33   3.16    6   8.00   1.67   14       5.57   2.38    7   7.71   0.95   3   8.00    1.73   7   6.14   1.95    27    6.74     1.48     8   6.00    3.70
Water and sanitation*               38   5.76   1.95    10   7.50   2.46    6   5.67   2.58    4   7.25   2.22   13       5.85   2.51    6   5.83   1.33   3   8.67    1.16   8   5.25   1.49    26    3.38     2.40     9   6.56    2.40
Trade and exports                   42   6.29   1.92    10   6.20   1.69   15   6.60   2.03    5   8.20   1.30   15       6.60   0.91    6   7.17   0.41   3   6.00    3.61   8   6.50   1.07    32    7.47     1.55     7   6.00    3.46
Economic growth                     60   6.80   2.02    11   6.36   2.11   16   6.94   1.69   13   7.31   1.38   19       6.68   1.64    9   7.33   1.87   5   6.60    2.70   8   5.75   1.04    32    7.81     1.91    10   6.00    3.50
Energy*                             58   6.86   2.20    14   6.00   1.88   11   7.55   1.37   12   8.08   1.98   18       6.89   2.99    9   8.44   0.73   4   7.00    2.94   8   5.00   2.33    31    5.81     2.18    11   6.27    2.76
Disaster management                 45   6.73   2.32     9   7.78   2.86   12   8.17   1.03    3   7.67   2.31    9       6.78   1.20    5   5.40   0.89   4   7.50    3.11   2   3.50   2.12    27    7.15     2.30     8   5.75    3.24
Public sector governance/reform     52   6.62   1.72    10   6.30   1.83    8   5.00   1.31   11   7.18   0.98   13       5.77   1.01    9   7.00   1.41   5   6.80    2.78   8   6.50   2.07    29    6.00     2.05     8   7.63    1.77
Job creation/employment*            57   6.30   2.14    14   4.86   1.66    9   5.67   1.58    4   7.25   2.22   18       6.22   1.96   10   6.60   2.01   4   6.50    2.38   8   3.75   1.17    35    7.29     2.01    11   6.18    3.03
Financial markets and savings       41   6.44   1.64    12   6.08   1.93   13   6.23   2.59    6   8.50   0.84   17       6.88   0.78    7   7.00   2.08   3   8.00    2.00   8   6.38   2.00    34    7.41     2.19     6   6.00    3.46
Income inequality*                  49   5.71   2.05     9   3.44   2.24   13   3.08   1.75    4   7.50   2.38   14       5.71   1.68    8   6.88   1.81   5   3.60    2.41   8   3.75   1.75    31    6.84     2.81     9   4.44    3.71
Health*                             44   6.66   2.15    10   6.10   2.08    9   7.00   1.23    4   7.25   2.22   10       5.00   1.41    7   6.00   2.08   2   6.00    0.00   8   5.13   0.64    33    3.82     2.70     8   5.88    2.75
Rural and regional development*     47   5.83   2.23    13   5.85   1.41   14   4.29   2.84    5   7.40   2.07   18       5.94   1.66    9   6.33   1.94   4   6.75    3.95   8   5.00   1.20    30    6.73     1.78    11   7.45    2.66
Education quality                   47   5.32   2.13    10   4.90   1.73   10   5.90   1.20    4   7.50   2.38   15       4.67   1.45    9   6.11   2.42   2   6.50    0.71   8   4.50   1.41    35    5.23     3.20     9   6.89    3.89
Social protection*                  34   4.68   2.11     8   3.50   1.31    5   4.80   0.45    3   6.67   3.22   10       4.20   1.69    6   7.17   1.33   3   7.00    3.00   8   2.50   1.41    29    5.48     2.42     7   6.14    3.24
Climate change*                     52   6.33   1.81     8   5.25   2.19    8   5.25   2.44   12   7.75   0.97   14       6.79   2.01    7   5.71   1.70   3   7.67    2.52   6   4.33   1.63    27    3.22     2.83     7   5.29    3.20
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                    Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                      Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                    N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve   80   6.13   1.82    15   6.07   1.67   23   6.48   1.41   14   7.21   1.05   19       6.05   1.72   12   7.25   1.42   9   5.33    1.73   9   5.00   1.12    40    5.58     2.40   15    5.53    2.33
development results in Turkey?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Turkey? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                    Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                      Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                    N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group's financial
instruments meet the needs of       79   6.44   2.13    16   4.94   2.14   24   7.13   1.83   14   7.29   1.44   20       5.70   1.59   14   6.36   2.24   7   5.86    2.12   6   4.67   0.82    34    5.41     2.30    19   5.37    2.61
Turkey*
The World Bank Group meets
Turkey’s needs for knowledge        81   6.74   2.07    12   4.67   1.88   23   6.74   1.42   14   7.36   1.01   19       5.68   1.11   13   6.69   2.18   8   6.38    2.26   9   5.89   0.93    44    5.64     2.07    20   5.85    2.80
services*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups                                                              85
The World Bank Group                                                                                              Turkey                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
                                                 Employee    Consultant on         Bilateral/                                              Financial            NGO/
                                                    of a    WBG-Supported Multilateral          Private                                     Sector/            Private                      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                         Ministry   Project/PMU            Agency      Sector                                   Private Bank        Foundation         Media       Union         Academia             Other
Weekly                                             19.8%                                                                                                        5.9%            10.0%                       4.2%               4.3%
Monthly                                            29.1%         20.0%               12.0%      71.4%                                         40.0%            17.6%            10.0%       66.7%          27.1%               21.7%
A few times a year                                 34.9%         26.7%               80.0%      28.6%                                         45.0%            47.1%            40.0%       22.2%          33.3%               21.7%
Rarely                                             14.0%         53.3%                4.0%                                                    15.0%            17.6%            40.0%       11.1%          25.0%               52.2%
Never                                              2.3%                               4.0%                                                                     11.8%                                       10.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Turkey, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                     Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                                Academia/
                                       Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation             Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Are timely                           72   6.85   1.62    14   7.36   1.01   20   7.25   0.44   14   7.36   0.75   20       7.45   1.47   8    7.50    1.31   5   7.00    1.58   9   7.00   1.80    35    6.40     2.02    13   7.31    1.60
Include appropriate level of
stakeholder involvement during       77   7.34   1.78    15   6.53   1.92   21   6.24   2.19   14   7.93   0.73   18       6.33   1.50   9    7.22    1.79   3   6.67    0.58   8   6.00   0.76    37    5.30     2.58    15   6.60    2.29
preparation*
Are relevant to Turkey’s
                                     75   7.04   2.13    15   6.53   1.81   23   7.96   1.19   13   7.08   0.76   20       6.25   1.45   13   7.08    2.25   5   6.80    1.92   9   6.22   1.72    38    5.92     2.29    14   5.71    2.02
development priorities*
Lead to practical solutions*         72   6.35   1.78    15   5.40   2.10   20   6.20   0.83   13   6.15   0.69   20       5.25   1.33   12   6.83    2.04   5   5.40    0.89   8   5.63   1.06    36    5.44     2.57    14   4.29    2.30
Are accessible (well written and
                                     78   7.54   1.90    15   7.13   1.13   22   6.32   1.17   14   7.93   0.83   20       7.15   1.18   13   7.69    2.29   7   7.57    1.81   9   7.00   0.87    38    6.95     2.89    17   6.71    2.80
easy to understand)
Are source of relevant information
                                     75   7.87   1.70    15   6.60   2.17   24   8.00   0.66   14   8.14   0.66   20       7.15   1.14   13   7.77    1.88   9   7.56    1.88   9   7.11   1.83    37    6.70     3.03    18   6.61    3.05
on global good practices*
Enhance your knowledge and/or
                                     76   7.63   1.74    15   7.27   1.10   22   7.73   0.55   14   8.00   0.39   20       7.25   0.97   12   7.58    1.73   6   6.83    1.47   8   7.13   1.13    38    6.11     3.29    18   6.78    2.53
skills*
Are adequately disseminated*         63   6.62   2.05    11   5.55   2.12   20   5.05   2.44   5    6.40   1.14   20       5.50   1.00   9    6.33    1.94   5   4.40    2.70   8   5.63   1.06    37    5.14     2.57    13   6.15    2.15
Are translated enough into local
                                     75   6.71   2.39    12   5.92   2.19   10   7.90   0.32   12   6.00   1.65   17       5.94   1.39   12   7.17    2.86   5   5.80    2.39   8   5.88   1.36    32    4.28     3.23    16   5.81    2.48
language*
Are adaptable to Turkey’s specific
development challenges and           71   6.72   2.31    12   4.58   2.19   23   7.57   0.51   14   7.00   1.11   20       5.25   1.68   10   7.10    1.97   5   5.80    2.28   8   5.00   2.73    37    5.59     2.48    17   5.29    2.37
country circumstances*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                  86
The World Bank Group                                                                                               Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                      Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                        Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
World Bank Group's knowledge
                                      83   6.53   1.62    15   5.67   1.50   24   6.75   0.79   14   7.21   0.89   20       6.20   0.89   14   7.36   2.17   7   6.00    1.63   8   5.00   1.85    44    5.73     2.06    20   5.05    2.56
work and activities make to
development results in your
country?*
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World Bank
                                      84   7.39   1.64    14   7.36   0.63   23   7.22   1.88   14   8.21   0.89   20       7.85   0.67   13   7.69   1.55   7   6.86    1.86   8   7.50   1.07    42    7.31     1.76    20   7.00    2.51
Group's knowledge work and
activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                      Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                        Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean    SD
The World Bank Group disburses
                                      71   6.56   1.97    16   5.13   2.87   15   6.80   0.94   11   6.45   1.29   18       6.06   1.96   8    5.88   0.84   2   7.50    0.71   6   5.00   0.00    32    6.66     2.18    13   6.31    2.10
funds promptly
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the            78   7.87   1.26    16   8.00   1.46   18   7.83   0.38   12   7.33   0.89   18       7.50   1.47   12   7.50   1.73   3   7.67    0.58   8   7.50   1.60    39    6.92     2.16    12   7.67    1.67
projects and programs it supports
The World Bank Group's approvals
and reviews are done in a timely      71   6.90   1.97    15   5.93   3.58   15   7.07   0.80   12   6.08   1.62   18       5.78   2.07   10   6.10   2.13   2   7.50    0.71   6   5.67   0.52    37    6.43     2.24    11   7.00    2.15
fashion
The World Bank Group's
"Safeguard Policy" requirements       53   6.92   2.02    11   6.64   1.80   12   7.67   0.49   4    7.50   1.73   13       5.85   1.28   7    7.00   1.29   2   7.00    1.41   8   4.75   1.49    28    4.96     2.20    9    6.33    2.83
are reasonable*
The World Bank Group's conditions
                                      66   6.55   1.95    16   6.94   2.72   18   7.22   0.88   11   7.27   1.01   19       6.37   0.96   7    6.43   1.62   4   7.50    0.58   6   5.17   1.60    24    4.79     2.55    9    6.22    3.07
on its lending are reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes
                                      69   7.17   1.72    15   4.53   2.53   11   7.09   0.94   11   5.91   1.38   18       6.00   1.68   9    7.00   1.12   1   8.00     .     6   6.67   0.82    32    7.16     2.53    11   6.82    1.83
decisions quickly in Turkey*
Working with the World Bank
Group increases Turkey’s              79   7.48   1.84    16   7.50   1.03   19   7.89   0.32   12   7.50   1.00   19       7.05   1.08   12   7.83   2.17   5   8.00    0.71   9   7.00   1.00    36    5.58     2.47    12   7.92    1.56
institutional capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures
consistency and continuity through    50   6.64   1.84    14   7.57   1.79   11   8.00   0.00   10   6.50   0.97    7       5.71   1.50   8    7.88   1.36   1   8.00     .     2   4.00   1.41    13    6.08     2.33    8    5.75    1.91
staff changes*
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group        54   6.69   1.93    10   3.80   2.53   13   7.69   0.48   11   7.18   1.08   11       5.18   0.98   8    6.75   2.32   2   8.00    0.00   6   4.50   1.23    26    6.88     2.09    9    6.00    3.08
makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides
                                      71   7.44   1.87    15   7.47   2.13   17   7.94   0.24   11   6.91   1.45   19       7.58   0.90   11   7.27   1.90   3   8.00    0.00   8   6.50   1.85    28    7.04     1.92    10   7.10    2.51
effective implementation support
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                                   87
The World Bank Group                                                                         Turkey                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Turkey?      (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                  Employee   Consultant on         Bilateral/                     Financial      NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                            of a   WBG-Supported Multilateral                Private      Sector/      Private                   Trade
(Responses Combined)                               Ministry  Project/PMU            Agency            Sector    Private Bank  Foundation      Media       Union     Academia          Other
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                    15.3%         18.8%              16.0%             0.0%       20.0%          17.6%        30.0%       33.3%       40.4%          43.5%
statistics/figures on Turkey’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government
                                                    25.9%         12.5%              24.0%            14.3%        0.0%           5.9%        10.0%       0.0%        12.8%          17.4%
clients (e.g., national, state, local)
Offer more innovative financial products*           11.8%         12.5%               0.0%             7.1%       30.0%           5.9%         0.0%       44.4%        2.1%          17.4%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                    14.1%         37.5%               0.0%             7.1%        5.0%           0.0%        20.0%       0.0%         0.0%           4.3%
compared to markets*
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                    25.9%         31.3%              76.0%            28.6%       25.0%          76.5%        20.0%       33.3%       48.9%          17.4%
Government*
Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                    14.1%         37.5%               0.0%             0.0%       20.0%           0.0%        20.0%       0.0%        14.9%           4.3%
Turkey’s specific challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge services            16.5%         0.0%               20.0%            14.3%        0.0%           0.0%        0.0%        0.0%        10.6%           8.7%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work              2.4%          0.0%                0.0%            7.1%         0.0%           0.0%        10.0%       0.0%        0.0%            8.7%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                    32.9%         6.3%               20.0%            64.3%       25.0%          41.2%        30.0%       11.1%       23.4%          26.1%
country*
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                    22.4%         31.3%               0.0%            57.1%       50.0%          35.3%        10.0%       44.4%       12.8%          30.4%
Group financing*
Increase availability of Fee-Based services*        0.0%          6.3%                0.0%             0.0%        0.0%           0.0%         0.0%       11.1%        6.4%          13.0%
Work faster                                         1.2%          0.0%                0.0%             0.0%        5.0%           0.0%         0.0%       0.0%         8.5%          0.0%
Other                                               8.2%          0.0%                0.0%             0.0%        0.0%           5.9%         0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          4.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Turkey, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe
the World Bank Group should offer more of in Turkey?*
                                                   Employee    Consultant on       Bilateral/                  Financial          NGO/
                                                      of a    WBG-Supported Multilateral          Private       Sector/          Private                  Trade
Percentage of Respondents                           Ministry    Project/PMU         Agency        Sector     Private Bank      Foundation      Media      Union       Academia     Other
Financial services                                   36.6%         37.5%             44.0%         7.1%          75.0%           42.9%         77.8%      55.6%         8.7%       38.1%
Knowledge products                                   31.7%          6.3%             40.0%        28.6%          5.0%                -         11.1%      11.1%        63.0%       28.6%
Convening services                                   9.8%             -              12.0%         7.1%          10.0%           21.4%            -       33.3%        15.2%       28.6%
None of the above                                    1.2%             -                 -            -              -            14.3%            -          -          4.3%          -
The combination is appropriate for Turkey            12.2%         56.3%                -         50.0%          10.0%             7.1%        11.1%         -            -           -
Don't know                                           8.5%             -               4.0%         7.1%             -            14.3%            -          -          8.7%        4.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                             88
The World Bank Group                                                                         Turkey                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                 Employee     Consultant on      Bilateral/                 Financial      NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                           of a     WBG-Supported      Multilateral   Private       Sector/      Private                         Trade
(Responses Combined)                              Ministry     Project/PMU        Agency        Sector    Private Bank  Foundation            Media       Union      Academia        Other
Local newspapers*                                  39.3%           50.0%           52.0%        78.6%         75.0%       70.6%               50.0%       55.6%       19.1%          34.8%
International newspapers                           10.7%           25.0%            8.0%         0.0%         5.0%         5.9%               10.0%       11.1%        8.5%          13.0%
Local radio*                                       0.0%            25.0%            0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%               10.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
International radio                                0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Local television                                   14.3%           31.3%           12.0%        14.3%         10.0%       29.4%               50.0%       11.1%       12.8%          30.4%
International television*                          4.8%            31.3%            0.0%         7.1%         5.0%         0.0%               0.0%        0.0%        12.8%          8.7%
Periodicals                                        2.4%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         5.0%         5.9%               0.0%        0.0%        12.8%          4.3%
Internet*                                          83.3%           37.5%           80.0%       100.0%         85.0%       70.6%               40.0%       88.9%       72.3%          91.3%
Social media                                       7.1%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         5.9%               0.0%        0.0%        14.9%          8.7%
Blogs                                              0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         2.1%          0.0%
Mobile phones*                                     0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%               0.0%        11.1%        0.0%          0.0%
Instant messaging                                  0.0%            0.0%             0.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%               0.0%        0.0%         2.1%          0.0%
Other                                              11.9%           0.0%             4.0%         0.0%         0.0%         0.0%               20.0%       22.2%        4.3%          4.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                                  Employee       Consultant on     Bilateral/                  Financial         NGO/
                                                     of a       WBG-Supported Multilateral        Private       Sector/         Private                     Trade
Percentage of Respondents                          Ministry      Project/PMU        Agency        Sector     Private Bank     Foundation       Media        Union      Academia      Other
Yes                                                 21.7%           18.8%            52.0%         7.7%          20.0%           17.6%         10.0%        55.6%        44.7%       18.2%
No                                                  78.3%           81.3%            48.0%         92.3%         80.0%           82.4%         90.0%        44.4%        55.3%       81.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                Employee      Consultant on         Bilateral/                    Financial       NGO/
                                                   of a      WBG-Supported Multilateral               Private      Sector/       Private                  Trade
Percentage of Respondents                        Ministry      Project/PMU           Agency           Sector    Private Bank   Foundation     Media       Union      Academia         Other
Yes                                               13.8%            6.3%               52.0%           21.4%           -          25.0%        44.4%       55.6%        6.5%             -
No                                                86.3%           93.8%               48.0%           78.6%        100.0%        75.0%        55.6%       44.4%       93.5%          100.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?
                                                      Employee     Consultant on     Bilateral/                   Financial       NGO/
                                                        of a      WBG-Supported     Multilateral      Private      Sector/       Private                  Trade
Percentage of Respondents                              Ministry    Project/PMU        Agency          Sector    Private Bank   Foundation     Media       Union      Academia         Other
Yes                                                    100.0%         100.0%          100.0%          100.0%          -          100.0%       75.0%         -         100.0%            -
No                                                        -              -                -              -            -             -         25.0%         -            -               -



                                                                                             89
The World Bank Group                                                                                                Turkey                                                                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                                 Employee          Consultant on         Bilateral/                          Financial           NGO/
                                                                   of a           WBG-Supported         Multilateral          Private         Sector/           Private                      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                                         Ministry         Project/PMU            Agency              Sector       Private Bank       Foundation         Media      Union          Academia              Other
Yes                                                               100.0%              100.0%              100.0%              100.0%          100.0%            100.0%           75.0%      100.0%          100.0%              100.0%
No                                                                   -                   -                    -                  -               -                 -             25.0%         -               -                   -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                               Employee                            Consultant on         Bilateral/                          Financial           NGO/
                                                  of a                            WBG-Supported         Multilateral          Private         Sector/           Private                      Trade
Percentage of Respondents                       Ministry                           Project/PMU            Agency              Sector       Private Bank       Foundation         Media      Union          Academia             Other
Yes                                              87.7%                                62.5%                84.0%              92.9%            95.0%            76.5%            100.0%     100.0%          66.7%               47.6%
No                                               12.3%                                37.5%                16.0%               7.1%            5.0%             23.5%               -          -            33.3%               52.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                      Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                            Financial Sector/       NGO/Private                                               Academia/
                                        Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency     Private Sector       Private Bank          Foundation            Media           Trade Union      Research Institute           Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD       N Mean SD              N Mean SD           N Mean SD             N Mean SD          N   Mean    SD     N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N    Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's
data more often than I did a few      77   6.12   2.45    15   4.47   3.14   25    6.20   2.55   14   3.71   2.61   20       3.55   2.48   12   6.92   1.93   7   6.29    2.06   9   6.33   1.58    43    4.28     3.22    17    4.59   2.40
years ago*
I find the World Bank Group's
                                      70   6.89   1.78    10   5.50   2.59   21    6.14   1.88   13   6.23   1.88   19       4.68   1.95   12   7.33   2.23   8   5.13    1.46   9   6.33   1.58    33    6.36     2.40    10    6.10   1.60
websites easy to navigate*
I find the information on the World
                                      72   7.40   1.57    10   8.80   1.14   21    7.24   1.34   13   7.92   0.64   19       6.58   1.58   12   7.83   1.53   8   6.63    1.30   9   6.33   1.58    33    7.67     1.87    11    6.73   3.26
Bank Group's websites useful*
The World Bank Group's social
media channels are valuable
                                      35   6.51   2.34    1    4.00    .     19    5.95   1.62   1    7.00    .     12       5.50   1.45   8    7.63   2.07   2   1.50    0.71   5   5.00   0.00    32    3.63     3.42    7     7.71   1.80
sources of information about the
institution*
When I need information from the
World Bank Group I know how to        78   7.15   2.00    14   9.43   1.02   25    5.72   2.85   13   9.62   0.87   20       6.90   1.89   11   7.45   2.46   8   6.63    3.20   9   5.44   0.53    42    5.31     3.57    17    6.35   2.42
find it*
The World Bank Group is
responsive to my information          65   7.55   1.90    11   8.55   1.21   23    4.13   3.38   13   8.85   0.80    9       7.00   1.23   9    8.33   1.50   5   7.80    1.79   9   6.33   1.58    28    4.89     3.69    11    6.64   3.14
requests and inquiries*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                    90
The World Bank Group                                                                        Turkey                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Turkey? (Select all that apply)
                                                  Employee     Consultant on      Bilateral/                    Financial       NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                            of a     WBG-Supported Multilateral          Private        Sector/       Private            Trade
(Responses Combined)                               Ministry     Project/PMU        Agency          Sector     Private Bank   Foundation   Media   Union    Academia       Other
The World Bank (IBRD)*                              67.9%          100.0%           24.0%          92.9%         100.0%        35.3%      40.0%   0.0%      32.6%         42.9%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)*         7.7%          25.0%            24.0%          71.4%          40.0%         5.9%      10.0%   0.0%       0.0%         9.5%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
                                                     2.6%           0.0%            20.0%           0.0%         5.0%          0.0%       0.0%     0.0%      0.0%          0.0%
(MIGA)*
None*                                               32.1%           0.0%            40.0%           7.1%         0.0%          58.8%      60.0%   100.0%    67.4%         47.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                     Employee   Consultant on      Bilateral/               Financial           NGO/
Percentage of Respondents                               of a   WBG-Supported      Multilateral Private       Sector/           Private            Trade
(Responses Combined)                                  Ministry  Project/PMU         Agency      Sector    Private Bank       Foundation   Media   Union    Academia        Other
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                       13.1%         0.0%            24.0%       7.1%         0.0%             18.8%      40.0%   55.6%     39.1%         18.2%
conversations, etc.)*
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                     52.4%         6.3%            44.0%      64.3%         20.0%            37.5%      50.0%   44.4%     43.5%         18.2%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                       20.2%        43.8%             8.0%      71.4%         20.0%            12.5%      0.0%    44.4%     10.9%         27.3%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*         57.1%        93.8%            40.0%      28.6%        100.0%            37.5%      30.0%    0.0%     43.5%         54.5%
Use World Bank Group website for information,
                                                       25.0%         6.3%             0.0%      14.3%         20.0%            31.3%      30.0%    0.0%     13.0%          4.5%
data, research, etc.*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            91
The World Bank Group                                           Turkey                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations
Ankara N=203               Outside Ankara N=73

A. General Issues Facing Turkey

In general, how would you say that Turkey is headed in...?

Percentage of Respondents                                     Ankara               Outside Ankara
The right direction                                           42.3%                    36.2%
The wrong direction                                           30.4%                    31.9%
Not sure                                                      27.3%                    31.9%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Turkey. Please identify which of the following you
consider the most important development priorities in Turkey. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Ankara                Outside Ankara
Social protection                                              6.0%                      2.7%
Transport                                                      2.0%                      2.7%
Public sector governance/reform                               15.5%                     19.2%
Gender equity                                                  5.0%                      9.6%
Foreign direct investment                                      5.0%                      4.1%
Water and sanitation                                           0.0%                      0.0%
Anti-corruption                                               18.0%                     16.4%
Job creation/employment                                       23.5%                     32.9%
Rural and regional development*                               10.0%                     31.5%
Financial markets and savings                                  6.0%                      4.1%
Urban development and planning                                 6.0%                      9.6%
Environmental sustainability                                   6.5%                     11.0%
Income inequality                                             17.5%                     12.3%
Health                                                         5.0%                      4.1%
Education quality                                             55.0%                     54.8%
Poverty reduction                                              6.0%                      4.1%
Energy                                                        19.5%                      9.6%
Climate change*                                                0.5%                      4.1%
Agricultural development*                                      3.0%                     12.3%
Trade and exports                                              6.5%                      2.7%
Competitiveness                                               16.5%                     17.8%
Economic growth*                                              20.0%                      6.8%
Law and justice                                               30.0%                     26.0%
Regulatory framework for private sector dev.                   7.0%                      1.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         0.0%                      0.0%
Disaster management                                            1.0%                      0.0%
Migration                                                      1.0%                      0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                92
The World Bank Group                                     Turkey                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                     Ankara             Outside Ankara
Water and sanitation*                                     0.0%                   2.7%
Income inequality                                        45.2%                  43.8%
Economic growth                                          41.7%                  42.5%
Climate change                                            0.0%                   0.0%
Gender equity                                             5.0%                   2.7%
Rural and regional development                           38.2%                  38.4%
Urban development and planning                            1.5%                   4.1%
Regulatory framework for private sector dev.              5.0%                   0.0%
Social protection                                        12.6%                  16.4%
Law and justice                                           3.5%                   6.8%
Transport                                                 0.0%                   0.0%
Competitiveness                                           4.5%                   5.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                    0.0%                   0.0%
Migration                                                 8.0%                   2.7%
Anti-corruption                                          12.1%                   9.6%
Foreign direct investment                                 3.0%                   0.0%
Education quality                                        34.2%                  38.4%
Energy                                                    4.0%                   4.1%
Public sector governance/reform                           3.5%                   2.7%
Environmental sustainability                              0.0%                   1.4%
Disaster management                                       0.5%                   0.0%
Health                                                    1.5%                   4.1%
Agricultural development                                 12.1%                  12.3%
Job creation/employment                                  45.7%                  52.1%
Financial markets and savings                             0.5%                   1.4%
Trade and exports                                         2.5%                   2.7%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           93
The World Bank Group                                          Turkey                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would
contribute most to generating economic growth in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Ankara            Outside Ankara
Energy                                                        28.0%                 30.1%
Gender equity                                                  6.0%                  4.1%
Income inequality                                              3.5%                  8.2%
Social protection                                              2.0%                  2.7%
Climate change                                                 0.0%                  0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                8.5%                  9.6%
Disaster management                                            2.0%                  0.0%
Rural and regional development                                27.5%                 20.5%
Foreign direct investment                                      9.5%                 15.1%
Urban development and planning                                 2.5%                  2.7%
Water and sanitation                                           0.0%                  0.0%
Education quality                                             40.0%                 30.1%
Migration                                                      3.0%                  4.1%
Regulatory framework for private sector dev.*                 11.0%                 23.3%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         0.0%                  0.0%
Trade and exports                                             33.0%                 28.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                9.5%                  9.6%
Job creation/employment                                       28.5%                 28.8%
Agricultural development                                      10.0%                 11.0%
Transport                                                      2.0%                  1.4%
Environmental sustainability                                   4.0%                  0.0%
Health                                                         0.0%                  0.0%
Law and justice                                                6.0%                  8.2%
Competitiveness                                               26.5%                 30.1%
Financial markets and savings*                                19.5%                 31.5%
*Significantly different between locations

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate
how this would be achieved in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Ankara               Outside Ankara
Better employment opportunities for young people                       21.1%                    14.3%
Better employment opportunities for women                              10.8%                     8.6%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor*                           3.6%                    14.3%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                        9.8%                     14.3%
greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                    5.2%                      5.7%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities                                   11.9%                     8.6%
A growing middle class                                                 13.9%                     15.7%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas*               8.2%                      17.1%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                1.0%                      0.0%
Consistent economic growth                                             35.1%                     31.4%
More reliable social safety net                                        12.9%                     15.7%
Greater equity of fiscal policy*                                       8.2%                      18.6%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity*             46.4%                     30.0%
Better quality public services                                         2.1%                      1.4%
Other                                                                  2.1%                      2.9%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                               94
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                                Ankara              Outside Ankara
                                                                                         N       Mean     SD    N        Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Turkey?                   201       6.65   2.66   72        6.71     2.02
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)


                                                                                                Ankara               Outside Ankara
                                                                                         N       Mean     SD    N         Mean     SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                        189       6.87   2.15   68        6.85     1.88
effectiveness in Turkey.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                                Ankara               Outside Ankara
                                                                                         N       Mean     SD    N         Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared
                                                                                        174       6.26   2.18   64        7.02     2.07
to help Turkey solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Turkey, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Ankara                   Outside Ankara
Social protection                                                      4.0%                         4.1%
Public sector governance/reform                                        4.5%                         6.8%
Transport                                                             12.0%                        11.0%
Poverty reduction                                                     17.5%                         8.2%
Gender equity                                                          8.5%                         6.8%
Competitiveness                                                       18.0%                        20.5%
Rural and regional development                                        23.0%                        34.2%
Foreign direct investment                                              3.5%                         2.7%
Water and sanitation                                                   0.0%                         1.4%
Energy                                                                15.5%                        20.5%
Job creation/employment                                               29.5%                        24.7%
Financial markets and savings                                          5.5%                         4.1%
Urban development and planning                                         5.0%                         9.6%
Environmental sustainability                                           5.0%                         4.1%
Income inequality                                                     14.5%                        13.7%
Health                                                                 3.0%                         4.1%
Education quality                                                     47.5%                        38.4%
Climate change                                                         0.5%                         2.7%
Agricultural development                                              13.0%                        13.7%
Trade and exports                                                     10.0%                        13.7%
Economic growth                                                       29.5%                        23.3%
Law and justice*                                                       4.0%                        13.7%
Regulatory framework for private sector dev.                           4.0%                         6.8%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                 0.0%                         0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                        5.0%                         5.5%
Migration                                                              1.0%                         2.7%
Disaster management                                                    3.0%                         0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                        95
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Turkey?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                  Ankara               Outside Ankara
Convening/facilitating*                                     3.4%                    10.4%
Data                                                        1.1%                     4.5%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                           25.0%                    31.3%
Financial resources                                        25.0%                    35.8%
Capacity development*                                      22.7%                    10.4%
Technical assistance*                                      18.2%                     6.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                  1.1%                     1.5%
Donor coordination                                          0.6%                     0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                               0.6%                     0.0%
Other                                                       1.1%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                  Ankara               Outside Ankara
Convening/facilitating                                      1.2%                     3.0%
Data                                                        1.8%                     4.5%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                           18.7%                     9.0%
Financial resources                                        13.9%                    16.4%
Capacity development                                       27.1%                    31.3%
Technical assistance                                       20.5%                    10.4%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                  9.0%                    13.4%
Donor coordination*                                         1.8%                    10.4%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                               4.8%                     1.5%
Other                                                       0.6%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Turkey’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                                                                 Ankara                   Outside Ankara
                                                                           N      Mean      SD        N        Mean     SD
Convening/facilitating                                                    124      5.77     2.11     36        5.47      2.16
Data                                                                      150      6.97     1.74     51        6.82      1.69
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                          165      7.36     1.68     54        7.00      1.80
Financial resources                                                       174      7.13     1.73     63        7.11      2.09
Technical assistance                                                      165      7.21     1.68     55        6.85      2.18
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                140      6.46     2.26     52        6.65      1.91
Donor coordination                                                        118      6.07     2.52     40        6.28      2.05
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                             113      5.95     2.78     30        6.40      2.58
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                             96
The World Bank Group                                              Turkey                                Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Turkey. To what degree would Turkey
benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                                                                      Ankara                Outside Ankara
                                                                               N       Mean      SD     N        Mean     SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                               181     7.08      2.09   64       7.34      2.26
more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development
                                                                               182     7.41      1.84   69       7.45      1.84
projects on the ground
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                               179     6.67      2.42   62       6.55      2.37
sociopolitical conditions)
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                174     7.11      2.03   69       7.45      1.82
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Turkey?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                  Ankara             Outside Ankara
Staff too inaccessible*                                                               13.1%                   0.0%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                              13.1%                   8.2%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Turkey                      16.6%                  11.0%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                              25.1%                  19.2%
Arrogant in its approach                                                               3.0%                   4.1%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                    7.5%                   8.2%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                  2.5%                   0.0%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country          11.6%                   5.5%
Too influenced by developed countries*                                                14.1%                  24.7%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                 11.1%                  13.7%
Too slow and bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                  25.6%                  30.1%
Not aligned with other donors’ work*                                                   0.0%                   4.1%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                        11.1%                  17.8%
Not client focused                                                                    10.1%                  13.7%
Other*                                                                                 2.5%                  13.7%
Don’t know                                                                             8.0%                   5.5%
*Significantly different between locations

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Turkey?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                              Ankara             Outside Ankara
Capacity development*                                             57.2%                  48.9%
Policy based lending/budget support to the
                                                                  11.6%                  12.8%
Government
Knowledge products/services                                       6.5%                   10.6%
Investment lending                                                41.3%                  51.1%
Technical assistance                                              18.1%                  14.9%
Trust Fund management                                             10.9%                  6.4%
South-South knowledge exchange                                    15.9%                  14.9%
Other*                                                            8.0%                   4.3%
Don’t know                                                        5.1%                   4.3%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                   97
The World Bank Group                                                 Turkey                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO
of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure
better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                Ankara                  Outside Ankara
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                            41.0%                       40.0%
Donor Community                                                      1.5%                        4.3%
Media                                                                9.0%                       14.3%
NGOs                                                                18.5%                       27.1%
Local Government                                                    15.5%                       24.3%
Private Sector*                                                     39.0%                       24.3%
Parliament*                                                         18.0%                        4.3%
Community-Based Organizations                                       20.5%                       15.7%
Beneficiaries                                                       14.0%                        8.6%
Foundations                                                          0.5%                        0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations                                            0.0%                        0.0%
Other*                                                               2.0%                       10.0%
Don’t know                                                           0.5%                        0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Turkey?
                                                                                            Ankara               Outside Ankara
                                                                                      N      Mean     SD     N        Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                      183     5.70    2.23   67       6.37      2.26
in Turkey*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                      181     6.39    2.19   67       6.99      2.27
development priorities for Turkey
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                                      169     6.31    2.16   63       6.89      2.42
for Turkey

The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Turkey with respect           161     7.24    2.11   65       7.57      2.49
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                       98
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Turkey, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                                Ankara              Outside Ankara
                                                                                         N       Mean     SD    N        Mean     SD
Responsiveness                                                                          168       6.40   1.89   63       6.65      2.10
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)                  157       6.15   1.90   59       5.92      2.08
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                                168       5.96   2.05   56       5.96      2.15
Being inclusive                                                                         166       6.68   2.02   55       6.27      1.85
Openness                                                                                168       7.23   1.94   62       7.53      1.71
Staff accessibility*                                                                    165       6.70   2.31   60       7.75      2.11
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                         154       7.53   1.97   66       8.11      2.01
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                        152       6.66   2.35   54       6.98      2.81
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                                     146       6.47   1.77   47       6.45      2.16
Collaboration with the Government                                                       151       7.54   1.80   50       7.72      1.51
Collaboration with other donors                                                         114       6.92   1.99   43       6.86      2.08
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                            147       6.22   1.98   52       6.58      1.74
Being a long-term partner*                                                              146       7.69   2.10   55       8.44      1.56
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To be a more effective development partner in Turkey, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?

Percentage of Respondents                                             Ankara                   Outside Ankara
More local presence                                                   66.7%                        71.2%
The current level of local presence is adequate                       19.8%                        23.3%
Less local presence                                                    .5%                            -
Don't know                                                            13.0%                         5.5%




                                                                        99
The World Bank Group                                      Turkey                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                               Ankara                  Outside Ankara
                                                                          N     Mean      SD       N        Mean     SD
Anti-corruption                                                          166     7.39    2.39      56       7.43       2.19
Migration                                                                160     7.05    2.30      60       7.43       2.09
Transport                                                                168     6.55    2.35      66       7.03       1.86
Competitiveness                                                          154     7.85    2.03      61       7.93       1.99
Law and justice                                                          152     7.51    2.33      51       7.76       2.38
Urban development and planning                                           164     8.04    1.83      53       8.30       1.62
Environmental sustainability*                                            176     8.07    1.79      67       8.66       1.25
Regulatory framework for private sector development                      156     7.58    1.98      63       7.83       1.56
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   148     5.93    2.13      43       6.33       2.06
Poverty reduction                                                        168     8.01    1.78      67       7.93       1.51
Gender equity                                                            156     7.21    2.64      59       7.90       1.79
Foreign direct investment                                                142     7.21    2.42      53       7.36       2.13
Water and sanitation                                                     156     6.53    2.03      52       7.12       1.94
Trade and exports                                                        161     7.81    2.07      65       7.34       2.25
Economic growth                                                          167     8.18    1.73      67       7.99       2.04
Energy                                                                   177     7.90    1.81      66       7.85       2.08
Disaster management                                                      166     7.51    1.71      61       7.13       1.59
Public sector governance/reform                                          164     7.77    1.96      62       8.08       2.29
Job creation/employment                                                  170     8.26    1.72      65       8.34       1.46
Financial markets and savings                                            167     7.62    2.03      69       7.13       2.30
Income inequality*                                                       159     7.64    2.00      54       8.33       1.67
Health                                                                   152     7.18    2.14      50       7.52       1.69
Rural and regional development                                           164     7.67    1.81      63       7.75       2.13
Education quality                                                        170     8.10    1.93      59       7.73       2.28
Social protection                                                        150     6.98    2.35      52       7.04       2.21
Climate change*                                                          167     6.81    2.60      60       7.72       1.81
Agricultural development                                                 175     7.74    1.75      64       7.42       2.22
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           100
The World Bank Group                                                  Turkey                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                Ankara               Outside Ankara
                                                                                         N       Mean    SD     N         Mean     SD
Migration                                                                               79        4.59   2.04   18        4.94     2.21
Transport*                                                                              93        5.13   2.77   26        6.81     1.83
Competitiveness                                                                         90        6.90   2.03   41        6.98     1.71
Urban development and planning                                                          90        6.27   1.95   24        6.38     2.12
Environmental sustainability*                                                           112       6.66   1.97   39        7.62     1.93
Regulatory framework for private sector development                                     112       6.22   2.29   31        6.42     1.82
Poverty reduction                                                                       117       5.47   2.05   34        6.15     2.27
Gender equity                                                                           105       5.10   2.87   28        5.93     2.36
Foreign direct investment*                                                              110       6.24   2.22   24        7.54     1.14
Water and sanitation*                                                                   103       5.33   2.52   23        6.78     1.78
Trade and exports                                                                       105       6.78   1.81   37        6.51     1.95
Economic growth                                                                         134       6.87   1.95   48        7.02     2.24
Energy*                                                                                 133       6.39   2.32   46        7.63     1.98
Disaster management                                                                     101       6.97   2.30   26        6.77     2.30
Public sector governance/reform                                                         122       6.32   1.83   30        6.93     1.53
Job creation/employment                                                                 122       6.11   2.19   47        6.64     2.17
Financial markets and savings                                                           111       6.87   1.97   35        6.46     2.03
Income inequality                                                                       122       5.41   2.59   27        5.56     2.71
Health                                                                                  113       5.53   2.48   21        6.24     2.07
Rural and regional development                                                          116       5.89   2.23   46        6.63     2.11
Education quality                                                                       117       5.39   2.44   31        5.48     2.59
Social protection                                                                       92        4.74   2.30   20        5.85     2.43
Climate change                                                                          117       5.60   2.58   30        6.10     2.17
*Significantly different between locations


                                                                                                Ankara               Outside Ankara
                                                                                         N       Mean    SD     N         Mean     SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                        180       5.95   1.87   63        6.51     1.83
development results in Turkey?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Turkey?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)

                                                                                                Ankara              Outside Ankara
                                                                                         N       Mean    SD     N        Mean     SD
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Turkey                   174       6.12   2.14   64        6.16     2.28
The World Bank Group meets Turkey’s needs for knowledge services                        181       6.35   2.02   67        6.22     2.12




                                                                       101
The World Bank Group                                                     Turkey                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?

Percentage of Respondents                                               Ankara                   Outside Ankara
Weekly                                                                   8.0%                         8.2%
Monthly                                                                 29.6%                        23.3%
A few times a year                                                      37.2%                        46.6%
Rarely                                                                  20.6%                        20.5%
Never                                                                    4.5%                         1.4%

In Turkey, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                                   Ankara                  Outside Ankara
                                                                                            N       Mean        SD     N        Mean     SD
Are timely                                                                                 160       6.96       1.62   53       7.30      1.30
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation                    160       6.61       2.05   60       6.93      2.07
Are relevant to Turkey’s development priorities                                            165       6.65       2.02   63       7.00      1.93
Lead to practical solutions                                                                160       5.76       1.96   60       6.15      1.79
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)*                                      170       7.07       2.14   66       7.65      1.46
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                                171       7.33       2.14   66       7.73      1.73
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills*                                                      166       7.08       2.14   66       7.77      1.50
Are adequately disseminated                                                                142       5.93       2.28   52       5.83      1.97
Are translated enough into local language*                                                 154       5.90       2.62   49       7.04      2.02
Are adaptable to Turkey’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                           167       6.17       2.28   55       6.47      2.19
circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations


                                                                                                   Ankara                  Outside Ankara
                                                                                            N       Mean        SD     N        Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
Group's knowledge work and activities make to development results in your                  186       6.26       1.73   68       6.22      1.96
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                           181       7.37       1.76   69       7.62      1.39
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                         102
The World Bank Group                                          Turkey                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                    Ankara                   Outside Ankara
                                                                              N      Mean      SD        N        Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                149     6.30     2.14      48        6.58      1.30
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                             163     7.54     1.51      58        7.91      1.49
programs it supports
The World Bank Group's approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                             152     6.40     2.12      52        7.15      2.03
fashion*
The World Bank Group's "Safeguard Policy" requirements are reasonable        119     6.46     2.08      34        6.32      2.10
The World Bank Group's conditions on its lending are reasonable              139     6.32     2.05      47        6.81      2.06
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Turkey                       143     6.75     2.07      47        6.70      1.79
Working with the World Bank Group increases Turkey’s institutional
                                                                             166     7.10     1.91      58        7.66      1.57
capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                             100     6.78     1.76      30        6.80      2.09
changes
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                             124     6.65     2.04      32        5.94      2.30
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support               143     7.33     1.68      55        7.60      1.84
*Significantly different between locations

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Turkey? (Choose no more than 2)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                Ankara                Outside Ankara
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Turkey’s
                                                                                     22.1%                      23.3%
economy
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients*                                18.6%                      8.2%
Offer more innovative financial products                                             12.6%                      5.5%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                     9.5%                       5.5%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government*                                      33.2%                      52.1%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Turkey’s specific
                                                                                     15.1%                      5.5%
challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                             12.1%                      5.5%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                               3.0%                       0.0%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                            31.2%                      24.7%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing*                       21.1%                      32.9%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                          2.0%                       5.5%
Work faster                                                                          2.5%                       1.4%
Other*                                                                               1.5%                       8.2%
*Significantly different between locations

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Turkey, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Turkey?*

Percentage of Respondents                                    Ankara                Outside Ankara
Financial services                                           32.8%                     44.3%
Knowledge products                                           29.1%                     32.9%
Convening services                                           13.8%                     10.0%
None of the above                                             2.1%                      1.4%
The combination is appropriate for Turkey                    14.8%                      8.6%
Don't know                                                    7.4%                      2.9%
*Significantly different between locations


                                                              103
The World Bank Group                                      Turkey                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Turkey?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                      Ankara              Outside Ankara
Local newspapers                                          46.5%                   38.4%
International newspapers*                                  6.5%                   20.5%
Local radio*                                               0.5%                    5.5%
International radio                                        0.0%                    0.0%
Local television                                          19.5%                   15.1%
International television                                   7.0%                    6.8%
Periodicals                                                3.0%                    6.8%
Internet                                                  77.5%                   76.7%
Social media                                               5.0%                    6.8%
Blogs                                                      0.5%                    0.0%
Mobile phones                                              0.5%                    0.0%
Instant messaging                                          0.5%                    0.0%
Other*                                                    11.5%                    0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose
any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*

Percentage of Respondents                                 Ankara              Outside Ankara
Yes                                                       31.0%                   16.9%
No                                                        69.0%                   83.1%
*Significantly different between locations

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?

Percentage of Respondents                                 Ankara              Outside Ankara
Yes                                                       19.5%                    9.7%
No                                                        80.5%                   90.3%

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                 Ankara              Outside Ankara
Yes                                                       100.0%                  87.5%
No                                                           -                    12.5%

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                 Ankara              Outside Ankara
Yes                                                       100.0%                  97.1%
No                                                           -                     2.9%
*Significantly different between locations

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                 Ankara              Outside Ankara
Yes                                                       79.8%                   78.9%
No                                                        20.2%                   21.1%




                                                           104
The World Bank Group                                           Turkey                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                     Ankara                  Outside Ankara
                                                                              N       Mean      SD       N        Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few years ago   176     5.10      2.94     65       5.69      2.28

I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate                       148     6.29      2.06     57       6.30      2.06
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful              150     7.21      1.81     59       7.69      1.39
The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                              86      5.38      2.94     38       5.95      2.28
information about the institution
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it       177     6.64      2.75     62       7.19      2.44
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                              139     6.52      3.04     46       7.52      1.81
inquiries*
*Significantly different between locations




H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Turkey? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Ankara                Outside Ankara
The World Bank (IBRD)                                         55.6%                     62.1%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                  13.2%                     24.2%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
                                                               3.7%                     1.5%
(MIGA)
None                                                          39.7%                     33.3%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Ankara                Outside Ankara
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                              24.5%                     6.9%
conversations, etc.)*
Use World Bank Group reports/data                             44.9%                     34.7%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                              18.4%                     29.2%
events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                 48.5%                     59.7%
Use World Bank Group website for information,
                                                              11.7%                     27.8%
data, research, etc.*
*Significantly different between locations




                                                               105
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Collaborators
Collaborators N=119              Non-Collaborators N=156

A. General Issues Facing Turkey

In general, how would you say that Turkey is headed in...?

Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The right direction                                                              42.6%            38.8%
The wrong direction                                                              28.7%            32.7%
Not sure                                                                         28.7%            28.6%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Turkey. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Turkey. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Social protection*                                                                1.7%             7.1%
Transport*                                                                        0.0%             3.9%
Public sector governance/reform*                                                 22.2%            12.3%
Gender equity                                                                     6.8%             5.8%
Foreign direct investment                                                         2.6%             6.5%
Water and sanitation                                                              0.0%             0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                                                 12.0%            21.9%
Job creation/employment                                                          23.9%            28.4%
Rural and regional development*                                                  21.4%            11.6%
Financial markets and savings                                                     3.4%             7.1%
Urban development and planning                                                    5.1%             8.4%
Environmental sustainability*                                                    12.0%             4.5%
Income inequality*                                                                9.4%            20.6%
Health                                                                            6.8%             3.2%
Education quality                                                                54.7%            55.5%
Poverty reduction                                                                 4.3%             5.8%
Energy                                                                           18.8%            15.5%
Climate change                                                                    1.7%             1.3%
Agricultural development                                                          5.1%             5.8%
Trade and exports                                                                 6.0%             5.2%
Competitiveness*                                                                 27.4%             9.0%
Economic growth                                                                  17.1%            16.1%
Law and justice                                                                  34.2%            25.2%
Regulatory framework for private sector development*                              0.9%             8.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            0.0%             0.0%
Disaster management                                                               0.0%             1.3%
Migration                                                                         0.0%             1.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       106
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Water and sanitation                                                              0.9%             0.6%
Income inequality                                                                45.3%            44.8%
Economic growth                                                                  41.9%            42.2%
Climate change                                                                    0.0%             0.0%
Gender equity                                                                     3.4%             5.2%
Rural and regional development                                                   38.5%            37.0%
Urban development and planning                                                    3.4%             1.3%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                               6.0%             1.9%
Social protection                                                                12.0%            14.9%
Law and justice*                                                                  7.7%             1.9%
Transport                                                                         0.0%             0.0%
Competitiveness                                                                   6.8%             3.2%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            0.0%             0.0%
Migration                                                                         5.1%             7.8%
Anti-corruption*                                                                 16.2%             7.1%
Foreign direct investment*                                                        5.1%             0.0%
Education quality                                                                32.5%            38.3%
Energy*                                                                           0.9%             6.5%
Public sector governance/reform*                                                  6.0%             1.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                      0.0%             0.6%
Disaster management                                                               0.9%             0.0%
Health*                                                                           0.0%             3.9%
Agricultural development*                                                         7.7%            15.6%
Job creation/employment                                                          53.8%            42.9%
Financial markets and savings                                                     0.9%             0.6%
Trade and exports                                                                 2.6%             1.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       107
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Energy*                                                                          20.2%            34.6%
Gender equity                                                                     5.9%             5.2%
Income inequality                                                                 4.2%             5.2%
Social protection                                                                 2.5%             2.0%
Climate change                                                                    0.0%             0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                  12.6%             5.9%
Disaster management*                                                              3.4%             0.0%
Rural and regional development                                                   31.1%            20.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                        10.1%            11.8%
Urban development and planning                                                    3.4%             2.0%
Water and sanitation                                                              0.0%             0.0%
Education quality*                                                               28.6%            45.1%
Migration*                                                                        5.9%             1.3%
Regulatory framework for private sector development*                             19.3%            10.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                           0.0%             0.0%
Trade and exports*                                                               40.3%            25.5%
Public sector governance/reform                                                  11.8%             7.2%
Job creation/employment                                                          31.1%            26.8%
Agricultural development                                                         13.4%             7.8%
Transport*                                                                        0.0%             3.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                      0.8%             4.6%
Health                                                                            0.0%             0.0%
Law and justice                                                                   5.0%             8.5%
Competitiveness                                                                  29.4%            26.1%
Financial markets and savings                                                    20.2%            24.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Better employment opportunities for young people*                                11.4%            25.3%
Better employment opportunities for women                                        10.5%            10.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                      5.3%             6.7%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                                12.3%             10.0%
greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                             6.1%              4.7%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities*                                           5.3%              15.3%
A growing middle class                                                          9.6%              18.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                         8.8%              11.3%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                         0.9%              0.7%
Consistent economic growth                                                      40.4%             30.0%
More reliable social safety net*                                                22.8%             6.7%
Greater equity of fiscal policy*                                                17.5%             6.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                       43.9%             41.3%
Better quality public services                                                  3.5%              0.7%
Other*                                                                          0.0%              4.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       108
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean      SD      N    Mean     SD

How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Turkey?*             116    7.07    2.03    156    6.39   2.76

(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) * Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean     SD       N    Mean    SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                   110    6.95    1.76    147    6.80   2.29
 effectiveness in Turkey.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean     SD       N    Mean    SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared
                                                                                   102    6.39    2.11    136    6.53   2.23
 to help Turkey solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Turkey, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                                 3.4%                         4.5%
Public sector governance/reform                                                   4.3%                         5.8%
Transport*                                                                       16.4%                         7.7%
Poverty reduction                                                                19.8%                        11.5%
Gender equity                                                                     8.6%                         7.7%
Competitiveness                                                                  14.7%                        21.8%
Rural and regional development                                                   30.2%                        22.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                         4.3%                         2.6%
Water and sanitation                                                              0.9%                         0.0%
Energy                                                                           12.9%                        19.9%
Job creation/employment*                                                         20.7%                        34.0%
Financial markets and savings                                                     4.3%                         5.8%
Urban development and planning*                                                  11.2%                         2.6%
Environmental sustainability                                                      5.2%                         4.5%
Income inequality                                                                11.2%                        15.4%
Health                                                                            3.4%                         3.2%
Education quality                                                                38.8%                        50.6%
Climate change*                                                                   2.6%                         0.0%
Agricultural development                                                         12.9%                        13.5%
Trade and exports                                                                 7.8%                        13.5%
Economic growth                                                                  31.9%                        25.6%
Law and justice                                                                   6.0%                         7.1%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                               5.2%                         3.8%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            0.0%                         0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                                   6.0%                         4.5%
Migration                                                                         2.6%                         0.6%
Disaster management*                                                              4.3%                         0.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       109
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
second greatest value in Turkey?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators           Non-Collaborators
Convening/facilitating                                                            4.3%                     6.3%
Data                                                                              1.7%                     1.6%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                 29.6%                    25.2%
Financial resources                                                              30.4%                    26.0%
Capacity development*                                                            12.2%                    25.2%
Technical assistance                                                             16.5%                    13.4%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                        1.7%                     0.8%
Donor coordination                                                                0.9%                     0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                     0.9%                     0.0%
Other                                                                             1.7%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators           Non-Collaborators
Convening/facilitating                                                            0.9%                     2.5%
Data                                                                              1.8%                     3.3%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                                                22.3%                     9.2%
Financial resources                                                              17.9%                    11.7%
Capacity development                                                             28.6%                    28.3%
Technical assistance*                                                             9.8%                    25.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                        7.1%                    13.3%
Donor coordination                                                                3.6%                     5.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                     6.3%                     1.7%
Other                                                                             0.9%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Turkey’s efforts to achieve development results?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Convening/facilitating                                                            62   5.74   2.17   99    5.68   2.08
Data                                                                              90   6.87   1.89   112   6.98   1.58
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                 100   7.32   1.79   120   7.23   1.65
Financial resources                                                              108   7.25   1.80   130   7.01   1.85
Technical assistance                                                             102   7.14   1.67   119   7.11   1.94
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                        82   6.39   2.06   111   6.59   2.24
Donor coordination                                                                64   6.45   2.12   95    5.89   2.55
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                     64   6.03   2.48   80    6.05   2.92
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)




                                                                       110
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Turkey. To what degree would Turkey
benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N    Mean      SD     N     Mean   SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                                   110   7.39     2.08   136    6.96   2.16
more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development
                                                                                   113   7.50     1.69   139    7.36   1.95
projects on the ground
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                                   109   6.81     2.18   132    6.50   2.57
sociopolitical conditions)
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                    110   7.12     1.90   134    7.29   2.03
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Turkey?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                            Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
Staff too inaccessible                                                                              11.2%                    8.4%
Not exploring alternative policy options*                                                            2.6%                   18.7%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Turkey                                    17.2%                   12.9%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                            20.7%                   25.8%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                             4.3%                    2.6%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                                  9.5%                    6.5%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                                0.9%                    2.6%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                        12.9%                    8.4%
Too influenced by developed countries                                                               15.5%                   18.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities*                              19.8%                    5.8%
Too slow and bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures*                               34.5%                   21.3%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                                  1.7%                    0.6%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                       9.5%                   15.5%
Not client focused                                                                                  11.2%                   11.0%
Other                                                                                                7.8%                    3.9%
Don’t know                                                                                           5.2%                    8.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Turkey?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                           Collaborators             Non-Collaborators
Capacity development                                                               23.5%                      33.6%
Policy based lending/budget support to the Government*                             40.0%                      16.4%
Knowledge products/services                                                        18.3%                      18.4%
Investment lending                                                                 38.3%                      38.8%
Technical assistance                                                               30.4%                      34.2%
Trust Fund management*                                                             15.7%                       7.2%
South-South knowledge exchange                                                      1.7%                       1.3%
Other                                                                               4.3%                       7.2%
Don’t know                                                                          2.6%                       6.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         111
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the
following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better
development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators            Non-Collaborators
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                         41.0%                     40.8%
Donor Community*                                                                  5.1%                      0.0%
Media                                                                             9.4%                     11.2%
NGOs                                                                             24.8%                     17.8%
Local Government*                                                                23.1%                     13.2%
Private Sector                                                                   34.2%                     35.5%
Parliament                                                                       14.5%                     14.5%
Community-Based Organizations                                                    19.7%                     19.1%
Beneficiaries                                                                    12.8%                     12.5%
Foundations                                                                       0.0%                      0.7%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                         0.0%                      0.0%
Other                                                                             4.3%                      3.9%
Don’t know                                                                        0.0%                      0.7%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Turkey?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                      No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean    SD      N        Mean   SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                                 112   6.24    1.99   137       5.62   2.40
in Turkey*
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                                 111   6.91    1.86   136       6.29   2.41
development priorities for Turkey*
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                                 107   6.86    1.77   125       6.17   2.50
for Turkey*
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Turkey with respect 107        7.48    1.96   119       7.26   2.41
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       112
The World Bank Group                                                  Turkey                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Turkey, in terms of each of the following?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean     SD      N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness                                                                   103    6.67    1.84    129    6.32    2.02
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)            98    6.37    1.89    119    5.85    1.97
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                          96    6.14    2.02    129    5.84    2.10
Being inclusive                                                                   94    6.37    1.73    128    6.73    2.14
Openness                                                                         103    7.53    1.59    128    7.15    2.08
Staff accessibility*                                                             104    7.55    1.97    122    6.52    2.47
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                  102    7.83    1.67    119    7.61    2.25
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                  93    6.98    2.17    114    6.55    2.67
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                               82    6.52    1.54    111    6.41    2.07
Collaboration with the Government                                                 93    7.61    1.32    109    7.54    2.04
Collaboration with other donors                                                   61    6.75    1.82    97     6.98    2.12
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                      85    6.41    1.85    115    6.23    1.98
Being a long-term partner                                                         93    8.16    1.66    109    7.64    2.23
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To be a more effective development partner in Turkey, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?
Percentage of Respondents                                                                 Collaborators               Non-Collaborators
More local presence                                                                           69.0%                        67.1%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                               20.4%                        21.1%
Less local presence                                                                             -                           .7%
Don't know                                                                                    10.6%                        11.2%




                                                                      113
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
         Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                 No
                the World Bank Group in your country?                           N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Anti-corruption                                                                 96    7.18   2.42   127   7.58   2.26
Migration                                                                       93    7.37   2.46   128   7.02   2.07
Transport*                                                                      103   7.18   2.02   132   6.30   2.31
Competitiveness                                                                 94    8.11   1.99   122   7.70   2.02
Law and justice                                                                 84    7.43   2.35   120   7.68   2.32
Urban development and planning                                                  101   8.16   1.93   117   8.05   1.65
Environmental sustainability                                                    107   8.34   1.72   136   8.14   1.64
Regulatory framework for private sector development                             96    7.56   1.82   124   7.72   1.91
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                          86    6.07   2.08   106   5.97   2.15
Poverty reduction                                                               104   7.98   1.70   132   8.00   1.71
Gender equity                                                                   98    7.64   2.30   118   7.21   2.56
Foreign direct investment                                                       89    7.22   2.27   107   7.28   2.40
Water and sanitation*                                                           91    7.22   1.99   118   6.25   1.94
Trade and exports                                                               98    7.64   2.08   129   7.70   2.16
Economic growth                                                                 102   8.20   1.62   133   8.08   1.97
Energy                                                                          107   7.98   2.02   137   7.82   1.77
Disaster management                                                             98    7.49   1.63   130   7.35   1.71
Public sector governance/reform                                                 95    7.76   2.11   130   7.92   2.02
Job creation/employment                                                         106   8.32   1.65   130   8.26   1.65
Financial markets and savings                                                   100   7.24   2.23   137   7.66   2.02
Income inequality                                                               93    7.87   1.73   121   7.78   2.10
Health                                                                          88    7.58   2.04   115   7.04   2.01
Rural and regional development                                                  100   7.94   1.83   128   7.52   1.94
Education quality                                                               99    8.21   2.04   131   7.86   2.01
Social protection                                                               89    6.99   2.26   114   7.01   2.34
Climate change*                                                                 95    7.54   2.15   133   6.72   2.59
Agricultural development                                                        102   7.83   1.83   138   7.53   1.92
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       114
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
         Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                  No
                the World Bank Group in your country?                           N     Mean    SD     N     Mean    SD
Migration*                                                                      40    3.88    1.70   58    5.24    2.13
Transport                                                                       59    5.88    2.31   61    5.13    2.95
Competitiveness                                                                 53    6.60    1.65   79    7.15    2.08
Urban development and planning                                                  48    6.40    2.04   67    6.24    1.94
Environmental sustainability                                                    72    7.14    1.76   80    6.71    2.18
Regulatory framework for private sector development                             62    6.32    1.91   82    6.24    2.39
Poverty reduction                                                               70    5.96    1.72   82    5.35    2.37
Gender equity*                                                                  68    6.29    2.23   66    4.24    2.91
Foreign direct investment*                                                      60    5.92    2.00   75    6.91    2.11
Water and sanitation*                                                           60    6.30    2.20   67    4.97    2.51
Trade and exports                                                               61    6.36    1.40   82    6.96    2.08
Economic growth*                                                                82    6.57    1.85   101   7.20    2.11
Energy                                                                          82    6.48    2.34   98    6.90    2.24
Disaster management                                                             54    6.50    2.21   74    7.23    2.30
Public sector governance/reform*                                                67    6.09    1.55   86    6.71    1.90
Job creation/employment*                                                        82    5.91    2.00   88    6.58    2.31
Financial markets and savings                                                   66    6.61    1.63   81    6.94    2.24
Income inequality*                                                              68    4.87    2.36   82    5.91    2.70
Health                                                                          57    5.84    1.95   78    5.53    2.72
Rural and regional development*                                                 80    5.73    2.14   83    6.46    2.23
Education quality                                                               67    5.36    2.09   82    5.46    2.72
Social protection                                                               55    4.64    1.98   58    5.24    2.63
Climate change*                                                                 61    6.25    1.77   87    5.34    2.86
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


         Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                  No
                the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD
 To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                110    6.15   1.68   133    6.08    1.99
 development results in Turkey?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Turkey?
         Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                  No
                the World Bank Group in your country?                           N     Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD

The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Turkey           105   5.90    1.95   133   6.29    2.32

The World Bank Group meets Turkey’s needs for knowledge services                107   6.21    1.80   142   6.39    2.21
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                       115
The World Bank Group                                                     Turkey                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?
Percentage of Respondents                                                      Collaborators                Non-Collaborators
Weekly                                                                              4.3%                         11.0%
Monthly                                                                            36.2%                         21.9%
A few times a year                                                                 42.2%                         38.1%
Rarely                                                                             17.2%                         22.6%
Never                                                                                 -                           6.5%

In Turkey, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                        No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                N    Mean      SD         N     Mean    SD
Are timely                                                                           100    7.22    1.44    113       6.86    1.63
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*             100    7.00    1.66    120       6.42    2.29
Are relevant to Turkey’s development priorities                                      106    6.89    1.85    123       6.63    2.11
Lead to practical solutions                                                          103    5.90    1.83    118       5.84    1.99
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                 108    7.30    1.61    129       7.18    2.26
Are source of relevant information on global good practices                          107    7.60    1.71    131       7.31    2.26
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                                 108    7.54    1.44    125       7.05    2.36
Are adequately disseminated                                                          91     5.81    1.96    104       5.98    2.38
Are translated enough into local language                                            94     6.24    2.03    109       6.12    2.90
Are adaptable to Turkey’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                     104    5.98    2.04    119       6.45    2.41
circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                             Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                 N    Mean      SD        N     Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
Group's knowledge work and activities make to development results in your            112     6.31    1.43       142    6.23   2.00
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                     114     7.41    1.57       136    7.46   1.75
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)




                                                                         116
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                     92   6.20   2.10   105   6.56   1.78
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                 104   7.85   1.18   117   7.42   1.72
programs it supports*
The World Bank Group's approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion         99   6.48   2.29   105   6.70   1.93
The World Bank Group's "Safeguard Policy" requirements are reasonable             67   6.49   1.77   86    6.38   2.30
The World Bank Group's conditions on its lending are reasonable                   90   6.56   1.86   95    6.36   2.25
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Turkey*                           94   6.17   2.00   97    7.26   1.87
Working with the World Bank Group increases Turkey’s institutional capacity 105        7.48   1.36   119   7.03   2.16
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                  68   6.88   1.93   61    6.66   1.74
changes
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                  68   6.13   2.23   87    6.76   1.96
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                    99   7.56   1.57   99    7.20   1.86
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Turkey
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Turkey?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                                            Collaborators       Non-Collaborators
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Turkey’s economy*                        14.7%                29.0%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                                13.8%                18.1%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                            14.7%                 7.7%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets*                                   15.5%                 3.2%
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                      31.9%                42.6%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Turkey’s specific challenges*                      19.0%                 7.7%
Offer more innovative knowledge services*                                                            2.6%                16.1%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                               2.6%                 1.9%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                           29.3%                29.0%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing*                                      30.2%                19.4%
Increase availability of Fee-Based services                                                          3.4%                 2.6%
Work faster                                                                                          0.9%                 3.2%
Other                                                                                                3.4%                 3.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Turkey, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Turkey?
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators           Non-Collaborators
Financial services                                                               45.1%                    28.8%
Knowledge products                                                               20.4%                    38.4%
Convening services                                                               11.5%                    13.7%
None of the above                                                                 1.8%                     2.1%
The combination is appropriate for Yemen                                         14.2%                    12.3%
Don't know                                                                        7.1%                     4.8%




                                                                       117
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Turkey?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Local newspapers                                                                 50.4%            39.0%
International newspapers*                                                        15.1%             6.5%
Local radio                                                                       3.4%             0.6%
International radio                                                               0.0%             0.0%
Local television                                                                 18.5%            18.2%
International television                                                          6.7%             7.1%
Periodicals                                                                       5.0%             3.2%
Internet*                                                                        70.6%            81.8%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                           5.9%             5.8%
Blogs                                                                             0.0%             0.6%
Mobile phones                                                                     0.0%             0.6%
Instant messaging                                                                 0.0%             0.6%
Other                                                                             7.6%             9.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                              26.3%            28.1%
No                                                                               73.7%            71.9%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                              22.9%            12.5%
No                                                                               77.1%            87.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Were you able to obtain this information?
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                              94.7%            100.0%
No                                                                                5.3%               -

Do you have access to the Internet?
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                             100.0%            98.5%
No                                                                                 -               1.5%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
Percentage of Respondents                                                    Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                              87.7%            73.6%
No                                                                               12.3%            26.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       118
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N     Mean   SD      N    Mean    SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few years
                                                                                 108    5.72   2.65   134   4.91    2.85
ago*
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate                          100    6.57   2.21   106   6.05    1.87
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful*                101    7.65   1.65   109   7.07    1.73
The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                  46    6.26   2.48   77    5.19    2.82
information about the institution*
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it*         111    7.70   2.20   128   5.99    2.82
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                  83    7.88   2.32   103   5.90    2.88
inquiries*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Turkey? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators            Non-Collaborators
The World Bank (IBRD)*                                                           94.1%                     26.1%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                      16.9%                     15.2%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)*                              5.9%                      0.7%
None*                                                                             0.8%                     69.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                         Collaborators            Non-Collaborators
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                                                 2.6%                       32.9%
conversations, etc.)*
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                              33.6%                       49.3%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                                28.4%                       15.8%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                  90.5%                       21.7%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data,
                                                                                10.3%                       20.4%
research, etc.*
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                       119
The World Bank Group                                                      Turkey                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix E: Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys1
FY02 N=208            FY05 N=169            FY11 N=552             FY14 N=278

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                          FY02                  FY05                FY11                FY14
                                                                      N   Mean     SD     N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD      N    Mean    SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                  207      7.28    1.97   168   7.27   2.22   235   7.26   2.14   275   6.67    2.50
Turkey?* ** ***
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) * Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 respondents
** Significantly different between FY05 and FY14 respondents *** Significantly different between FY02 and FY14 respondents


                                                                          FY02                  FY05                FY11                FY14
                                                                      N   Mean     SD     N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD      N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                  200      6.26    1.74   160   5.62   1.79   226   6.38   1.66   259   6.86    2.07
effectiveness in Turkey.* ** ***
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 respondents
** Significantly different between FY05 and FY14 respondents *** Significantly different between FY02 and FY14 respondents

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Turkey?
                                                                          FY02                  FY05                FY11                FY14
                                                                      N   Mean     SD     N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD      N    Mean    SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                  205      6.31    2.16   166   6.13   2.00   224   5.05   2.11   252   5.90    2.26
development in Turkey* ***
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                  204      6.01    2.31   158   5.56   2.41   222   5.53   2.18   250   6.56    2.22
development priorities for Turkey* ** ***
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 respondents
** Significantly different between FY05 and FY14 respondents *** Significantly different between FY02 and FY14 respondents




1
 Only those questions that were asked in both the FY ’11 and FY ’14 country surveys, with similar response scales/options, are presented.
Additional comparisons to FY ’02 and FY ’05 country surveys are presented when possible.



                                                                          120
The World Bank Group                                                   Turkey                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)^
                                                                       FY02                  FY05                FY11                  FY14
                                                                  N    Mean     SD     N     Mean    SD      N   Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD
Environmental sustainability*                                                                              452    6.95   2.48    245    8.24   1.67
Poverty reduction*                                                                                         478    6.52   2.74    236    7.99   1.70
Gender equity*                                                                                             461    6.67   2.73    217    7.42   2.45
Economic growth*                                                                                           471    6.17   2.47    236    8.14   1.82
Energy*                                                                                                    451    6.82   2.56    245    7.90   1.88
Disaster management*                                                                                       441    6.75   2.58    229    7.42   1.68
Public sector governance/reform*                                                                           462    6.57   2.49    227    7.87   2.06
Job creation/employment*                                                                                   480    6.89   2.58    237    8.30   1.64
Financial markets and savings*                                                                             447    6.07   2.45    238    7.49   2.11
Health*                                                                                                    459    6.48   2.59    204    7.28   2.03
Education quality*                                                                                         477    7.21   2.48    231    8.02   2.03
^Note in FY11, these questions were asked with the following instruction: “When thinking about some important challenges that Turkey might
face in the future, on a scale of 1-10, 1 meaning not useful at all, 10 meaning very useful, how useful will it be for the World Bank to work with
Turkey in…?       *Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 respondents

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                       FY02                  FY05                FY11                  FY14
                                                                  N    Mean     SD     N     Mean    SD      N   Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD
Environmental sustainability*                                                                              443    5.53   2.47    153    6.92   1.99
Poverty reduction* ** ***                                        190    5.06    2.02   151   5.11   1.89   493    4.52   2.41    153    5.65   2.12
Gender equity                                                                                              462    5.25   2.55    135    5.31   2.79
Economic growth* ** ***                                          198    5.93    1.83   154   5.91   1.73   490    5.30   2.22    184    6.93   2.02
Energy*                                                                                                    442    5.52   2.49    181    6.72   2.29
Disaster management*                                                                                       417    5.19   2.47    129    6.94   2.28
Public sector governance/reform*                                                                           458    5.60   2.33    154    6.45   1.79
Job creation/employment*                                                                                   483    4.99   2.36    171    6.27   2.19
Financial markets and savings*                                                                             462    5.30   2.28    148    6.80   1.99
Health*                                                          185    5.61    2.24   147   5.71   2.42   452    5.20   2.33    136    5.68   2.43
Education quality                                                169    5.18    2.06   137   5.24   2.20   484    5.57   2.34    150    5.44   2.46
*Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 respondents ** Significantly different between FY05 and FY14 respondents
*** Significantly different between FY02 and FY14 respondents




                                                                        121
The World Bank Group                                                Turkey                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing

Do you have access to the Internet?
Percentage of Respondents                                       FYY02                 FY05              FY11                 FY14
Yes                                                               -                     -               99.1%                99.2%
No                                                                -                     -                .9%                  .8%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?
Percentage of Respondents                                       FYY02                 FY05              FY11                 FY14
Yes                                                               -                   72.9%             82.8%                79.7%
No                                                                -                   27.1%             17.2%                20.3%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                    FY02                FY05              FY11                FY14
                                                                N   Mean     SD   N     Mean   SD   N     Mean   SD      N    Mean    SD
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate*                                            187   6.89   2.01   207    6.31   2.05
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how
                                                                                                    200   6.63   2.34   241    6.78   2.68
to find it
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests
                                                                                                    132   7.11   2.26   186    6.78   2.82
and inquiries
*Significantly different between FY11 and FY14 respondents




                                                                    122
The World Bank Group                                                                                                             Turkey                                                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix F: Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’ Specializations/Sectors
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Turkey? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                                                                                        Public sector
                                                                                                                                             Natural                    governance /
                             Agriculture/                                                                                      Law and      resource     Private sector     public
                                 rural                              Financial Gender equity    Information                     justice /  management / development /      financial
                           development /                            markets /  / equality of    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental foreign direct mgmt. / anti-        Social                   Urban     Water and
                            food security   Education    Energy      banking   opportunity      technology   employment      framework    sustainability investment      corruption     protection   Transport development   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                              N     Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean       N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption              4     7.00     35   8.37   9    6.22   28   7.25    4     8.50     5    8.60     13     7.00    3     7.67     4     5.75    15     7.73    18     6.39    7    6.14    1   10.00   2    7.50   6     8.50   13   8.38    43     7.49
Migration                    4     8.00     33   7.70   11   5.91   32   7.00    5     8.60     4    8.00     13     7.08    3     7.00     4     5.75    16     8.13    17     7.71    7    5.43    1   10.00   2    8.50                13   6.77    39     6.87
Transport*                   6     7.50     31   5.29   13   6.92   36   6.53    4     7.75     5    8.00     13     7.77    3     5.67     9     7.22    20     7.85    17     7.29    6    4.83    2   10.00   2    6.00   4    10.00   12   5.92    39     6.08
Competitiveness              6     7.17     36   8.78   11   7.18   36   7.58    5     8.40     4    8.25     11     7.91    3     7.33     4     7.00    12     8.42    18     7.78    6    6.83    2   10.00   2    8.00                13   8.46    34     7.41
Law and justice*             4     7.00     33   8.36   8    5.13   27   7.41    4     8.25     5    7.40     13     7.08    3     8.67     3     4.33    11     8.18    18     8.00    7    6.57    1   10.00   2    8.00   2     9.50   13   8.62    37     7.65
Urban development and
                             4     7.00     30   7.93   12   7.42   31   8.16    4     9.00     5    8.20     13     7.69    3     8.67     4     6.25    11     7.73    18     8.89    7    6.00    1   10.00   2    9.00   5     9.80   12   8.33    41     8.24
planning*
Environmental
                             6     8.00     35   7.69   13   7.31   36   8.44    4     8.75     5    8.00     13     7.69    3     9.67     9     7.33    20     8.85    17     8.18    7    7.29    2   9.50    2    9.00   5     9.80   13   8.54    39     8.38
sustainability*
Regulatory framework
                             6     6.17     36   8.36   12   6.67   36   6.78    5     8.60     4    7.75     12     7.92    3     8.00     3     4.67    14     8.00    18     7.22    7    7.71    1   10.00   2    9.00                13   8.46    35     7.80
for private sector dev.*
Communicable/non-
                             4     7.25     30   4.83   10   6.80   27   6.11    4     7.75     4    8.00     12     6.42    2     5.50     2     5.00     6     7.17    17     5.65    7    4.29    1   10.00   2    6.50   5     8.20   13   5.08    33     6.24
communicable disease*
Poverty reduction*           5     7.80     34   8.59   13   7.08   37   7.76    5     8.20     5    8.40     12     7.58    2     8.50     9     7.11    20     7.80    18     7.28    7    6.00    1   10.00   2    9.00   1     9.00   13   8.31    39     8.69
Gender equity*               4     8.50     33   6.30   10   7.00   32   8.03    6     8.67     5    7.40     12     7.92    3     6.33     2     8.50    17     8.18    17     7.06    7    4.57    1   10.00   2    5.00   5     8.20   12   7.67    35     7.86
Foreign direct
                             4     7.25     31   7.32   11   6.73   26   6.69    4     8.25     4    7.75     12     7.17    3     7.33     3     8.33    11     8.64    18     7.50    6    5.83    2   10.00   2    9.00                13   7.69    33     6.85
investment
Water and sanitation*        4     7.00     29   5.31   10   6.80   31   7.29    4     8.00     4    8.00     12     7.33    3     5.33     4     6.75    10     7.40    17     5.88    6    4.17    1   10.00   2    5.00   5     9.80   12   6.17    38     6.61
Trade and exports            5     6.80     30   8.63   10   8.10   36   6.94    4     8.50     4    8.75     13     7.62    3     8.00     3     6.67    20     8.20    17     6.47    7    8.00    1   10.00   2    8.50   4     8.00   13   7.77    38     7.53
Economic growth              6     7.67     31   8.74   11   8.09   38   7.68    5     8.60     4    8.75     13     7.69    3     7.67     9     7.67    20     8.70    18     7.11    7    8.00    2   10.00   2    8.50   4     8.00   13   8.38    36     8.44
Energy                       6     8.17     30   7.13   13   8.38   37   7.62    4     8.50     4    9.00     13     8.15    3     7.67     9     8.11    19     8.26    17     7.47    7    6.71    2   10.00   2    7.50   5     9.80   13   8.08    43     7.77
Disaster management*         6     7.00     30   7.83   11   6.64   34   7.38    4     8.25     3    8.67     12     6.83    2     7.50     4     7.50    19     7.53    17     7.06    6    6.17    1   10.00   2    9.00   5     9.80   12   6.33    43     7.60
Public sector
                             4     7.25     33   8.70   12   6.83   32   7.91    4     8.50     4    8.50     12     7.67    3     9.00     11    7.73    17     8.82    18     7.44    6    7.00    1   10.00   2    7.50   1     9.00   13   7.77    40     7.68
governance/reform
Job creation/
                             6     7.67     31   9.00   11   7.27   37   8.08    5     8.60     5    8.80     13     8.23    3     9.00     4     7.00    20     8.50    17     7.47    7    7.00    1   10.00   2    8.00   6     7.83   13   8.92    42     8.50
employment*
Financial markets and
                             6     6.33     37   8.00   11   7.55   36   6.39    4     8.75     5    8.80     12     7.75    3     8.33     11    6.73    20     8.10    16     6.94    7    6.57    1   10.00   2    8.50   5     7.40   13   8.62    35     7.71
savings*
Income inequality*           4     8.25     35   8.63   9    7.00   30   8.20    5     8.80     3    8.67     13     6.38    3     8.67     4     6.00    11     8.27    18     7.33    7    6.43    2   10.00   2    7.00   1     9.00   13   7.77    41     7.83
Health*                      4     8.75     32   6.78   9    7.67   27   7.67    5     8.40     3    8.67     13     7.00    3     7.33     4     6.25    10     7.50    17     6.24    7    5.43    1   10.00   1    9.00   5     9.80   13   6.85    36     7.50
Rural and regional
                             6     7.67     24   8.00   10   8.00   35   7.57    6     8.17     4    9.00     13     7.38    3     9.00     4     7.00    20     7.80    16     7.13    7    6.00    1   10.00   2    8.50   5     7.40   13   8.62    43     7.33
development
Education quality            6     7.33     34   8.79   11   7.27   34   7.88    5     8.00     4    9.00     13     8.08    3     9.33     4     7.00    13     7.62    18     7.56    7    6.43    1   10.00   2    8.50   5     9.00   13   8.92    40     7.48
Social protection            4     7.25     30   6.93   11   5.82   30   7.13    5     8.40     5    8.00     12     6.92    3     8.00     4     5.25     9     8.00    17     7.12    7    6.29    1   10.00   2    8.00   1     9.00   13   8.46    36     6.36
Climate change*              4     7.75     30   5.30   13   7.46   33   7.52    5     8.00     4    8.00     12     7.33    3     9.00     11    7.64    16     7.94    16     6.75    6    3.17    1   10.00   2    6.50   5     9.80   12   6.42    38     7.00
Agricultural
                             6     8.00     31   8.55   12   7.33   36   7.58    5     8.80     5    8.80     12     7.67    3     7.67     11    7.64    19     7.16    17     6.12    7    6.57    1   10.00   2    8.50   4     8.00   13   8.00    39     7.38
development*
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                                  123
The World Bank Group                                                                                                             Turkey                                                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Turkey? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                                                                        Public sector
                                                                                                                                             Natural                    governance /
                             Agriculture/                                                                                      Law and      resource     Private sector     public
                                 rural                              Financial Gender equity    Information                     justice /  management / development /      financial
                           development /                            markets /  / equality of    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental foreign direct mgmt. / anti-        Social                   Urban     Water and
                            food security   Education    Energy      banking   opportunity      technology   employment      framework    sustainability investment      corruption     protection   Transport development   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                              N     Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean       N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Migration                    1     3.00     17   5.59   6    5.50   8    3.88                   1    8.00     8      5.63    1     6.00     1     3.00     7     5.14    11     3.64    5    3.00                1    6.00                3    4.67    19     4.26
Transport*                   3     6.67     19   4.26   8    6.50   19   5.63                   1    8.00     5      6.40                   2     5.50    11     6.64    11     5.27    5    5.40    2   10.00   1    4.00   4    10.00   5    5.40    18     4.33
Competitiveness*             3     6.67     16   7.94   6    7.00   30   6.20                   1    8.00     5      8.40    2     5.50     2     6.50    16     7.44     8     6.13    5    7.60                1   10.00                10   7.70    23     6.17
Urban development and
                             3     7.00     16   6.31   8    5.25   20   6.50                   1    8.00     6      7.67    1     6.00     2     7.00     7     6.29    12     6.17    4    6.25                2    8.00   5     9.00   7    6.00    17     5.29
planning
Environmental
                             3     7.67     19   6.16   9    6.67   25   7.40                   1    8.00     8      7.75    1     6.00     10    6.90    17     8.65    15     5.33    5    5.00                1    9.00   5     9.80   7    5.86    19     6.32
sustainability*
Regulatory framework
                             4     6.25     19   6.63   8    6.25   23   5.78                                 9      7.11    2     6.00     2     4.50    12     6.25    13     4.00    6    7.17                1   10.00                11   7.73    25     6.52
for private sector dev.*
Poverty reduction            5     6.00     20   4.45   9    5.78   25   6.16    2     7.50     1    8.00     10     6.10    1     6.00     3     6.67    11     5.91    13     5.00    6    5.00                1    6.00                7    5.86    29     5.59
Gender equity*               5     6.00     20   4.10   9    5.67   15   5.07    2     9.50     1    8.00     9      6.78    1     4.00     3     6.67     9     6.33    13     5.62    5    2.60                1    1.00   4     5.00   7    6.43    21     4.52
Foreign direct
                             3     6.33     18   6.67   8    5.88   19   6.42                   1    8.00     7      7.71    2     6.50     2     6.00     9     7.44    14     5.36    5    7.40                1   10.00   4     5.00   10   7.50    24     6.67
investment
Water and sanitation*        4     6.00     18   3.50   9    6.11   15   5.60                   1    8.00     8      6.50                   4     7.25     6     5.33    13     4.69    4    4.25                1    4.00   5     9.80   5    6.80    22     5.59
Trade and exports*           5     6.00     18   7.39    6   6.83   29   6.38                   1    8.00      9     7.33    1     8.00     1     4.00    11     6.36    12     5.25    5    7.60                1    9.00                11   8.00    26     6.65
Economic growth*             5     6.20     20   7.50   11   6.00   34   6.79                   1    8.00     11     7.45    1     8.00     9     6.89    18     7.22    14     5.43    6    8.50    1   10.00   1   10.00                11   7.91    31     6.61
Energy*                      4     7.25     20   5.40   12   6.67   34   7.38                   1    10.00    9      6.89    1     8.00     10    8.50    17     8.35    14     4.93    5    6.00                1    6.00   4     7.00   6    7.00    29     6.17
Disaster management*         2     7.00     14   7.86   6    6.50   26   7.46                   1    8.00     5      7.60                   2     5.50     9     6.33    11     4.18    5    5.20    1   10.00   1    9.00   5     9.80   5    8.20    29     6.59
Public sector
                             3     6.67     20   5.80   9    6.22   22   6.18                   1    8.00     10     7.70    1     8.00     10    6.80    11     7.00    15     5.80    6    6.50                1    5.00   4     5.00   7    6.71    26     6.96
governance/reform
Job
                             5     6.20     22   6.73   9    5.56   32   6.31    1     8.00     1    8.00     11     5.73    2     7.00     1     7.00    18     7.11    14     5.21    6    4.50                1    7.00   4     5.00   6    7.00    28     6.57
creation/employment
Financial markets and
                             4     5.50     22   7.32   7    6.57   27   6.15                   1    6.00     9      7.00    1     8.00     1     4.00    11     6.64    12     6.00    5    5.20                1    8.00   4     5.00   9    8.78    24     7.42
savings*
Income inequality            5     6.20     24   6.50   9    5.22   21   5.33                   1    7.00     11     5.36    1     6.00     1     3.00    12     6.33    14     4.64    7    5.57                1    6.00   4     2.00   5    7.20    24     4.88
Health*                      4     6.75     23   4.13   8    6.13   17   6.76                   1    8.00     10     6.00    2     6.00     1     3.00    11     6.82    14     5.57    5    5.80                1    4.00   4     8.00   7    6.57    20     5.00
Rural and regional
                             5     6.40     23   5.39   8    6.13   27   5.93                   1    6.00     9      6.11    2     6.50     4     6.00    19     6.89    13     5.69    4    5.25                1    7.00   4     5.00   6    6.50    24     6.75
development
Education quality            4     5.00     24   5.79   8    5.63   23   5.30                                 10     5.30    1     9.00     2     6.00    12     5.50    15     5.87    7    5.29    1   10.00   1    5.00   4     5.00   8    7.50    22     4.00
Social protection            4     5.50     20   5.25   9    5.33   12   4.75                                  9     4.00    1     6.00     1     4.00     6     6.33    12     4.42    6    4.67                1    3.00   4     4.00   7    6.29    14     5.36
Climate change*              4     6.00     19   4.00   9    6.22   22   6.18                                 8      6.00    1     5.00     10    7.60    13     6.15    11     4.27    4    4.50                1    7.00   4     7.00   6    5.00    24     5.42
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                                  124
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey




In instances where more than 10% of respondents come from a specific sector, additional analyses are
conducted to further examine their perceptions as opposed to those from other sectors. In the case of
Turkey, there were 15% of respondents from the Financial Markets/Banking sector and 15% of
respondents from the Education sector.


Financial Markets/Banking Sector vs. Others
Financial Markets/Banking N=39                All Others N=219

A. General Issues Facing Turkey

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Turkey. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Turkey. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                            Financial Markets /
(Responses Combined)                                                   Banking Sector                  All Others
Social protection                                                            0.0%                         6.4%
Transport                                                                    0.0%                         2.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                             25.6%                        13.8%
Gender equity                                                                7.7%                         6.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                    0.0%                         5.5%
Water and sanitation                                                         0.0%                         0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                                             2.6%                        19.3%
Job creation/employment                                                     33.3%                        26.6%
Rural and regional development*                                             38.5%                        12.4%
Financial markets and savings*                                              12.8%                         4.6%
Urban development and planning                                               5.1%                         6.4%
Environmental sustainability                                                12.8%                         6.0%
Income inequality*                                                           2.6%                        18.8%
Health                                                                       0.0%                         3.7%
Education quality                                                           43.6%                        55.5%
Poverty reduction                                                            0.0%                         6.4%
Energy                                                                      20.5%                        17.0%
Climate change                                                               5.1%                         0.9%
Agricultural development                                                     7.7%                         5.5%
Trade and exports                                                            5.1%                         6.0%
Competitiveness*                                                            38.5%                        11.0%
Economic growth                                                              7.7%                        18.8%
Law and justice                                                             17.9%                        33.0%
Regulatory framework for private sector development*                        12.8%                         4.6%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       0.0%                         0.0%
Disaster management                                                          0.0%                         0.9%
Migration                                                                    0.0%                         0.9%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            125
The World Bank Group                                     Turkey




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                          Financial Markets /
(Responses Combined)                                                 Banking Sector                 All Others
Water and sanitation                                                      2.6%                         0.5%
Income inequality                                                         38.5%                       44.7%
Economic growth                                                           38.5%                       43.3%
Climate change                                                            0.0%                         0.0%
Gender equity                                                             0.0%                         5.5%
Rural and regional development                                            43.6%                       35.9%
Urban development and planning                                            5.1%                         0.9%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                       7.7%                         3.2%
Social protection                                                         15.4%                       13.8%
Law and justice                                                           10.3%                        3.7%
Transport                                                                 0.0%                         0.0%
Competitiveness                                                           7.7%                         4.1%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                    0.0%                         0.0%
Migration                                                                 10.3%                        6.0%
Anti-corruption                                                           7.7%                        12.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                 0.0%                         2.8%
Education quality                                                         51.3%                       35.0%
Energy                                                                    0.0%                         3.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                           5.1%                         3.2%
Environmental sustainability                                              0.0%                         0.5%
Disaster management                                                       0.0%                         0.5%
Health                                                                    0.0%                         2.8%
Agricultural development                                                  17.9%                       11.1%
Job creation/employment*                                                  28.2%                       48.8%
Financial markets and savings                                             2.6%                         0.5%
Trade and exports                                                         2.6%                         2.8%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          126
The World Bank Group                                    Turkey




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                         Financial Markets /
(Responses Combined)                                                Banking Sector                All Others
Energy                                                                   41.0%                      26.4%
Gender equity                                                            10.3%                       4.6%
Income inequality                                                        2.6%                        5.1%
Social protection                                                        0.0%                        2.8%
Climate change                                                           0.0%                        0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                          5.1%                        8.8%
Disaster management                                                      0.0%                        1.9%
Rural and regional development                                           12.8%                      23.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                2.6%                       13.4%
Urban development and planning                                           2.6%                        2.8%
Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                        0.0%
Education quality                                                        43.6%                      38.9%
Migration                                                                2.6%                        2.8%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                      17.9%                      14.8%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                        0.0%
Trade and exports                                                        28.2%                      31.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                          10.3%                       9.7%
Job creation/employment                                                  28.2%                      26.9%
Agricultural development                                                 5.1%                       11.1%
Transport                                                                0.0%                        2.3%
Environmental sustainability                                             0.0%                        3.7%
Health                                                                   0.0%                        0.0%
Law and justice                                                          10.3%                       6.5%
Competitiveness*                                                         51.3%                      25.0%
Financial markets and savings                                            25.6%                      21.8%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                         127
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Turkey, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                                          Financial Markets /
(Responses Combined)                                                 Banking Sector                    All Others
Social protection                                                           0.0%                          4.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                             5.1%                          5.5%
Transport                                                                  10.3%                         12.3%
Poverty reduction                                                          10.3%                         14.2%
Gender equity                                                              10.3%                          7.8%
Competitiveness*                                                           43.6%                         15.5%
Rural and regional development                                             23.1%                         21.9%
Foreign direct investment                                                   0.0%                          4.1%
Water and sanitation*                                                       2.6%                          0.0%
Energy                                                                     28.2%                         15.5%
Job creation/employment*                                                   15.4%                         32.9%
Financial markets and savings                                              10.3%                          4.6%
Urban development and planning*                                            15.4%                          5.0%
Environmental sustainability                                                5.1%                          4.1%
Income inequality                                                          12.8%                         15.5%
Health                                                                      0.0%                          4.1%
Education quality                                                          59.0%                         43.8%
Climate change*                                                             5.1%                          0.5%
Agricultural development                                                    7.7%                         12.3%
Trade and exports                                                          10.3%                         11.4%
Economic growth*                                                           10.3%                         30.6%
Law and justice                                                             5.1%                          6.8%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                         5.1%                          4.6%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                      0.0%                          0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                             2.6%                          5.5%
Migration                                                                   0.0%                          1.8%
Disaster management                                                         0.0%                          2.7%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            128
The World Bank Group                                      Turkey




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)

                                                                              Financial Markets /
                                                                                Banking Sector             All Others
                                                                                N Mean SD             N      Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                                 28    7.25    2.29   182     7.54   2.25
Migration                                                                       32    7.00    2.48   172     7.23   2.13
Transport                                                                       36    6.53    1.93   186     6.68   2.34
Competitiveness                                                                 36    7.58    1.89   167     7.96   2.03
Law and justice                                                                 27    7.41    2.28   164     7.72   2.26
Urban development and planning                                                  31    8.16    1.90   172     8.05   1.80
Environmental sustainability                                                    36    8.44    1.56   193     8.15   1.72
Regulatory framework for private sector development*                            36    6.78    2.10   171     7.79   1.80
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                          27    6.11    2.15   152     5.97   2.11
Poverty reduction                                                               37    7.76    1.71   186     8.02   1.71
Gender equity                                                                   32    8.03    1.89   171     7.32   2.48
Foreign direct investment                                                       26    6.69    2.67   157     7.36   2.28
Water and sanitation*                                                           31    7.29    2.10   161     6.45   2.01
Trade and exports*                                                              36    6.94    2.77   174     7.83   2.00
Economic growth                                                                 38    7.68    2.11   184     8.24   1.75
Energy                                                                          37    7.62    2.37   190     7.88   1.81
Disaster management                                                             34    7.38    1.52   177     7.44   1.76
Public sector governance/reform                                                 32    7.91    2.15   181     7.94   1.97
Job creation/employment                                                         37    8.08    1.48   186     8.31   1.67
Financial markets and savings*                                                  36    6.39    2.67   188     7.73   1.94
Income inequality                                                               30    8.20    1.47   171     7.80   2.02
Health                                                                          27    7.67    1.54   163     7.20   2.15
Rural and regional development                                                  35    7.57    1.95   177     7.67   1.96
Education quality                                                               34    7.88    2.32   179     7.97   2.05
Social protection                                                               30    7.13    1.91   160     7.01   2.33
Climate change                                                                  33    7.52    2.45   178     6.89   2.52
Agricultural development                                                        36    7.58    1.86   187     7.62   1.96
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           129
The World Bank Group                                      Turkey




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

                                                                               Financial Markets /
                                                                                 Banking Sector             All Others
                                                                                 N Mean SD             N      Mean SD
Migration                                                                         8    3.88   1.46     81     4.75     2.12
Transport                                                                        19    5.63   1.83     95     5.59     2.83
Competitiveness*                                                                 30    6.20   1.77     98     7.12     1.96
Urban development and planning                                                   20    6.50   2.01     91     6.31     1.99
Environmental sustainability                                                     25    7.40   1.80    120     6.80     2.03
Regulatory framework for private sector development                              23    5.78   2.26    112     6.38     2.13
Poverty reduction                                                                25    6.16   1.68    118     5.51     2.25
Gender equity                                                                    15    5.07   1.75    110     5.26     2.88
Foreign direct investment                                                        19    6.42   2.24    108     6.64     2.02
Water and sanitation                                                             15    5.60   2.10    100     5.51     2.53
Trade and exports                                                                29    6.38   1.74    107     6.83     1.90
Economic growth                                                                  34    6.79   1.68    140     6.97     2.09
Energy                                                                           34    7.38   1.76    133     6.60     2.35
Disaster management                                                              26    7.46   1.99     96     6.76     2.40
Public sector governance/reform                                                  22    6.18   1.76    124     6.52     1.81
Job creation/employment                                                          32    6.31   1.77    129     6.28     2.26
Financial markets and savings                                                    27    6.15   2.01    111     6.90     2.04
Income inequality                                                                21    5.33   2.01    119     5.51     2.73
Health                                                                           17    6.76   1.92    111     5.57     2.51
Rural and regional development                                                   27    5.93   1.80    123     6.15     2.27
Education quality                                                                23    5.30   1.69    119     5.48     2.63
Social protection                                                                12    4.75   1.55     94     5.09     2.47
Natural resource management                                                      22    6.18   2.40    114     5.48     2.53
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           130
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey




Education Sector vs. Others
Education Sector N=38               All Others N=167

A. General Issues Facing Turkey

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Turkey. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Turkey. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                Education Sector           All Others
Social protection                                                        2.6%                     5.4%
Transport                                                                0.0%                     3.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                          10.5%                   15.1%
Gender equity                                                            5.3%                     6.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                7.9%                     4.8%
Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                     0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                          13.2%                   15.7%
Job creation/employment                                                  34.2%                   29.5%
Rural and regional development                                           10.5%                   18.7%
Financial markets and savings                                            2.6%                     5.4%
Urban development and planning                                           0.0%                     5.4%
Environmental sustainability                                             5.3%                     8.4%
Income inequality                                                        18.4%                   15.1%
Health*                                                                  10.5%                    1.8%
Education quality                                                        65.8%                   50.6%
Poverty reduction                                                        5.3%                     5.4%
Energy*                                                                  5.3%                    20.5%
Climate change                                                           0.0%                     2.4%
Agricultural development                                                 0.0%                     7.8%
Trade and exports                                                        7.9%                     5.4%
Competitiveness                                                          10.5%                   17.5%
Economic growth*                                                         39.5%                   13.3%
Law and justice                                                          23.7%                   27.1%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                      2.6%                     8.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                     0.0%
Disaster management                                                      0.0%                     1.2%
Migration                                                                0.0%                     1.2%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            131
The World Bank Group                                     Turkey




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                              Education Sector           All Others
Water and sanitation                                                   0.0%                     0.6%
Income inequality                                                      50.0%                   45.5%
Economic growth*                                                       26.3%                   44.8%
Climate change                                                         0.0%                     0.0%
Gender equity                                                          7.9%                     4.8%
Rural and regional development*                                        10.5%                   38.8%
Urban development and planning                                         0.0%                     1.2%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                    0.0%                     5.5%
Social protection                                                      5.3%                    15.2%
Law and justice                                                        5.3%                     6.1%
Transport                                                              0.0%                     0.0%
Competitiveness*                                                       15.8%                    3.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                 0.0%                     0.0%
Migration                                                              0.0%                     4.8%
Anti-corruption*                                                       23.7%                    7.3%
Foreign direct investment                                              0.0%                     3.6%
Education quality                                                      47.4%                   35.8%
Energy*                                                                5.3%                     0.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                        0.0%                     5.5%
Environmental sustainability                                           0.0%                     0.6%
Disaster management                                                    0.0%                     0.0%
Health*                                                                7.9%                     1.2%
Agricultural development                                               7.9%                    15.2%
Job creation/employment                                                36.8%                   47.3%
Financial markets and savings                                          0.0%                     1.2%
Trade and exports                                                      5.3%                     2.4%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          132
The World Bank Group                                    Turkey




A. General Issues Facing Turkey (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Education Sector           All Others
Energy*                                                               10.5%                   30.9%
Gender equity                                                         7.9%                     6.1%
Income inequality                                                     0.0%                     4.8%
Social protection*                                                    7.9%                     1.8%
Climate change                                                        0.0%                     0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                                      18.4%                    6.7%
Disaster management                                                   0.0%                     0.0%
Rural and regional development*                                       7.9%                    24.2%
Foreign direct investment                                             7.9%                    11.5%
Urban development and planning                                        5.3%                     2.4%
Water and sanitation                                                  0.0%                     0.0%
Education quality                                                     55.3%                   38.2%
Migration*                                                            13.2%                    1.2%
Regulatory framework for private sector development                   7.9%                    16.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                0.0%                     0.0%
Trade and exports                                                     36.8%                   31.5%
Public sector governance/reform                                       10.5%                   12.1%
Job creation/employment                                               28.9%                   24.2%
Agricultural development                                              2.6%                    12.7%
Transport                                                             0.0%                     3.0%
Environmental sustainability                                          0.0%                     2.4%
Health                                                                0.0%                     0.0%
Law and justice                                                       10.5%                    7.3%
Competitiveness*                                                      5.3%                    31.5%
Financial markets and savings                                         21.1%                   24.2%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                         133
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Turkey, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                Education Sector           All Others
Social protection                                                        0.0%                     4.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                          0.0%                     7.8%
Transport                                                                21.1%                   10.8%
Poverty reduction                                                        13.2%                   10.8%
Gender equity                                                            2.6%                     9.6%
Competitiveness*                                                         0.0%                    24.0%
Rural and regional development                                           10.5%                   23.4%
Foreign direct investment                                                2.6%                     3.6%
Water and sanitation                                                     0.0%                     0.6%
Energy*                                                                  5.3%                    22.2%
Job creation/employment                                                  34.2%                   25.7%
Financial markets and savings                                            0.0%                     7.2%
Urban development and planning                                           2.6%                     6.6%
Environmental sustainability                                             5.3%                     5.4%
Income inequality                                                        2.6%                    13.2%
Health                                                                   2.6%                     3.0%
Education quality                                                        44.7%                   49.7%
Climate change                                                           0.0%                     1.8%
Agricultural development                                                 7.9%                    11.4%
Trade and exports*                                                       31.6%                    9.6%
Economic growth*                                                         42.1%                   25.7%
Law and justice                                                          10.5%                    6.6%
Regulatory framework for private sector development*                     13.2%                    3.6%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                   0.0%                     0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                                         13.2%                    3.6%
Migration                                                                0.0%                     1.8%
Disaster management                                                      0.0%                     0.6%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            134
The World Bank Group                                      Turkey




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                               Education Sector            All Others
                                                                                N Mean SD             N      Mean SD
Anti-corruption*                                                                35    8.37    2.10   132     7.27   2.24
Migration                                                                       33    7.70    2.13   132     7.17   2.30
Transport*                                                                      31    5.29    2.52   152     7.09   1.97
Competitiveness*                                                                36    8.78    2.02   133     7.78   1.91
Law and justice*                                                                33    8.36    1.75   121     7.50   2.27
Urban development and planning                                                  30    7.93    1.93   132     8.05   1.83
Environmental sustainability                                                    35    7.69    2.08   155     8.26   1.62
Regulatory framework for private sector development*                            36    8.36    1.93   136     7.37   1.88
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                         30    4.83    1.32   116     6.22   2.09
Poverty reduction*                                                              34    8.59    1.46   150     7.65   1.80
Gender equity*                                                                  33    6.30    3.51   135     7.59   2.05
Foreign direct investment                                                       31    7.32    2.14   119     7.37   2.30
Water and sanitation*                                                           29    5.31    1.49   125     6.87   2.02
Trade and exports*                                                              30    8.63    1.94   142     7.51   2.09
Economic growth*                                                                31    8.74    1.71   155     7.95   1.71
Energy*                                                                         30    7.13    1.66   154     8.00   1.90
Disaster management                                                             30    7.83    2.14   138     7.28   1.65
Public sector governance/reform*                                                33    8.70    1.53   140     7.84   1.87
Job creation/employment*                                                        31    9.00    1.24   150     8.06   1.67
Financial markets and savings                                                   37    8.00    1.87   152     7.35   2.08
Income inequality*                                                              35    8.63    1.54   125     7.66   1.95
Health                                                                          32    6.78    2.64   122     7.32   1.96
Rural and regional development                                                  24    8.00    1.45   145     7.69   1.93
Education quality*                                                              34    8.79    1.41   139     7.89   2.04
Social protection                                                               30    6.93    3.06   124     7.25   1.99
Climate change*                                                                 30    5.30    3.05   143     7.34   2.27
Agricultural development*                                                       31    8.55    1.41   153     7.48   1.80
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           135
The World Bank Group                                      Turkey




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Turkey? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                Education Sector            All Others
                                                                                 N Mean SD             N      Mean SD
Migration                                                                        17    5.59   1.66     53     4.53     2.12
Transport                                                                        19    4.26   2.94     77     6.22     2.35
Competitiveness                                                                  16    7.94   1.61     89     6.91     1.86
Urban development and planning                                                   16    6.31   1.25     78     6.58     1.96
Environmental sustainability                                                     19    6.16   1.26    107     7.14     2.06
Regulatory framework for private sector development*                             19    6.63   1.83     91     6.13     2.27
Poverty reduction                                                                20    4.45   2.09     94     5.88     1.96
Gender equity                                                                    20    4.10   3.11     84     5.69     2.54
Foreign direct investment                                                        18    6.67   1.19     85     6.58     2.15
Water and sanitation*                                                            18    3.50   2.55     75     5.99     2.23
Trade and exports*                                                               18    7.39   1.34     92     6.63     1.85
Economic growth                                                                  20    7.50   1.61    123     6.93     1.94
Energy                                                                           20    5.40   2.72    118     7.14     2.07
Disaster management                                                              14    7.86   1.75     79     6.86     2.38
Public sector governance/reform                                                  20    5.80   1.67    100     6.48     1.77
Job creation/employment                                                          22    6.73   1.67    111     6.13     2.08
Financial markets and savings*                                                   22    7.32   1.70     92     6.45     1.95
Income inequality                                                                24    6.50   3.39     92     5.38     2.45
Health                                                                           23    4.13   2.77     85     6.33     2.11
Rural and regional development                                                   23    5.39   2.81    103     6.13     2.07
Education quality                                                                24    5.79   2.48     96     5.70     2.40
Social protection                                                                20    5.25   2.34     72     4.93     2.43
Natural resource management                                                      19    4.00   2.96     93     5.97     2.21
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           136
The World Bank Group                                                                                               Turkey                                                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG
                                                          H3. Currently, do you
                                                       professionally collaborate/     H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                          work with the WBG?                 Observer          Use WBG reports/data     Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate         Use WBG website

Indicator Question                                       No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean       Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                           6.80          6.95         7.06              6.09    6.66           7.17       6.79           7.23       6.75         7.00     6.92        6.68
Bank Group’s effectiveness in Turkey.
To what extent do you believe the World Bank
Group's staff is well prepared to help Turkey solve        6.53          6.39         6.54              6.14    6.12           6.93       6.55           6.16       6.49         6.44     6.47        6.45
its most complicated development challenges?
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                           5.62          6.24         6.04              5.07    5.74           6.06       5.84           5.98       5.76         5.97     5.90        5.70
relevant role in development in Turkey
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
                                                           6.29          6.91         6.77              5.66    6.33           6.90       6.58           6.55       6.32         6.78     6.64        6.17
consider the development priorities for Turkey

Responsiveness                                             6.32          6.67         6.71              5.40    6.23           6.80       6.58           6.20       6.36         6.59     6.47        6.56

Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
                                                           5.85          6.37         6.27              5.27    5.64           6.66       6.13           5.98       6.20         6.00     6.11        6.00
products and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                           5.84          6.14         6.14              5.39    5.66           6.42       6.04           5.87       6.20         5.81     5.94        6.40
circumstances)
Being inclusive                                            6.73          6.37         6.58              6.48    6.29           6.91       6.58           6.50       6.80         6.32     6.57        6.48
Openness                                                   7.15          7.53         7.51              6.54    7.12           7.63       7.26           7.61       7.13         7.53     7.41        6.94
Staff accessibility                                        6.52          7.55         7.39              5.14    6.66           7.48       6.81           7.66       6.64         7.35     7.10        6.58
Straightforwardness and honesty                            7.61          7.83         7.99              6.03    7.49           8.00       7.56           8.15       7.60         7.80     7.80        7.23
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                           6.41          6.52         6.49              6.43    6.47           6.49       6.58           6.05       6.50         6.46     6.47        6.52
Government
Collaboration with the Government                          7.54          7.61         7.60              7.44    7.61           7.49       7.53           7.66       7.49         7.62     7.58        7.47
Collaboration with other donors                            6.98          6.75         6.88              6.91    6.78           6.99       6.89           6.88       6.85         6.92     6.93        6.64
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
                                                           6.23          6.41         6.40              5.89    6.05           6.61       6.39           6.04       6.31         6.30     6.31        6.27
the ground
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work
                                                           6.08          6.15         6.23              5.51    5.85           6.43       6.08           6.16       6.26         5.95     6.11        6.00
help to achieve development results in Turkey?
The World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet
                                                           6.29          5.90         6.16              5.93    5.64           6.80       6.16           5.98       6.63         5.66     6.12        6.11
the needs of Turkey
The World Bank Group meets Turkey's needs for
                                                           6.39          6.21         6.40              5.91    5.92           6.81       6.25           6.54       6.40         6.24     6.41        5.80
knowledge services
Are adaptable to Turkey’s specific development
                                                           6.45          5.98         6.44              5.37    5.77           6.89       6.27           6.18       6.39         6.14     6.25        6.29
challenges and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
                                                           6.23          6.31         6.30              6.11    6.06           6.54       6.24           6.33       6.38         6.16     6.27        6.23
and activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of
the World Bank Group's knowledge work and                  7.46          7.41         7.55              6.90    7.39           7.52       7.34           7.81       7.38         7.50     7.47        7.32
activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                           6.76          6.13         6.41              6.77    6.11           6.93       6.50           6.41       6.88         6.04     6.45        6.62
Bank Group makes appropriate use of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.
                                                                                                                       137
The World Bank Group                                                                                                    Turkey                                                                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group
                                      Employee of a       Consultant on       Bilateral/                           Financial Sector/     NGO/Private                                                  Academia/
                                        Ministry         WBG Project/PMU Multilateral Agency    Private Sector       Private Bank        Foundation            Media              Trade Union      Research Institute          Other
                                      N    Mean   SD      N    Mean   SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean     SD     N    Mean   SD     N   Mean    SD     N      Mean   SD      N    Mean    SD       N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank          84   7.24   1.79    14   6.14   2.03   25   7.76   2.07   14   7.57   2.38   20    7.00    1.12   14   5.93   2.67   8   5.50    2.20   9      6.67   1.41    44    6.34   1.77     20   6.65    2.64
Group’s effectiveness in Turkey.*
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Turkey solve its     77   6.70   2.05    15   4.87   1.73   24   7.25   2.05   14   6.86   1.88   16    6.00    1.63   14   6.86   2.63   5   6.20    2.17   6      3.83   0.98    42    6.69   2.09     19   6.05    2.76
most complicated development
challenges?*
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in    83   5.73   2.14    15   6.47   2.20   23   7.00   0.80   14   7.07   1.39   20    6.15    1.57   15   6.27   2.82   7   4.43    1.90   8      4.00   1.31    41    5.41   2.71     19   5.26    3.07
development in Turkey*
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the      81   6.74   2.19    15   6.87   2.42   24   7.88   1.04   14   7.29   0.99   20    7.05    1.32   15   6.27   2.99   6   4.83    1.47   8      4.75   1.75    41    5.73   2.35     19   5.68    2.83
development priorities for Turkey*
Responsiveness*                       77   6.57   1.67    15   5.93   2.28   23   7.96   1.30   14   7.00   1.04   20    6.45    1.19   13   6.62   2.63   3   7.00    3.00   8      5.00   0.00    38    5.68   2.30     17   6.00    2.50
Flexibility (in terms of the World
Bank Group’s products and             73   5.97   1.68    15   6.13   2.33   23   7.09   1.88   13   7.00   1.58   20    6.15    1.18   12   5.92   2.84   4   7.25    2.50   7      5.57   1.51    31    5.71   2.07     15   4.47    2.00
services)*
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                      74   6.42   1.61    12   4.83   2.17   23   6.83   2.21   14   5.79   1.31   20    5.85    1.39   12   5.58   3.09   4   7.50    2.65   9      5.67   1.00    35    5.40   2.32     16   5.06    2.54
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                      77   6.44   1.77    12   6.17   2.04   21   6.71   0.78   14   8.00   1.57   19    5.74    1.52   15   6.33   2.97   3   5.33    1.16   9      5.33   1.66    32    7.50   2.27     16   5.88    2.03
Openness                              78   7.64   1.81    15   6.73   1.44   23   7.65   0.49   14   7.36   1.01   20    7.50    1.36   12   6.92   3.06   5   7.00    1.58   9      7.22   1.20    34    6.82   2.68     17   6.71    2.14
Staff accessibility*                  80   7.40   1.85    15   8.27   2.09   19   7.63   1.54   14   7.86   1.17   17    6.65    2.00   13   6.69   3.07   4   6.75    1.26   9      6.11   1.45    32    5.66   3.44     17   6.29    2.57
Straightforwardness and honesty*      75   7.51   1.93    15   7.87   2.07   23   8.57   0.90   14   9.14   1.10   20    7.55    1.23   13   8.23   2.49   4   7.25    1.50   9      7.44   1.33    27    6.85   2.85     17   7.29    2.39
Collaboration with groups outside
                                      63   6.54   1.42    9    6.22   1.48   16   7.06   1.77   7    5.00   2.89   17    6.06    0.97   13   5.92   3.25   4   6.75    0.96   9      5.22   1.39    38    6.74   2.09     14   6.57    1.65
of the Government
Collaboration with the Government     68   7.35   1.64    14   8.36   1.15   18   8.00   0.49   7    5.86   3.58   17    7.47    0.87   10   6.80   2.74   5   7.40    1.34   9      7.67   1.66    34    7.88   1.98     16   7.94    1.69
Collaboration with other donors*      56   7.20   1.78    10   7.70   1.49   14   5.79   1.58   5    5.20   3.90   10    6.30    1.06   9    5.67   3.12   3   4.67    1.53   5      6.20   2.59    29    7.45   1.79     13   7.00    1.63
The speed in which it gets things
                                      68   6.65   1.86    11   4.73   2.28   23   7.09   0.73   12   6.00   2.37   15    6.20    1.01   9    6.22   2.86   4   6.50    1.29   5      5.60   1.67    33    6.06   2.49     16   6.00    1.32
accomplished on the ground
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve     80   6.13   1.82    15   6.07   1.67   23   6.48   1.41   14   7.21   1.05   19    6.05    1.72   12   7.25   1.42   9   5.33    1.73   9      5.00   1.12    40    5.58   2.40     15   5.53    2.33
development results in Turkey?*
The World Bank Group’s financial
instruments meet the needs of         79   6.44   2.13    16   4.94   2.14   24   7.13   1.83   14   7.29   1.44   20    5.70    1.59   14   6.36   2.24   7   5.86    2.12   6      4.67   0.82    34    5.41   2.30     19   5.37    2.61
Turkey*
The World Bank Group meets
                                      81   6.74   2.07    12   4.67   1.88   23   6.74   1.42   14   7.36   1.01   19    5.68    1.11   13   6.69   2.18   8   6.38    2.26   9      5.89   0.93    44    5.64   2.07     20   5.85    2.80
Turkey's needs for knowledge
Are adaptable to Turkey’s specific
development challenges and            71   6.72   2.31    12   4.58   2.19   23   7.57   0.51   14   7.00   1.11   20    5.25    1.68   10   7.10   1.97   5   5.80    2.28   8      5.00   2.73    37    5.59   2.48     17   5.29    2.37
country circumstances*
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
World Bank Group's knowledge
                                      83   6.53   1.62    15   5.67   1.50   24   6.75   0.79   14   7.21   0.89   20    6.20    0.89   14   7.36   2.17   7   6.00    1.63   8      5.00   1.85    44    5.73   2.06     20   5.05    2.56
work and activities make to
development results in your
country?*
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World Bank
                                      84   7.39   1.64    14   7.36   0.63   23   7.22   1.88   14   8.21   0.89   20    7.85    0.67   13   7.69   1.55   7   6.86    1.86   8      7.50   1.07    42    7.31   1.76     20   7.00    2.51
Group's knowledge work and
activities?
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group        54   6.69   1.93    10   3.80   2.53   13   7.69   0.48   11   7.18   1.08   11    5.18    0.98   8    6.75   2.32   2   8.00    0.00   6      4.50   1.23    26    6.88   2.09     9    6.00    3.08
makes appropriate use of them*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups
                                                                                                                         138
The World Bank Group                                 Turkey                              Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix I: Turkey FY 2014 Questionnaire




                            World Bank Group Country Survey FY14 – Turkey


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Turkey or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Turkey, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Turkey.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING TURKEY

 A1. In general would you say that Turkey is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                      139
The World Bank Group                                        Turkey                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Turkey.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
 Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                           15     Education quality
       assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)       16     Poverty reduction
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public     17     Energy
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4    Gender equity                                          18     Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  5    Foreign direct investment                              19     Agricultural development
  6    Water and sanitation                                   20     Trade and exports
  7    Anti corruption                                        21     Competitiveness
  8    Job creation/employment                                22     Economic growth
  9    Rural and regional development                         23     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
                                                                     Regulatory framework for private sector
 10    Financial markets and savings                          24
                                                                     development
 11    Urban development and planning                         25     Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 12    Environmental sustainability                           26     Disaster management (earthquakes, floods, etc.)
 13    Income inequality
                                                              27     Migration
 14    Health


 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                                   14     Migration
  2    Income inequality                                      15     Anti corruption
  3    Economic growth                                        16     Foreign direct investment
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)          17     Education quality
  5    Gender equity                                          18     Energy
                                                                     Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  6    Rural and regional development                         19     effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                     expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  7    Urban development and planning                         20     Environmental sustainability
       Regulatory framework for private sector
  8                                                           21     Disaster management (earthquakes, floods, etc.)
       development
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  9                                                           22     Health
       assistance)
 10    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                23     Agricultural development
 11    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)       24     Job creation/employment
 12    Competitiveness                                        25     Financial markets and savings
 13    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                 26     Trade and exports




                                                             140
The World Bank Group                                         Turkey                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                  Regulatory framework for private sector
 1    Energy                                                14
                                                                  development
 2    Gender equity                                         15    Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 3    Income inequality                                     16    Trade and exports
                                                                  Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 4                                                          17    effectiveness, public financial management, public
      assistance)
                                                                  expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 5    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)         18    Job creation/employment
 6    Anti corruption                                       19    Agricultural development
 7    Disaster management (earthquakes, floods, etc.)       20    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
 8    Rural and regional development                        21    Environmental sustainability
 9    Foreign direct investment                             22    Health
 10   Urban development and planning                        23    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11   Water and sanitation                                  24    Competitiveness
 12   Education quality
                                                            25    Financial markets and savings
 13   Migration


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following
 TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Better employment opportunities for young people
 2    Better employment opportunities for women
 3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
 4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
 5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
 6    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
 7    A growing middle class
 8    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
 9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 10   Consistent economic growth
 11   More reliable social safety net
 12   Greater equity of fiscal policy
 13   Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 14   Better quality public services
 15   Other (please specify):_____________________________________




                                                                 141
The World Bank Group                                            Turkey                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Turkey?
          1                 2               3       4       5              6       7        8            9              10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                             Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Turkey.
          1             2           3           4   5       6              7       8        9           10              
                                                                                                         Very
 Not effective at all                                                                                               Don't know
                                                                                                     effective


 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Turkey solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2       3       4       5   6   7             8        9                10                      
                                                                                       To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                Don't know
                                                                                                    degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in Turkey, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
 resources (financial and knowledge services) in Turkey? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                               15       Income inequality
      assistance)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 2    effectiveness, public financial management, public         16       Health
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)           17       Education quality
 4    Poverty reduction                                          18       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 5    Gender equity                                              19       Agricultural development
 6    Competitiveness                                            20       Trade and exports
 7    Rural and regional development                             21       Economic growth
 8    Foreign direct investment                                  22       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
                                                                          Regulatory framework for private sector
 9    Water and sanitation                                       23
                                                                          development
 10   Energy                                                     24       Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 11   Job creation/employment                                    25       Anti corruption
 12   Financial markets and savings                              26       Migration
 13   Urban development and planning
                                                                 27       Disaster management (earthquakes, floods, etc.)
 14   Environmental sustainability




                                                                 142
The World Bank Group                                          Turkey                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Turkey?
                                                                           Greatest Value              Second Greatest Value
                                                                       (Choose only ONE)           (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/facilitating                                                                                    
 2     Data                                                                                                      
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                          
 4     Financial resources                                                                                       
       Capacity development (e.g., institutional development,
 5                                                                                                               
       training for staff at state institutions, etc.)
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                      
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                                
 8     Donor coordination                                                                                        
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 9                                                                                                               
       knowledge sharing)
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________                                                          


 How effectively do the World Bank Group’s activities below support Turkey’s efforts to achieve
 development results?
                                                                  Not effective                                       Very    Don't
                                                                  at all                                          effective   know
  B6    Convening/facilitating                                       1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B7    Data                                                         1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B8    Policy advice, studies, analyses                             1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B9    Financial resources                                          1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B10    Technical assistance                                         1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B11    Mobilizing third party financial resources                   1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B12    Donor coordination                                           1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 B13                                                                 1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        knowledge sharing)


 The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Turkey. To which
 degree would Turkey benefit, if capacity building were to support...?
                                                                  To no                                        To a very
                                                                                                                              Don't
                                                                  degree                                      significant
                                                                                                                              know
                                                                  at all                                         degree
        Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
 B14    media) to help them more effectively engage and              1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        participate in development efforts
        The public sector, related to implementation of
 B15                                                                 1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        specific development projects on the ground
        The public sector, related to changing institutions
 B16                                                                 1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        (organizations or sociopolitical conditions)
        The private sector, related to institutional and
 B17                                                                 1     2      3    4   5   6   7     8    9        10      
        policy change




                                                               143
The World Bank Group                                          Turkey                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B18. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Staff too inaccessible
 2    Not exploring alternative policy options
 3    Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Turkey
 4    Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5    Arrogant in its approach
 6    Not aligned with country priorities
 7    The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8    Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 9    Too influenced by developed countries
 10   Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 11   Too slow and bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 12   Not aligned with other donors’ work
 13   Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 14   Not client focused
 15   Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 16   Don’t know


 B19. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Capacity development (e.g., institutional development, training for staff at state institutions, etc.)
 2    Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 3    Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 4    Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 5    Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6    Trust Fund management
 7    South-South knowledge exchange
 8    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 9    Don’t know



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               144
The World Bank Group                                     Turkey                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B20. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which
 TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 2     Donor community
 3     Media
 4     NGOs
 5     Local Government
 6     Private sector
 7     Parliament
 8     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 9     Beneficiaries
 10    Foundations
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    Other (please specify): __________________________
 13    Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
 Turkey?
                                                               Strongly                                 Strongly   Don't
                                                               disagree                                    agree   know
        Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B21                                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        relevant role in development in Turkey
        The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B22                                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        consider the development priorities for Turkey
        The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B23                                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        strategies that are realistic for Turkey
        The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B24                                                               1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        stakeholders in Turkey with respect




                                                             145
The World Bank Group                                        Turkey                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Turkey in terms of each of
 the following?
                                                                 To no                                     To a very
                                                                                                                        Don't
                                                                 degree at                                significant
                                                                                                                        know
                                                                 all                                         degree

 B25    Responsiveness                                             1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
 B26                                                               1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        products and services)
        Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B27                                                               1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        circumstances)
 B28    Being inclusive                                            1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B29    Openness (sharing data and other information)              1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B30    Staff accessibility                                        1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B31    Straightforwardness and honesty                            1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B32    Group who are making decisions important to my             1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        work
        Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B33                                                               1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B34    Collaboration with the Government                          1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B35    Collaboration with other donors                            1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B36                                                               1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
        the ground
 B37    Being a long-term partner                                  1    2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       



 B38. To be a more effective development partner in Turkey, do you believe that the World Bank Group
 should have …? (Select only ONE response)
                                     The current level of local
   More local presence                                                     Less local presence       Don't know
                                          presence is adequate




                                                             146
The World Bank Group                                        Turkey                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS

 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Turkey?
                                                                Not important                            Very     Don't
                                                                at all                               important    know
  1    Anti corruption                                             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  2    Migration                                                   1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  4    Competitiveness                                             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  6    Urban development and planning                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  7    Environmental sustainability                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Regulatory framework for private sector
  8                                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       development
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 10    Poverty reduction                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 11    Gender equity                                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 12    Foreign direct investment                                   1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 13    Water and sanitation                                        1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 14    Trade and exports                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 15    Economic growth                                             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 16    Energy                                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 17    Disaster management (earthquakes, floods, etc.)             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 18    effectiveness, public financial management, public          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 19    Job creation/employment                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 20    Financial markets and savings                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 21    Income inequality                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 22    Health                                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 23    Rural and regional development                              1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 24    Education quality                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 25                                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       assistance)
 26    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 27    Agricultural development                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       




                                                             147
The World Bank Group                                        Turkey                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Turkey?
 (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the sectors listed below, please respond
 “Don’t know?)
                                                                Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                at all                                       effective   know
  1    Migration                                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  3    Competitiveness                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  4    Urban development and planning                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  5    Environmental sustainability                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Regulatory framework for private sector
  6                                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       development
  7    Poverty reduction                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  8    Gender equity                                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  9    Foreign direct investment                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 10    Water and sanitation                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 11    Trade and exports                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 12    Economic growth                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 13    Energy                                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 14    Disaster management (earthquakes, floods, etc.)             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 15    effectiveness, public financial management, public          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 16    Job creation/employment                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 17    Financial markets and savings                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 18    Income inequality                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 19    Health                                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 20    Rural and regional development                              1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 21    Education quality                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 22                                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       assistance)
 23    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      




                                                             148
The World Bank Group                                           Turkey                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
 Turkey?
         1             2   3      4       5       6        7            8       9               10                   
 To no degree at                                                                                 To a very
                                                                                                                 Don't know
 all                                                                                    significant degree



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Turkey?
                                                       Strongly                                              Strongly     Don't
                                                       disagree                                                 agree     know
       The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
       (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
 C4                                                    1         2          3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10      
       Loan, Trust Funds, etc.) meet the needs of
       Turkey
       The World Bank Group meets Turkey’s needs
 C5    for knowledge services (e.g., research,         1         2          3   4   5       6    7     8     9     10      
       analysis, data, technical assistance)



PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                149
The World Bank Group                                              Turkey                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
 you do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never


 In Turkey, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                             To no                                                       To a very
                                                                                                                                      Don't
                                                             degree at                                                  significant
                                                                                                                                      know
                                                             all                                                           degree
  D2     Are timely                                           1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D3                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Turkey’s development
  D4                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         priorities
  D5     Lead to practical solutions                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D6                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D7                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         good practices
  D8     Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                 1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

  D9     Are adequately disseminated                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

 D10     Are translated enough into local language            1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are adaptable to Turkey’s specific
 D11     development challenges and country                   1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         circumstances


 D12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3   4      5       6            7           8       9                  10                        
 Not significant at all                                                                              Very significant       Don't know



 D13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities?
          1               2       3    4         5       6            7           8       9              10                        
 Very low                                                                                         Very high technical
                                                                                                                            Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                            quality




                                                                      150
The World Bank Group                                       Turkey                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                       Strongly                                  Strongly   Don't
                                                       disagree                                     agree   know
        The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E1                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        promptly
        The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E2    and evaluates the projects and programs it     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        supports
        The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E3                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        reviews are done in a timely fashion
        The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
  E4                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        requirements are reasonable
        The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
  E5                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        lending are reasonable
        The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
  E6                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        in Turkey
        Working with the World Bank Group
  E7                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        increases Turkey’s institutional capacity
        The World Bank Group ensures consistency
  E8                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        and continuity through staff changes
        Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
        financial management, etc.) are adequate,
  E9                                                   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
        of them
        The World Bank Group provides effective
 E10    implementation support (i.e., supervision of   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
        projects)




                                                            151
The World Bank Group                                         Turkey                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN TURKEY
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
  1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Turkey’s economy
  2    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
  3    Offer more innovative financial products
  4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
  5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
  6    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Turkey’s specific challenges
  7    Offer more innovative knowledge services
  8    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
  9    Increase the level of capacity development in the country
 10    Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 11    Increase availability of Fee-Based services
 12    Work faster
 13    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Turkey, and
 taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the
 World Bank Group should offer more of in Turkey? (Select only ONE response)
  1    Financial services
  2    Knowledge products
  3    Convening services
  4    None of the above
  5    The combination is appropriate for Turkey
  6    Don’t know




                                                              152
The World Bank Group                                         Turkey                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Turkey? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Local newspapers
 2     International newspapers
 3     Local radio
 4     International radio
 5     Local television
 6     International television
 7     Periodicals
 8     Internet
 9     Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 10    Blogs
 11    Mobile phones
 12    Instant messaging
 13    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 G2                                                                                                         Yes          No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G3                                                                                                         Yes          No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G4; if NO please go to G5)
 G4    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                            Yes          No
 G5    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                                  Yes          No
 G6    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                               Yes          No



 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                       Strongly                               Strongly    Don't
                                                                       disagree                                  agree    know
         I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than
  G7                                                                   1     2    3   4   5   6   7    8      9    10      
         I did a few years ago
         I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
  G8     navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank          1     2    3   4   5   6   7    8      9    10      
         Group website)
         I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
  G9     websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World        1     2    3   4   5   6   7    8      9    10      
         Bank Group website)
         The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G10     Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) are valuable sources      1     2    3   4   5   6   7    8      9    10      
         of information about the institution
         When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G11     know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach       1     2    3   4   5   6   7    8      9    10      
         them, etc.)
         The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G12                                                                   1     2    3   4   5   6   7    8      9    10      
         requests and inquiries




                                                                 153
The World Bank Group                                        Turkey                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?          (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
                                                             Natural resource management / environmental
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security   11
                                                             sustainability
                                                             Private sector development / foreign direct
 2    Climate change / disaster management             12
                                                             investment
                                                             Public sector governance / public financial
 3    Education                                        13
                                                             management / anti corruption
 4    Energy                                           14    Social protection
 5    Financial markets / banking                      15    Transport
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity          16    Urban development
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                     17    Water and sanitation
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology        18    Generalist
 9    Job creation/employment
                                                       19    Other (please specify): _________________________
 10   Law and justice / regulatory framework




                                                             154
The World Bank Group                                          Turkey                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Turkey?
 (Select all that apply)
 1    The World Bank (IBRD/IDA) 
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    None


 H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Turkey?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H6. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Ankara
 2    Outside Ankara




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               155
