                              96140




        Uganda
  The World Bank Group
Country Opinion Survey FY14
      Report of Findings
         June 2014
The World Bank Group                        Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



Acknowledgements
The Uganda Country Opinion Survey is part of the County Opinion Survey Program series of the
World Bank Group. This report was prepared by the Public Opinion Research Group (PORG)
team led by Sharon Felzer (Senior Communications Officer, Head of PORG), Jessica Cameron,
Svetlana Markova and Jing Guo. Calita Woods and Dania Mendoza provided data support. The
report was prepared under the overall guidance and supervision of Sumir Lal (Director, ECRGP).
PORG acknowledges the significant contribution from the Uganda country team and the local
fielding agency CIPESA (Collaboration on International ICT Policy in East and Southern
Africa). In particular, PORG is grateful to Ahmadou Moustapha Ndiaye (Courtry Manager) and
Sheila Gashishiri (Communications Associate) for their ongoing support throughout the Country
Opinion Survey process.




                                              1
The World Bank Group                                   Uganda                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




Table of Contents
           I. Objectives ...................................................................................3

          II. Methodology ...............................................................................3

         III. Demographics of the Sample.......................................................5

         IV. General Issues Facing Uganda ...................................................11

          V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group .......................19

         VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness ......................................29

        VII. How the World Bank Group Operates .......................................36

       VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments .......................42

         IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda ................50

          X. Communication and Openness..................................................58

         XI. Appendices ................................................................................66




                                                          2
The World Bank Group                            Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



I. Objectives
This survey was designed to achieve the following objectives:
    Assist the World Bank Group in gaining a better understanding of how stakeholders in
       Uganda perceive the World Bank Group;
    Obtain systematic feedback from stakeholders in Uganda regarding:
            Their views regarding the general environment in Uganda;
            Their overall attitudes toward the World Bank Group in Uganda;
            Overall impressions of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness and results,
              project/program related issues, knowledge work and activities, and
              communication and information sharing in Uganda; and
            Perceptions of the World Bank Group’s future role in Uganda.
    Use data to help inform Uganda country team’s strategy.


II. Methodology
    From January to March 2014, 600 stakeholders of the World Bank Group in Uganda were
invited to provide their opinions on the WBG’s assistance to the country by participating in a
country survey. Participants in the survey were drawn from among the office of the President or
Prime Minister; the office of a Minister; the office of a Parliamentarian; employees of a ministry,
ministerial department, or implementation agency; consultants/contractors working on World
Bank Group-supported projects/programs; project management units (PMUs) overseeing
implementation of a project; local government officials or staff; bilateral agencies; multilateral
agencies; private sector organizations; private foundations; the financial sector/private banks;
NGOs; community-based organizations (CBOs); the media; independent government
institutions; trade unions; faith-based groups; academia/research institutes/think tanks; the
judiciary branch; cultural leaders; and political parties. A total of 326 stakeholders participated in
the survey (54% response rate).
    Respondents completed questionnaires with a representative from the fielding agency or
received the questionnaire via courier, post, or email, and returned it accordingly. Respondents
were asked about: general issues facing Uganda; their overall attitudes toward the WBG; the
WBG’s effectiveness and results; the WBG’s knowledge work and activities; working with the
WBG; the WBG’s future role in Uganda; and the WBG’s communication and information
sharing in Uganda. In addition, every country that engages in the Country Survey must include
specific indicator questions that will be aggregated for the WBG’s annual Corporate Scorecard.
These questions are identified throughout the survey report.
    In addition, when possible, responses from respondents completing this year’s country
survey were compared to responses from the 306 respondents (56% response rate) who
completed the country survey in FY ’08. Notations and/or charts are included when these
comparisons were possible. Comparisons to the 53 respondents (22% response rate) who
completed the country survey in FY ’04 can be found in the Appendix (see page 151).
A. General Issues Facing Uganda: Respondents were asked to indicate whether Uganda is
   headed in the right direction, what they thought were the most important development
   priorities, which areas would contribute most to reducing poverty, which areas would
   contribute most to generating economic growth, and what would achieve “shared prosperity?.


                                                  3
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



II. Methodology (continued)
B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group: Respondents were asked to rate their
   familiarity with the WBG, its effectiveness in Uganda, WBG staff preparedness, the
   effectiveness of its activities, to what extent it should provide capacity building support to
   certain groups, the importance and effectiveness of the WBG’s current capacity building
   work, their agreement with various statements regarding the WBG’s work, and the extent to
   which it is an effective development partner. Respondents were also asked to indicate the
   sectoral areas on which it would be most productive for the WBG to focus its resources, the
   WBG’s greatest values and greatest weaknesses, its most effective instruments, with which
   stakeholder groups the WBG should collaborate more, if the WBG should have more or less
   of a local presence in Uganda, and to what they attributed slowed or failed reform efforts.
C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results: Respondents were asked to rate the extent
   to which the WBG’s work helps achieve development results in Uganda, the extent to which
   the WBG meets Uganda’s needs for knowledge services and financial instruments, the extent
   to which the WBG’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold it accountable for achieving
   results, and the importance of the WBG’s involvement and the WBG’s level of effectiveness
   across thirty-one development areas. Respondents were also asked to indicate if WBG
   decisions regarding its Uganda program were made primarily in country or at Headquarters.
D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities: Respondents were asked to
   indicate how frequently they consult WBG knowledge work and to rate the quality of the
   WBG’s knowledge work and activities, including how significant of a contribution it makes
   to development results and its technical quality.
E. Working with the World Bank: Respondents were asked to rate the extent to which various
   aspects of the WBG’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Uganda’s
   development challenges and their agreement with a series of statements regarding working
   with the WBG. Respondents were asked to indicate if the WBG operates with too much risk.
F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda: Respondents were asked to indicate
   what the WBG should do to make itself of greater value in Uganda, which of its services the
   WBG should offer more of in Uganda, the areas related to the oil and gas sector in Uganda
   where the WBG should provide greater support, and whether respondents would like to see
   more or less WBG involvement in the oil and gas sector.
G. Communication and Information Sharing: Respondents were asked to indicate how they get
   information about economic and social development issues, how they prefer to receive
   information from the WBG, their Internet access, and their usage and evaluation of the
   WBG’s websites. Respondents were asked about their awareness of the WBG’s Access to
   Information policy, past information requests from the WBG, and their level of agreement
   that they use more data from the World Bank Group as a result of the WBG’s Open Data
   policy. Respondents were also asked to evaluate the WBG’s information accessibility and
   responsiveness to information requests.
H. Background Information: Respondents were asked to indicate their current position,
   specialization, whether they currently collaborate with the WBG, with which WBG agencies
   they work, their exposure to the WBG in Uganda, and their geographic location.



                                                4
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample

Current Position
       For further analyses, the few respondents from the financial sector/private banks were
        combined with those from the private sector and the few respondents from the office of a
        Parliamentarian, multilateral agencies, and independent government institutions were
        included in the “Other? category.




                                                5
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Area of Primary Specialization

       Key comparisons across respondents’ specializations can be found in the Appendix (see
        page 154).




                                               6
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Geographic Location

       The majority of respondents were from Kampala City. The few respondents from
        Eastern, Western, and Northern Uganda were combined into one “Other Areas? category
        for all further analyses. Only significant geographic location differences in ratings of
        indicator questions will be discussed in the body of this report. All geographic locations
        comparisons can be found in the Appendix (see page 114).




                                                 7
The World Bank Group                        Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Collaboration with the World Bank Group

       Differences in responding, based on collaboration with the World Bank Group in
        Uganda, can be found in the Appendix (see page 132).




                                               8
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Exposure to the World Bank Group

       Differences in responses to the indicator questions, based on exposure to the World Bank
        Group in Uganda, can be found in the Appendix (see page 168). Please note that where
        these two factors appear to have a significant relationship with overall views of the
        WBG, it is highlighted in yellow in that table.




                                                9
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



III. Demographics of the Sample (continued)

Familiarity with the World Bank Group

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar levels of familiarity
        with the World Bank Group in Uganda compared to respondents from the FY ’08 country
        survey (6.7).
       Respondents from the media and employees of ministries had the highest levels of
        familiarity with the World Bank Group in Uganda whereas respondents from NGOs,
        private sector/financial sector/private banks, faith-based groups, and academia had
        significantly lower levels of familiarity.
       Respondents’ ratings of familiarity with the World Bank Group were significantly,
        strongly correlated with their perceptions of the World Bank Group’s overall
        effectiveness in Uganda.




                                               10
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda

Uganda Heading in the Right Direction

       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG in Uganda were significantly more likely
        to indicate that Uganda is headed in the right or wrong direction and significantly less
        likely to indicate that they are not sure whether Uganda was headed in the right or wrong
        direction compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                11
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)
Development Priority
       Stakeholders express equal concern about education, corruption and growth, followed
        closely by poverty, health, energy and jobs.




                                               12
The World Bank Group                           Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Development Priority (continued)

       There were several statistically significant stakeholder group differences in what they
        considered to be the most important development priorities in Uganda.
             Respondents from private foundations were significantly more likely to indicate
              that foreign direct investment is one of the most important development priorities
              in Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from CBOs were significantly more likely to indicate that gender
              equity, education, and information and communications technology are the most
              important development priorities in Uganda compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from faith-based groups were significantly more likely to indicate
              that anti-corruption and economic growth are the most important development
              priorities in Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from academia were significantly more likely to indicate that job
              creation/employment is one of the most important development priorities in
              Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.

       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        poverty reduction as the most important development priority compared to respondents
        who did not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                 13
The World Bank Group                        Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction

   Nearly half of all respondents in the FY ’08 country survey indicated that agriculture
    development/modernization of agriculture would contribute most to poverty reduction (47%).




                                              14
The World Bank Group                           Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Factors Contributing to Poverty Reduction (continued)

       There were several statistically significant stakeholder group differences in what they
        considered would contribute most to poverty reduction in Uganda.
             Employees of ministries were significantly more likely to indicate that transport
              would contribute to poverty reduction in Uganda compared to respondents from
              other stakeholder groups.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from other organizations were
              significantly more likely to indicate that domestic private sector development
              would contribute to poverty reduction in Uganda compared to respondents from
              other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from private sector/financial sector/private banks were significantly
              more likely to indicate that communicable/non-communicable diseases and
              environmental sustainability would contribute to poverty reduction in Uganda
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from CBOs were significantly more likely to indicate that equality
              of opportunity, gender equity, and urban development would contribute to poverty
              reduction in Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from CBOs and the media were significantly more likely to indicate
              that education would contribute to poverty reduction in Uganda compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from CBOs and faith-based groups were significantly more likely to
              indicate that health would contribute to poverty reduction in Uganda compared to
              respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from faith-based groups were significantly more likely to indicate
              that information and communications technology would contribute to poverty
              reduction in Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from faith-based groups and academia were significantly more likely
              to indicate that job creation/employment would contribute to poverty reduction in
              Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.

       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        economic growth, transport, and domestic private sector development as contributing
        most to poverty reduction compared to respondents who did not collaborate with the
        WBG.




                                                 15
The World Bank Group               Uganda      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth




                                     16
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Factors Contributing to Economic Growth (continued)

       There were several statistically significant stakeholder group differences in what they
        considered would contribute most to poverty reduction in Uganda.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from other organizations were
              significantly more likely to indicate that transport would contribute to economic
              growth in Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from private sector/financial sector/private banks and respondents
              from other organizations were significantly more likely to indicate that public
              sector governance/reform would contribute to economic growth in Uganda
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from private foundations and academia were significantly more
              likely to indicate that trade and exports would contribute to economic growth in
              Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from CBOs were significantly more likely to indicate that rural
              development, education, and domestic private sector development, and
              significantly less likely to indicate agricultural development, would contribute to
              economic growth in Uganda compared to respondents from other stakeholder
              groups.
             Respondents from faith-based groups were significantly more likely to indicate
              that anti-corruption and health would contribute to economic growth in Uganda
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from academia were significantly more likely to indicate that
              sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector would
              contribute to economic growth in Uganda compared to respondents from other
              stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from other organizations were significantly more likely to indicate
              that foreign direct investment would contribute to economic growth in Uganda
              compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.

       Respondents who collaborated with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        energy and education as contributing most to generating economic growth compared to
        respondents who did not collaborate with the WBG who were significantly more likely to
        indicate trade and exports.




                                                17
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IV. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)
Achieving “Shared Prosperity?
       Employees of ministries were more likely to indicate that consistent economic growth
        would achieve “shared prosperity? in Uganda, respondents from the private
        sector/financial sector/private banks were more likely to indicate education and training
        that better ensure job opportunity and respondents from private foundations were more
        likely to indicate better employment opportunities for women and greater access to
        micro-finance for the poor.




                                                18
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
As noted in the “Methodology? section, the indicator questions referred to throughout the survey
report are questions that are asked in every country that engages in the Country Survey. These
will be aggregated for the World Bank Group’s annual Corporate Scorecard.
Focusing World Bank Group Resources
       Respondents from private foundations were more likely to indicate job creation,
        respondents from faith-based groups indicated rural development, and respondents from
        other organizations indicated agricultural development as the areas on which it would be
        most productive for the WBG to focus.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        transport and education compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                19
The World Bank Group                           Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group’s Overall Effectiveness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from this year’s country survey gave statistically similar ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness in Uganda compared to respondents from the FY ‘08 country
        survey (6.3).
       Respondents from the media gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness in
        Uganda whereas respondents from academia gave significantly lower ratings.
        Respondents from other organizations gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the
        WBG’s work achieves development results in Uganda whereas respondents from the
        media gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents across geographic locations, as well as those who collaborated with the
        WBG and those who do not, gave statistically similar ratings for the extent to which the
        WBG’s work achieves development results in Uganda and for the WBG’s effectiveness
        in Uganda.




                                                 20
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Staff Preparedness (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the media gave the highest ratings for the extent to which the World
        Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Uganda solve its most complicated
        development challenges whereas respondents from faith-based groups gave significantly
        lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        extent to which the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Uganda solve its
        most complicated development challenges compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.
       Respondents across all geographic locations gave statistically similar ratings for the
        extent to which the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared to help Uganda solve its
        most complicated development challenges.




                                               21
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank (continued)

Overall Ratings for Indicator Questions

       Respondents from other organizations and the private sector/financial sector/private
        banks gave the highest ratings across all of the country survey indicator questions
        whereas respondents from academia gave significantly lower ratings. Responses for
        individual indicator questions by stakeholder groups can be found in the Appendix (see
        page 169).




                                               22
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

WBG Activities: Greatest Value

       Capacity development is valued equally to the WBG’s financial resources.




                                               23
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
WBG Activities: Effectiveness
       Respondents from private foundations gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the
        WBG’s convening/facilitating whereas respondents from CBOs gave significantly lower
        ratings. Respondents from private foundations gave the highest ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s data whereas respondents from faith-based groups gave
        significantly lower ratings. Respondents from the media gave the highest ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s policy advice, studies, analyses whereas respondents from
        academia gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from the media gave the highest
        ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s technical assistance whereas respondents from
        private foundations gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from CBOs and the
        media gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s mobilizing third party
        financial resources whereas respondents from academia gave significantly lower ratings.
        Respondents from CBOs gave the highest ratings for the effectiveness of the WBG’s
        donor coordination whereas employees of ministries gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly lower ratings for the
        effectiveness of the WBG’s convening/facilitating compared to respondents who do not
        collaborate with the WBG.




                                                24
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Capacity Building
       Respondents from private foundation gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness at project implementation and policy design capacity building whereas
        respondents from academia gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from CBOs,
        faith-based groups, and other organizations gave the highest ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness at citizen engagement capacity building whereas respondents from
        academia gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents from private foundation gave the highest ratings for the importance of the
        WBG being involved in project implementation capacity building whereas respondents
        from NGOs and other organizations gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from
        private foundation gave the highest ratings for the importance of the WBG being
        involved in policy design capacity building whereas employees of ministries gave
        significantly lower ratings. Respondents from private foundation and academia gave the
        highest ratings for the importance of the WBG being involved in citizen engagement
        capacity building whereas employees of ministries gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        importance of the WBG being involved in project implementation and policy design
        capacity building compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               25
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness

       In contrast to nearly all country surveys, a plurality of stakeholders in Uganda reported
        that the WBG’s greatest weakness was that it was too influenced by developed countries.




                                                26
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Greatest Weakness (continued)

       There were several statistically significant stakeholder group differences in what they
        considered to be the WBG’s greatest weaknesses in its work in Uganda.
            Employees of ministries were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s
               greatest weakness is being arrogant in its approach compared to respondents from
               other stakeholder groups.
            Employees of ministries and respondents from CBOs were significantly more
               likely to indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is being too bureaucratic in
               its operational policies and procedures compared to respondents from other
               stakeholder groups.
            Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks were
               significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s greatest weakness is that its
               processes are too complex compared to respondents from other stakeholder
               groups.
            Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and private
               foundations were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG’s greatest
               weakness is that its processes are too slow compared to respondents from other
               stakeholder groups.
            Respondents from NGOs were significantly more likely to indicate that the
               WBG’s greatest weakness is that it does not collaborate enough with non-state
               actors compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            Respondents from CBOs and academia were significantly more likely to indicate
               that the WBG’s greatest weakness is that it is not willing to honestly criticize
               policies and reform efforts in the country compared to respondents from other
               stakeholder groups.
            Respondents from faith-based groups were significantly more likely to indicate
               that the WBG’s greatest weaknesses were that its staff is too inaccessible and that
               it is not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Uganda compared to
               respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            Respondents from academia were significantly more likely to indicate that the
               WBG’s greatest weakness is that there is not enough public disclosure of its work
               compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
            Respondents from other organizations were significantly more likely to indicate
               that the WBG’s greatest weakness is that it does not explore alternative policy
               options compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that being too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures was one of the
        WBG’s greatest weaknessess compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the
        WBG, who were significantly more likely to indicate that its processes are too complex
        and too slow.


                                                27
The World Bank Group                            Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



V. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Attributing Failed/Slow Reform Efforts
       Employees of ministries and respondents from NGOs and the media indicated that they
        attribute failed or slow reform efforts to there not being an adequate level of citizen/civil
        society participation. A majority of respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
        private banks indicated that they attribute it to reforms not being well thought out in light
        of country challenges. Respondents from private foundations and faith-based groups
        indicated that they attribute it to high levels of corruption in the country. Respondents
        from faith-based groups also indicated that they attribute it to the WBG not doing
        adequate follow through. Respondents from CBOs indicated that they attribute it to
        inadequate levels of capacity in Government and the Government working inefficiently.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they attribute failed or slow reform efforts to high levels of corruption in the country
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                  28
The World Bank Group           Uganda       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness
Importance of Specific Areas




                                 29
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among twenty-three of
        these thirty-one areas of development. For the most part, respondents from the private
        sector/financial sector/private banks and the media tended to have the highest ratings of
        importance whereas respondents from private foundations and faith-based groups tended
        to have significantly lower importance ratings. Respondents from CBOs also tended to
        have some of the highest ratings, as well as some of the lowest ratings of importance
        across these areas. Those areas with significant stakeholder group differences were:
             “Information and communications technology?;
             “Transport?;
             “Crime and violence?;
             “Environmental sustainability?;
             “Regulatory framework?;
             “Communicable/non-communicable diseases?;
             “Gender equity?;
             “Domestic private sector development?;
             “Foreign direct investment?;
             “Trade and exports?;
             “Economic growth?;
             “Energy?;
             “Disaster management?;
             “Public sector governance/reform?;
             “Job creation/employment?;
             “Financial markets?;
             “Equality of opportunity?;
             “Rural development?;
             “Global/regional integration?;
             “Food security?;
             “Social protection?;
             “Agricultural development?; and
             “Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector?.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings of
        importance for “Anti-Corruption?, “Environmental sustainability?, “Poverty Reduction?,
        “Water and Sanitation?, “Economic growth?, “Energy?, “Public sector governance/
        reform?, “Rural development?, “Agricultural development?, and “Sustainable and
        transparent development of the oil and gas sector?, but significantly lower importance
        ratings for “Gender equity?, “Trade and exports?, “Financial markets?, “Equality of
        opportunity?, and “Social protection? compared to respondents who do not collaborate
        with the WBG.


                                                30
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Importance of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had lower ratings of importance across all
        areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’08 country survey. Those
        differences that reached statistical significance are noted in the graph.




                                                31
The World Bank Group              Uganda           Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)
Effectiveness of Specific Areas




                                    32
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Please note the complete breakdown of respondents’ effectiveness ratings for the WBG’s
        work in these development areas can be found in the Appendix. In addition to the
        aggregate mean ratings for each area, respondents who indicated that they “Don’t Know?
        are reported in Appendix A (see page 70), suggesting that primarily informed
        stakeholders responded to these questions. A complete breakdown by stakeholder groups
        can be found in Appendix B (see page 88), by geographic locations in Appendix C (see
        page 114), by WBG-collaborators in Appendix D (see page 132), and by respondents’
        specializations/sectors in Appendix F (see page 154).

       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but two of
        these thirty-one areas of development. For the most part, employees of ministries and
        respondents from faith-based groups tended to give the highest ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness across these areas whereas respondents from academia and other
        organizations tended to give significantly lower effectiveness ratings. Respondents from
        CBOs also tended to have some of the highest ratings, as well as some of the lowest
        ratings of the WBG’s effectiveness across these areas. Those areas with statistically
        similar stakeholder group ratings were:
             “Poverty reduction?; and
             “Financial markets?.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        WBG’s effectiveness at “Transport?, “Economic growth?, “Energy?, and “Health?, but
        significantly lower ratings for the WBG’s effectiveness at “Anti-Corruption?, “Crime and
        violence?, “Law and justice?, and “Equality of opportunity? compared to respondents
        who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                33
The World Bank Group                           Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Effectiveness of Specific Areas (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey tended to give higher ratings for the WBG’s
        effectiveness across the areas that could be compared to respondents from the FY ’08
        country survey, but not always. Those differences that reached statistical significance are
        noted in the graph.




                                                 34
The World Bank Group                           Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VI. Sectors: Importance and Effectiveness (continued)

Drivers of Effectiveness
To determine the key drivers of respondents’ ratings of the World Bank Group’s overall
effectiveness and ratings of its ability to help achieve development results in Uganda, bivariate
correlational analyses were conducted using respondents’ ratings of the thirty-one specific areas
of effectiveness.

Correlational analyses, however, are not able to tell us exactly what is causing respondents’
ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or ratings of its ability to help achieve development
results. Rather, these analyses tell us that as ratings of effectiveness in one area increase,
respondents’ ratings of the WBG’s overall effectiveness increase, or as ratings of effectiveness in
one area increase, ratings of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results increase.
Thus, it can be inferred that respondents’ perceptions of effectiveness in one specific area are
related to, or drive, respondents’ perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness or perceptions
of the WBG’s ability to help achieve development results.

       Overall Effectiveness: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-Moment
        correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the WBG’s
        overall effectiveness, suggesting that ratings of effectiveness in those specific areas are
        drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s overall effectiveness in Uganda. The areas
        determined to be key drivers from these analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at transport;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at disaster management;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at energy; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at education.

       Achieving Development Results: Those specific areas with the highest Pearson Product-
        Moment correlations were determined to be the most closely related to perceptions of the
        WBG’s ability to help achieve development results in Uganda, suggesting that ratings of
        effectiveness in those specific areas are drivers of perceptions of the WBG’s ability to
        help achieve development results. The areas determined to be key drivers from these
        analyses were:
                The WBG’s effectiveness at information and communications technology;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at equality of opportunity;
                The WBG’s effectiveness at foreign direct investment; and
                The WBG’s effectiveness at domestic private sector development.




                                                 35
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates

The World Bank Group’s Work in Uganda

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had significantly lower levels of agreement
        that the WBG currently plays a relevant role in Uganda and that the WBG is aligned with
        their development priorities compared to respondents from the FY ’08 country surve y.
       Employees of ministries and respondents from faith-based groups and other organizations
        had the highest levels of agreement that the WBG is aligned with their development
        priorities whereas respondents from academia and CBOs had significantly lower levels of
        agreement. Employees of ministries and respondents from private foundations and other
        organizations had the highest levels of agreement that the WBG supports realistic
        programs and strategies for Uganda whereas respondents from academia and CBOs had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.




                                               36
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)
Overall Perceptions
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but one of
        these aspects of the WBG’s operations. For the most part, respondents from the private
        sector/financial sector/private banks and other organizations tended to have the highest
        levels of agreement across these aspects whereas respondents from private foundations
        tended to have significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from CBOs, the
        media, and academia also tended to have some of the highest levels of agreement, as well
        as some of the lowest levels of agreement across these aspects. The one statement with
        statistically similar stakeholder group ratings was “The World Bank Group effectively
        monitors and evaluates the projects and programs it supports?.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        for “The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable?, “Where
        country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes appropriate use of them?,
        and “The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support? compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                               37
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Overall Perceptions (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had lower levels of agreement across all
        aspects of how the World Bank Group operates that could be compared to respondents
        from the FY ’08 country survey. Those aspects that reached statistical significance are
        noted in the graph.




                                                38
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner

       Respondents from this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the
        WBG’s “Staff accessibility? and “Straightforwardness and honesty? compared to
        respondents from the FY ’08 country survey (6.2 and 6.9, respectively).
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but three of
        these aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner. For the most part,
        respondents from other organizations tended to have the highest ratings across these
        aspects whereas respondents from academia and CBOs tended to have significantly lower
        ratings. The three aspects with statistically similar stakeholder group ratings were
        “Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)?, “Collaboration
        with groups outside of the Government?, and “Being a long-term partner?.




                                                39
The World Bank Group                           Uganda                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

The World Bank Group as an Effective Development Partner (continued)

       Respondents who indicated that they collaborated with the WBG gave higher ratings
        across some of these aspects of the WBG being an effective development partner, but
        lower ratings across others, compared to respondents who indicated that they did not
        collaborate. Those differences that reached statistical significance are noted in the graph.




                                                 40
The World Bank Group         Uganda             Country Opinion Survey 2014



VII. How the World Bank Group Operates (continued)

Risk-Taking




Where Decisions are Made




                               41
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments

Frequency of Consulting World Bank Group Knowledge Work and Activities

       Employees of ministries reported the most frequent usage of WBG knowledge work and
        activities whereas respondents from CBOs reported significantly less frequent usage.
       Respondents who indicated that they collaborated with the WBG reported significantly
        more frequent usage of WBG knowledge work and activities compared to respondents
        who indicated that they did not collaborate.




                                               42
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Uganda’s Knowledge Needs (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the media and employees of ministries had the highest levels of
        agreement that the World Bank Group meets Uganda’s needs for knowledge services
        whereas respondents from academia and CBOs had significantly lower levels of
        agreement.
       Respondents across geographic locations, as well as those who collaborate with the WBG
        and those who do not, had statistically similar levels of agreement that the World Bank
        Group meets Uganda’s needs for knowledge services.




                                               43
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Qualities of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities

       Respondents in this year’s country survey gave significantly lower ratings for the extent
        to which the WBG’s knowledge work and activities “Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific
        development challenges and country circumstances?, but statistically similar ratings that
        they “Are source of relevant information on global good practices?, compared to
        respondents from the FY ’08 country survey (6.3 and 7.5, respectively).
       There were statistically significant stakeholder group differences among all but three of
        these qualities of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities. For the most part,
        respondents from other organizations and the media tended to have the highest ratings
        across these qualities whereas respondents from CBOs and NGOs tended to have
        significantly lower ratings. Respondents from academia also tended to have some of the
        highest ratings, as well as some of the lowest ratings across these qualities. The three
        qualities with statistically similar stakeholder group ratings were “Lead to practical
        solutions?, “Enhance your knowledge and/or skills?, and “Are adaptable to Uganda’s
        specific development challenges and country circumstances?.




                                                44
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Contribution of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Respondents across all stakeholder groups and geographic locations, as well as those who
        collaborate with the WBG and those who do not, had statistically similar ratings
        regarding the significance of the contribution of the WBG’s knowledge work.




                                               45
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Technical Quality of the WBG’s Knowledge Work and Activities (Indicator Question)

       Respondents from the media had the highest ratings regarding the technical quality of the
        WBG’s knowledge work and activities whereas respondents from NGOs, CBOs, and
        faith-based groups had significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents across all geographic locations, as well as those who collaborate with the
        WBG and those who do not, had statistically similar ratings regarding the technical
        quality of the WBG’s knowledge work and activities.




                                                46
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Most Effective Instruments

       Although respondents across all stakeholder groups indicated that investment lending and
        capacity development were the most effective instruments in helping reduce poverty in
        Uganda, respondents from CBOs were significantly more likely to indicate that policy-
        based lending/budget support to the Government was one of the most effective
        instruments and respondents from faith-based groups were significantly more likely to
        indicate that Trust Fund management was one of the most effective instruments
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                               47
The World Bank Group                        Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)

Meeting Uganda’s Needs for Financial Instruments (Indicator Question)

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that the World Bank Group’s financial instruments meet the needs of Uganda compared
        to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                              48
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



VIII. World Bank Group Knowledge and Instruments (continued)


Technical Assistance/Advisory Work

       Respondents from the media gave the highest ratings that the WBG’s technical
        assistance/advisory work contributes to design whereas respondents from academia gave
        significantly lower ratings. Respondents from other organizations gave the highest ratings
        that the WBG’s technical assistance/advisory work contributes to implementation
        whereas respondents from CBOs gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from
        other organizations gave the highest ratings that the WBG’s technical assistance/advisory
        work contributes to evaluations whereas respondents from CBOs, the media, faith-based
        groups, and academia gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings that the
        WBG’s technical assistance/advisory work contributes to design compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                49
The World Bank Group               Uganda      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value




                                     50
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
(continued)

Making the World Bank Group of Greater Value

       There were several statistically significant stakeholder group differences in what they
        indicated the WBG should do to make itself of greater value to Uganda.
             Respondents from private foundations, NGOs, faith-based groups, academia, and
                other organizations were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG
                should reach out to more groups outside of Government compared to respondents
                from other stakeholder groups.
             Employees of ministries were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG
                should reduce the complexity of obtaining WBG financing compared to
                respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Employees of ministries and respondents from the private sector/financial sector/
                private banks were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should
                improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets compared to
                respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from CBOs, the media, and academia were significantly more likely
                to indicate that the WBG should offer more innovative financial products
                compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from faith-based groups were significantly more likely to indicate
                that the WBG should provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on
                Uganda’s economy compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from private foundations and academia were significantly more
                likely to indicate that the WBG should offer more innovative knowledge services
                compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks were
                significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should ensure greater
                selectivity in its work compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
             Respondents from CBOs were significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG
                should increase the level of capacity development in the country compared to
                respondents from other stakeholder groups.

       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG should reach out to more groups outside of Government and work faster
        compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG who were significantly
        more likely to indicate that the WBG should improve the quality of its experts as related
        to Uganda’s specific challenges.




                                                51
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
(continued)

Capacity Building

       Respondents from private foundations and CBOs gave the highest ratings for the extent
        to which Uganda would benefit from WBG capacity building support to groups outside
        of government whereas respondents from academia gave significantly lower ratings.
        Respondents from the media and other organizations gave the highest ratings for the
        extent to which Uganda would benefit from WBG capacity building support to the public
        sector, related to implementation of specific development projects, whereas respondents
        from academia gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from the media gave the
        highest ratings for the extent to which Uganda would benefit from WBG capacity
        building support to the public sector, related to changing institutions, whereas
        respondents from academia gave significantly lower ratings. Respondents from private
        foundations gave the highest ratings for the extent to which Uganda would benefit from
        WBG capacity building support to the private sector whereas respondents from faith-
        based groups gave significantly lower ratings.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG gave significantly higher ratings for the
        extent to which Uganda would benefit from WBG capacity building support to groups
        outside of government, the public sector, related to implementation of specific
        development projects, and the public sector, related to changing institutions, compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                52
The World Bank Group        Uganda            Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
(continued)

Local Presence in Uganda




                              53
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
(continued)

Focusing Services

       Employees of ministries and respondents from faith-based groups and academia indicated
        that the WBG should offer more financial services in Uganda. Respondents from NGOs
        indicated that the WBG should offer more knowledge products. Respondents from the
        private sector/financial sector/private banks and the media indicated that the WBG should
        offer more convening services. Respondents from private foundations and other
        organization indicated that the combination of services is appropriate. Respondents from
        CBOs indicated that they didn’t know what the WBG should offer more of in Uganda.




                                               54
The World Bank Group                        Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
(continued)
Collaborating with Stakeholders in Uganda
       Employees of ministries and respondents from academia indicated that the WBG should
        collaborate more with academia/research institutes/think tanks. Respondents from NGOs
        and private foundations indicated that the WBG should collaborate more with NGOs.
        Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and other
        organizations indicated that the WBG should collaborate more with the private sector.
        Respondents from CBOs indicated that the WBG should collaborate more with
        beneficiaries. Respondents from faith-based groups indicated that the WBG should
        collaborate more with faith-based organizations.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that the WBG should collaborate more with faith-based organizations compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were significantly more likely to
        indicate that the WBG should collaborate more with the donor community and NGOs.




                                              55
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
(continued)
The Oil and Gas Sector
       Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that it would be most
        valuable for the WBG to support governance, anti-corruption, etc. in support of the oil
        and gas sector in Uganda, respondents from NGOs were more likely to indicate that the
        WBG should support efforts to ensure participation of civil society and citizens,
        respondents from the media were more likely to indicate that the WBG should support
        management of foreign exchange and revenues, and respondents from CBO were more
        likely to indicate that they didn’t know.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that it would be most valuable for the WBG to have an advisory role in contract
        negotiations compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were
        significantly more likely to indicate that the WBG should support technical aspects
        related to the sector.




                                                56
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



IX. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
(continued)

The Oil and Gas Sector (continued)

       The majority of respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, private
        foundations, NGOs, the media, faith-based groups, academia, and other organizations
        indicated that they would like to see more WBG involvement in the oil and gas sector in
        Uganda. In contrast, the majority of employees of ministries indicated that they would
        like to see just about the same WBG involvement, and respondents from CBO were more
        likely to indicate that they didn’t know.




                                                57
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness
Information Sources
       Nearly two-thirds of respondents in the FY ’08 country survey indicated that they got
        most of their information about economic and social development issues in Uganda from
        local newspapers (65%).
       Although respondents from most stakeholder groups indicated that they got most of their
        information from local newspapers, respondents from faith-based groups were more
        likely to utilize local radio and local television and respondents from academia were
        more likely to utilize local radio and local television.
       Although the majority of respondents who collaborate with the WBG and those who do
        not collaborate with the WBG indicated that they got most of their information from local
        newspapers, respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to
        utilize the Internet and periodicals compared to respondents who do not collaborate with
        the WBG, who were significantly more likely to utilize local radio and local television.




                                               58
The World Bank Group                         Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Preferred Information Sources

       Employees of ministries and respondents from CBOs and other organizations indicated
        that they preferred to get their information from e-Newsletters. Respondents from CBOs
        also indicated that they preferred to get their information from instant messaging.
        Respondents from academia indicated that they preferred to get their information from
        the WBG’s publications. Respondents from the media indicated that they preferred to get
        their information from social media. Respondents from NGOs and faith-based groups
        indicated that they preferred to get their information from the WBG’s seminars.
        Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks and private
        foundations indicated that they preferred to get their information from mobile phones.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to indicate
        that they preferred to get their information from the WBG’s website compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG, who were significantly more likely to
        prefer instant messaging and mobile phones.




                                               59
The World Bank Group                        Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information

       Employess of ministries and respondents from CBOs and academia were significantly
        less likely to be aware of theWBG’s Access to Information Policy compared to
        respondents from other stakeholder groups.




       Respondents from private foundations and CBOs were significantly more likely to have
        requested information from the WBG in the past year compared to respondents from
        other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have
        requested information from the WBG in the past year compared to respondents who do
        not collaborate with the WBG.




                                              60
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                        Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Access to Information (continued)

       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks were significantly less
        likely to have reveived their requested information compared to respondents from other
        stakeholder groups.




       Respondents from other organizations had significantly higher levels of agreement that
        they consult the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago whereas
        respondents from the financial sector/private sector/private banks had significantly lower
        levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they consult the WBG’s data more often than they did a few years ago compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                61
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Internet Access

       Respondents from the FY ’08 country survey were significantly more likely to have
        Internet access compared to respondents from this year’s country survey.
       Respondents from faith-based groups were significantly less likely to have Internet
        access compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




Website Usage
       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar usage of the WBG’s
        website compared to respondents from the FY ’08 country survey.
       Respondents from the private sector/financial sector/private banks, CBOs, faith-based
        groups, and academia were significantly less likely to have used the WBG’s website
        compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have used
        the WBG’s website compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                62
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website Usage (continued)

       Respondents in this year’s country survey had statistically similar usage of the WBG’s
        country and main websites compared to respondents from the FY ’08 country survey.
       Employees of ministries and respondents from academia and other organizations were
        significantly more likely to have used the WBG’s main website compared to respondents
        from other stakeholder groups.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG were significantly more likely to have used
        the WBG’s main website compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the
        WBG.




       Respondents from CBOs were significantly more likely to use dial-up connections when
        visiting the WBG’s website compared to respondents from other stakeholder groups.




                                                63
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Website/Social Media Evaluation

       Respondents from CBOs and the media had significantly higher levels of agreement that
        they find the WBG’s websites easy to navigate whereas respondents from the financial
        sector/private sector/private banks, private foundations, and academia had significantly
        lower levels of agreement. Respondents from CBOs and the media had significantly
        higher levels of agreement that they find the information on the WBG’s websites useful
        whereas respondents from the financial sector/private sector/private banks and academia
        had significantly lower levels of agreement. Respondents from the financial sector/
        private sector/private banks had significantly higher levels of agreement that the WBG’s
        social media channels are valuable sources of information whereas respondents from the
        media had significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that they find the WBG’s websites easy to navigate and that they find the information on
        the WBG’s websites useful compared to respondents who do not collaborate with the
        WBG.




                                                64
The World Bank Group                          Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



X. Communication and Openness (continued)

Information Sharing

       Respondents from the media had significantly higher levels of agreement that when they
        need information from the WBG they know how to find it whereas respondents from the
        financial sector/private sector/private banks and academia had significantly lower levels
        of agreement. Respondents from faith-based groups and other organizations had
        significantly higher levels of agreement that the WBG is responsive to their information
        requests whereas respondents from CBOs, private foundations, and academia had
        significantly lower levels of agreement.
       Respondents who collaborate with the WBG had significantly higher levels of agreement
        that when they need information from the WBG they know how to find it compared to
        respondents who do not collaborate with the WBG.




                                                65
The World Bank Group                               Uganda                            Country Opinion Survey 2014



XI. Appendices

          A. Responses to All Questions across All Respondents ..................... 67

          B. Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups ..................... 85

          C. Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations........... 111

          D. Responses to All Questions among WBG Collaborators
             and Non-Collaborators ............................................................... 129

          E. Responses to All Questions across Country Surveys ................... 148

          F. Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’
             Specializations/Sectors ............................................................... 151

          G. Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG ....... 165

          H. Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Groups .......... 166

          I. World Bank Group Country Survey
             2014 Uganda Questionnaire ...................................................... 167


                                                 UGANDA




                                                      66
The World Bank Group                                Uganda                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix A: Responses to All Questions across All Respondents (N=326)
All rating scale questions are presented with the total number of respondents that provided a rating (N), the
number of respondents who indicated that they “Don’t know? (DK), the mean rating across all respondents (Mean),
and the standard deviation of this mean (SD). Indicator questions are noted with an asterisk (*).

A. General Issues Facing Uganda

                                                                                  Percentage of Respondents
1. In general would you say that Uganda is headed in...?                                    (N=317)
The right direction                                                                          46.1%
The wrong direction                                                                          28.1%
Not sure                                                                                     25.9%

2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Uganda.
   Please identify which of the following you consider the most important         Percentage of Respondents
   development priorities in Uganda. (Choose no more than THREE)                  (Responses Combined; N=316)
Education                                                                                    33.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                              32.6%
Economic growth                                                                              31.6%
Poverty reduction                                                                            25.0%
Health                                                                                       24.4%
Energy                                                                                       23.4%
Job creation/employment                                                                      20.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                                              14.2%
Agricultural development                                                                     13.3%
Transport                                                                                    13.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                         10.1%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector                            10.1%
Rural development                                                                            7.6%
Trade and exports                                                                            6.3%
Foreign direct investment                                                                    6.0%
Information and communications technology                                                    6.0%
Social protection                                                                            5.1%
Gender equity                                                                                4.4%
Food security                                                                                2.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                                      2.2%
Financial markets                                                                            1.9%
Urban development                                                                            1.9%
Domestic private sector development                                                          1.3%
Crime and violence                                                                           1.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                                 0.6%
Law and justice                                                                              0.6%
Global/regional integration                                                                  0.0%
Climate change                                                                               0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                                         0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                       0.0%
Disaster management                                                                          0.0%




                                                      67
The World Bank Group                                 Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different
   areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe
   would contribute most to reducing poverty in Uganda?                        Percentage of Respondents
   (Choose no more than THREE)                                                 (Responses Combined; N=324)
Agricultural development                                                                 36.7%
Education                                                                                29.9%
Rural development                                                                        28.7%
Job creation/employment                                                                  26.5%
Anti-corruption                                                                          25.9%
Economic growth                                                                          22.5%
Health                                                                                   22.2%
Transport                                                                                16.4%
Energy                                                                                   12.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                                          9.9%
Gender equity                                                                            9.3%
Domestic private sector development                                                      8.6%
Trade and exports                                                                        8.6%
Equality of opportunity                                                                  7.4%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector                        5.2%
Environmental sustainability                                                             4.9%
Urban development                                                                        3.7%
Water and sanitation                                                                     3.4%
Information and communications technology                                                3.4%
Financial markets                                                                        2.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                   2.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                                2.2%
Food security                                                                            2.2%
Social protection                                                                        1.2%
Law and justice                                                                          1.2%
Disaster management                                                                      1.2%
Climate change                                                                           0.6%
Global/regional integration                                                              0.3%
Regulatory framework                                                                     0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                       0.0%




                                                       68
The World Bank Group                             Uganda                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas
   below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth   Percentage of Respondents
   in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)                                     (Responses Combined; N=325)
Agricultural development                                                                46.8%
Energy                                                                                  36.3%
Education                                                                               32.3%
Job creation/employment                                                                 22.5%
Trade and exports                                                                       21.2%
Anti-corruption                                                                         18.2%
Rural development                                                                       16.0%
Transport                                                                               16.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                               10.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                                         9.2%
Food security                                                                           8.9%
Health                                                                                  8.6%
Domestic private sector development                                                     7.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                    7.4%
Financial markets                                                                       6.2%
Global/regional integration                                                             5.8%
Information and communications technology                                               5.5%
Water and sanitation                                                                    5.2%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector                       4.9%
Gender equity                                                                           3.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                                 2.8%
Social protection                                                                       1.5%
Environmental sustainability                                                            0.9%
Climate change                                                                          0.0%
Disaster management                                                                     0.0%
Urban development                                                                       0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  0.0%
Law and justice                                                                         0.0%
Crime and violence                                                                      0.0%




                                                    69
The World Bank Group                                           Uganda                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

5. When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country,
   which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved                   Percentage of Respondents
   in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (Responses Combined; N=302)
Better employment opportunities for young people                                                     38.1%
Consistent economic growth                                                                           24.2%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                                            23.2%
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized
                                                                                                     19.2%
businesses)
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability                   18.2%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                                         16.2%
Greater access to social services for citizens across Uganda                                         16.2%
Better employment opportunities for women                                                            14.2%
Better quality public services                                                                       8.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                                              6.6%
A growing middle class                                                                               4.6%
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                                                  3.0%
Other                                                                                                2.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                                              1.3%
More reliable social safety net                                                                      1.3%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                                      1.0%




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

Familiarity                                                                          N         DK      Mean       SD
1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                                     316        0       6.34     2.75
   Uganda? (1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar)

Overall Effectiveness                                                                N         DK      Mean       SD
2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                     287        24      6.05     2.31
   effectiveness in Uganda.* (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

Staff Preparedness                                                                   N         DK      Mean       SD
3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well
    prepared (e.g., skills and knowledge) to help Uganda solve its most
                                                                                     295        27      6.73     2.08
    complicated development challenges?*
    (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                 70
The World Bank Group                              Uganda                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact
   on development results in Uganda, in which sectoral areas do you believe
   the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and     Percentage of Respondents
   knowledge services) in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)                 (Responses Combined; N=326)
Education                                                                               38.3%
Poverty reduction                                                                       37.4%
Agricultural development                                                                26.7%
Energy                                                                                  26.4%
Health                                                                                  22.7%
Transport                                                                               19.0%
Rural development                                                                       15.6%
Anti-corruption                                                                         15.6%
Job creation/employment                                                                 12.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                                         12.6%
Trade and exports                                                                       10.7%
Regulatory framework                                                                    10.1%
Gender equity                                                                           7.1%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector                       5.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                               4.9%
Urban development                                                                       4.9%
Economic growth                                                                         4.9%
Climate change                                                                          4.3%
Financial markets                                                                       3.7%
Domestic private sector development                                                     2.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                                 2.8%
Global/regional integration                                                             2.5%
Crime and violence                                                                      2.1%
Information and communications technology                                               1.8%
Food security                                                                           1.2%
Water and sanitation                                                                    0.9%
Social protection                                                                       0.3%
Environmental sustainability                                                            0.3%
Law and justice                                                                         0.3%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                                  0.0%
Disaster management                                                                     0.0%




                                                    71
The World Bank Group                                       Uganda                           Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which                Percentage of Respondents (N=295)
                                                                                       nd
   activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity     Greatest       2 Greatest
   is of second greatest value in Uganda?                               Value           Value              Combined
Financial resources                                                     33.9%           16.9%                50.8%
Capacity development                                                    36.9%           10.8%                47.8%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                        12.2%           9.2%                 21.4%
Technical assistance                                                    9.2%            12.2%                21.4%
Convening/Facilitating                                                  0.0%            15.9%                15.9%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                           1.0%            14.2%                15.3%
Donor coordination                                                      3.4%            9.5%                 12.9%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                              1.0%            9.5%                 10.5%
Data                                                                    2.4%            1.7%                 4.1%
Other                                                                   0.0%            0.0%                 0.0%

How effectively to the World Bank Groups’ activities below support                          Effectiveness
Uganda’s efforts to achieve development results?
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                                       N          DK       Mean      SD
6.   Convening/Facilitating                                                   255            31        5.60    2.73
7.   Data                                                                     248            43        6.70    2.28
8.   Policy advice, studies, analyses                                         265            32        7.09    2.32
9.   Financial resources                                                      286            18        7.27    2.42
10. Technical assistance                                                      233            36        6.24    2.53
11. Mobilizing third party financial resources                                228            49        6.00    2.28
12. Donor coordination                                                        261            33        6.47    2.62
13. Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                             199            71        5.67    2.06

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number                            Degree
of ways in Uganda. To what degree would Uganda benefit, if capacity
building were to support…?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                          N          DK       Mean      SD
14. Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                              296             6        7.47    2.71
    more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
15. The public sector, related to implementation of specific development
                                                                              281            14        7.57    1.87
    projects on the ground
16. The public sector, related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                              290            23        6.78    2.21
    sociopolitical conditions)
17. The private sector, related to institutional and policy change            288            14        6.59    2.79




                                                             72
The World Bank Group                                      Uganda                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the                       Effectiveness
capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Uganda?
(If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below, please
respond “Don’t know?) (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                 N         DK     Mean       SD
18. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                255       59      6.76     2.45
19. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)          256       58      5.38     2.29
20. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                  237       68      6.77     2.00
    goals)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Uganda to help                      Importance
ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it
for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of
capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                                       N         DK     Mean       SD
21. Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                270       47      7.92     2.20
22. Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)          258       49      7.49     2.37
23. Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                                  262       44      7.85     2.11
    goals)

24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest           Percentage of Respondents
    WEAKNESSES in its work in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)                         (Responses Combined; N=316)
Too influenced by developed countries                                                             29.4%
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                                          18.0%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures                                       14.6%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                                    14.6%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                                          14.2%
Staff too inaccessible                                                                            13.0%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Uganda                                  11.7%
Arrogant in its approach                                                                          9.8%
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                                             9.8%
Don't know                                                                                        9.5%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                                          6.6%
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                                               6.6%
Other                                                                                             5.7%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country                      4.4%
Not aligned with country priorities                                                               4.1%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                                             2.8%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities                             0.3%
Not client focused                                                                                0.3%




                                                             73
The World Bank Group                                 Uganda                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

25. Which of the World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the               Percentage of Respondents
    MOST effective in reducing poverty in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)          (Responses Combined; N=321)
Investment lending                                                                             60.1%
Capacity development                                                                           43.9%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                                        24.0%
Technical assistance                                                                           17.1%
Trust Fund management                                                                          14.6%
Knowledge products/services                                                                    10.0%
Don't know                                                                                     4.0%
Other                                                                                          1.2%

26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main
    interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank
    Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development         Percentage of Respondents
    results there? (Choose no more than TWO)                                         (Responses Combined; N=324)
Private Sector                                                                                 34.9%
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                                       31.5%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                                           24.4%
NGOs                                                                                           21.3%
Beneficiaries                                                                                  19.8%
Media                                                                                          16.7%
Local Government                                                                               15.4%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                                      12.7%
Donor Community                                                                                11.1%
Parliament                                                                                     5.6%
Foundations                                                                                    2.2%
Don't know                                                                                     1.9%
Other                                                                                          0.3%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the                  Level of Agreement
World Bank Group’s work in Uganda?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                        N        DK     Mean       SD
27. Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                               295       22      6.07     2.76
    development in Uganda*
28. The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                               275       31      5.89     2.33
    development priorities for Uganda*
29. The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are
                                                                               278       28      6.29     2.37
    realistic for Uganda
30. The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Uganda with
                                                                               276       40      6.24     2.70
    respect




                                                       74
The World Bank Group                                       Uganda                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner                         Degree
in Uganda, in terms of each of the following?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                             N        DK      Mean       SD
31. Responsiveness*                                                                 225       45      5.64      2.30
32. Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services) *        262       42       5.26     2.03
33. Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                       251       36       4.95     2.64
34. Being inclusive*                                                                260       39       5.84     2.41
35. Openness (sharing data and other information)*                                  271       29       5.93     2.74
36. Staff accessibility*                                                            269       28       5.08     2.55
37. Straightforwardness and honesty*                                                259       41       5.93     2.44
38. Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                    273       32       5.46     2.69
    decisions important to my work
39. Collaboration with groups outside of the Government*                            240       65       5.68     2.31
40. Collaboration with the Government*                                              262       38       7.86     1.89
41. Collaboration with other donors*                                                249       44       7.58     1.98
42. The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                   272       38       5.51     2.53
43. Being a long-term partner                                                       269       30       8.20     1.89

44. To be a more effective development partner in Uganda, do you believe that             Percentage of Respondents
    the World Bank Group should have…?                                                             (N=286)
More local presence                                                                                 72.0%
The current level of local presence is adequate                                                     19.6%
Less local presence                                                                                 4.9%
Don't know                                                                                          3.5%

45. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take
    place, which of the following would you attribute this to?                            Percentage of Respondents
    (Choose no more than TWO)                                                             (Responses Combined; N=315)
High levels of corruption in the country                                                             47.3%
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation                                37.5%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges                                      26.3%
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the
                                                                                                     25.4%
ground
The Government works inefficiently                                                                   16.2%
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up                                   13.0%
Political pressures and obstacles                                                                    12.7%
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                                                  7.0%
Poor donor coordination                                                                              4.8%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                                                3.5%
Other                                                                                                1.3%




                                                             75
The World Bank Group                                   Uganda                     Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results

1.    In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be          Importance
      involved in the following areas of development in Uganda?
      (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)                            N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                       295     5      8.37      2.03
2.    Information and communications technology                             268     1      7.26      2.33
3.    Transport                                                             281     1      8.47      1.57
4.    Crime and violence                                                    272     9       5.65     2.14
5.    Law and justice                                                       297     1       7.38     2.14
6.    Urban development                                                     280     1       7.80     2.01
7.    Environmental sustainability                                          293     1       7.82     1.96
8.    Regulatory framework                                                  270    18       6.75     2.39
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                256    11       7.28     2.35
10.   Poverty reduction                                                     296     1       8.38     1.96
11.   Gender equity                                                         283     6       6.55     2.39
12.   Domestic private sector development                                   270     5       6.77     2.39
13.   Foreign direct investment                                             283     2       8.08     1.76
14.   Water and sanitation                                                  289     6       7.80     1.88
15.   Trade and exports                                                     283     7       7.34     2.48
16.   Economic growth                                                       297     1       8.48     1.57
17.   Energy                                                                280     1       8.48     1.56
18.   Disaster management                                                   295     4       7.17     2.11
19.   Public sector governance/reform                                       287    10       8.14     1.86
20.   Job creation/employment                                               296     1       8.01     1.86
21.   Financial markets                                                     281     8       7.08     2.48
22.   Equality of opportunity                                               274     3       6.50     2.40
23.   Health                                                                290     7       8.06     2.00
24.   Rural development                                                     296     1       7.98     1.70
25.   Global/regional integration                                           283    12       6.88     1.99
26.   Food security                                                         274     7       7.64     1.80
27.   Education                                                             290     7       8.31     1.83
28.   Social protection                                                     270    12       6.49     2.38
29.   Climate change                                                        285     8       7.02     2.22
30.   Agricultural development                                              293     8       8.46     1.81
31.   Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector     287    12       8.14     1.96




                                                         76
The World Bank Group                                   Uganda                   Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

2.    How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of          Effectiveness
      the work it does in the following areas of development in Uganda?
      (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)                          N     DK      Mean       SD
1.    Anti-corruption                                                     234    65      5.15      2.44
2.    Information and communications technology                           227    67      5.73      2.19
3.    Transport                                                           248    57      7.52      1.72
4.    Crime and violence                                                  198    95       4.38     2.01
5.    Law and justice                                                     211    85       5.43     1.86
6.    Urban development                                                   237    47       6.46     2.03
7.    Environmental sustainability                                        222    71       6.41     2.19
8.    Regulatory framework                                                207    89       6.98     2.10
9.    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                              217    73       6.29     2.30
10.   Poverty reduction                                                   255    33       6.52     2.43
11.   Gender equity                                                       225    59       5.56     2.05
12.   Domestic private sector development                                 228    60       5.55     1.88
13.   Foreign direct investment                                           242    42       6.98     2.03
14.   Water and sanitation                                                245    44       6.75     2.09
15.   Trade and exports                                                   227    64       6.35     1.91
16.   Economic growth                                                     238    41       7.76     1.74
17.   Energy                                                              234    59       7.50     1.62
18.   Disaster management                                                 196    80       5.53     2.29
19.   Public sector governance/reform                                     247    47       6.40     2.37
20.   Job creation/employment                                             252    46       5.60     2.53
21.   Financial markets                                                   206    79       6.06     2.08
22.   Equality of opportunity                                             205    70       5.23     1.93
23.   Health                                                              270    20       6.91     2.00
24.   Rural development                                                   238    57       5.95     1.99
25.   Global/regional integration                                         197    91       6.22     1.56
26.   Food security                                                       241    50       6.10     2.20
27.   Education                                                           266    33       7.34     1.71
28.   Social protection                                                   216    80       5.67     2.22
29.   Climate change                                                      232    62       5.77     2.18
30.   Agricultural development                                            261    33       6.28     2.06
31.   Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector   224    71       5.50     2.17




                                                         77
The World Bank Group                                            Uganda                      Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

3.   Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support              Percentage of Respondents
     the program in Uganda?                                                                        (N=302)
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                                            26.2%
In the country                                                                                      17.5%
Don't know                                                                                          56.3%


Achieving Development Results                                                      N         DK      Mean       SD
4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
    development results in Uganda?*                                                287       26       5.89     2.34
     (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the
World Bank Group in Uganda? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)               N         DK      Mean       SD
5. The World Bank Group’s financial instruments (i.e., investment lending,
    Development Policy Loan, trust funds/grants, Program 4 Result, etc.)           282       35       5.91     2.38
    meet the needs of Uganda*
6. The World Bank Group meets Uganda’s needs for knowledge services
                                                                                   267       26       5.78     2.69
    (e.g., research, analysis, data, technical assistance)*


Internal Evaluation Mechanisms                                                     N         DK      Mean       SD
7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal
     evaluation mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving          235       79       6.00     2.34
     results in Uganda? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities
(i.e., Analysis, Studies, Data, Reports, Conferences)

1.  How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work                 Percentage of Respondents
    and activities in the work you do?                                                         (N=320)
Weekly                                                                                             .3%
Monthly                                                                                           14.7%
A few times a year                                                                                41.3%
Rarely                                                                                            23.8%
Never                                                                                             20.0%




                                                                  78
The World Bank Group                                           Uganda                    Country Opinion Survey 2014


D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Uganda, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s                        Degree
knowledge work and activities:
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)                            N     DK      Mean       SD
2.    Are timely                                                                   272    43      5.96      2.23
3.    Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during
                                                                                   233    62       6.15     2.20
      preparation
4.    Are relevant to Uganda's development priorities                              270    30       6.99     2.50
5.    Lead to practical solutions                                                  257    39       5.49     2.55
6.    Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                         264    37       6.17     2.85
7.    Are source of relevant information on global good practices                  266    40       7.45     2.37
8.    Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                         265    35       6.51     2.79
9.    Are adequately disseminated                                                  248    56       5.12     2.90
10.   Are translated enough into local language                                    244    58       3.52     2.16
11.   Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific development challenges and
                                                                                   271    35       5.22     2.43
      country circumstances*


Overall Evaluations                                                                 N     DK      Mean       SD
12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities make to development results in           285    36       6.07     2.27
    your country?* (1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant)
13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank
    Group’s knowledge work and activities?*                                        281    40       7.65     1.95
      (1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group

To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank                         Degree
Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Uganda’s
development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)    N     DK      Mean       SD
1. Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                       257    36      5.96      2.50
2. Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                                  272    34       6.67     2.06
3.    Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making
                                                                                   282    31       5.82     2.18
      appropriate adjustments)
4.    Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                                281    25       5.72     2.48




                                                                  79
The World Bank Group                                 Uganda                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                                                  Level of Agreement
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                     N       DK      Mean       SD
5.   The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                          236      81      6.04      2.64
6.   The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects
                                                                            272      34       6.31     2.51
     and programs it supports
7.   The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely
                                                                            261      44       6.41     2.44
     fashion
8.   The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are
                                                                            219      87       7.11     2.06
     reasonable
9.   The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable        261      40       5.52     2.53
10. The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Uganda                  268      37       5.07     2.46
11. Working with the World Bank Group increases Uganda’s institutional
                                                                            259      37       6.40     2.52
    capacity
12. The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                            239      61       6.03     2.30
    changes
13. Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                            238      79       7.08     2.16
    appropriate use of them*
14. The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support          278      28       6.20     2.32

15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group       Percentage of Respondents
    operates in Uganda?                                                                (N=313)
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Uganda                                         1.0%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Uganda                                  20.1%
The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate                                    22.7%
Don't know                                                                                49.8%
Prefer not to answer                                                                       6.4%




                                                       80
The World Bank Group                                  Uganda                            Country Opinion Survey 2014


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda

1.  Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of           Percentage of Respondents
    greater value in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)                                (Responses Combined; N=321)
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                                                  39.6%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing                                   26.2%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                                       21.2%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets                                19.0%
Offer more innovative financial products                                                        17.8%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Uganda’s specific challenges                   14.0%
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                                            12.5%
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Uganda’s economy                     10.9%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                                          9.7%
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                                        9.0%
Work faster                                                                                     5.3%
Other                                                                                           2.5%

2.  When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group
    offers in Uganda, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which
    ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer             Percentage of Respondents
    more of in Uganda? (Select only ONE response)                                              (N=314)
Financial services                                                                              29.6%
Convening services                                                                              22.0%
The combination is appropriate for Uganda                                                       21.3%
Knowledge products                                                                              17.8%
None of the above                                                                               5.4%
Don't know                                                                                      3.8%

3.  Please identify two areas related to sustainable development of the oil and
    gas sector in Uganda, where greater support from the World Bank Group             Percentage of Respondents
    would be most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)                                 (Responses Combined; N=321)
Support in governance, anti-corruption, access to information and transparency
                                                                                                44.9%
related to overall management of oil and gas resources
Support in mitigation of macro-economic risks                                                   25.9%
Support efforts to ensure participation of civil society and citizens                           25.5%
Support in monitoring of operations                                                             23.7%
Support in improving quality of public expenditures                                             16.2%
Advisory role in contract negotiations                                                          15.6%
Technical aspects related to the sector                                                         13.4%
Support in management of foreign exchange and revenues                                          10.9%
Don’t know                                                                                      5.6%
Other                                                                                           0.0%

4.   Would you like to see more, less, or just about the same level of World Bank
     Group involvement in the sustainable development of the oil and gas sector       Percentage of Respondents
     in Uganda? (Select only ONE response)                                                     (N=300)
More                                                                                            64.0%
Just about the same                                                                             28.7%
Less                                                                                            1.0%
Don't know                                                                                      6.3%




                                                        81
The World Bank Group                                  Uganda                          Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing

1.  How do you get most of your information about economic and social              Percentage of Respondents
    development issues in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)                        (Responses Combined; N=317)
Local newspapers                                                                              59.0%
Local television                                                                              38.8%
Internet                                                                                      37.2%
Local radio                                                                                   24.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       6.6%
Periodicals                                                                                   5.4%
International newspapers                                                                      4.7%
International television                                                                      4.7%
Mobile phones                                                                                 2.5%
Other                                                                                         1.6%
International radio                                                                           0.9%
Blogs                                                                                         0.9%
Instant messaging                                                                             0.3%

2.    How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?       Percentage of Respondents
      (Choose no more than TWO)                                                    (Responses Combined; N=321)
e-Newsletters                                                                                 31.2%
World Bank Group's publications and other written materials                                   29.6%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                                       27.1%
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences                                             26.5%
Mobile phones                                                                                 24.6%
World Bank Group's website                                                                    16.5%
Instant messaging                                                                             9.7%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                                          8.1%
Blogs                                                                                         6.9%
Other                                                                                         1.9%

3.    Are you aware of the World Bank Group's Access to Information Policy
      under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession     Percentage of Respondents
      that is not a list of exceptions?                                                      (N=310)
Yes                                                                                          35.2%
No                                                                                           64.8%

4.    Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities   Percentage of Respondents
      in the past year?                                                                      (N=306)
Yes                                                                                          32.7%
No                                                                                           67.3%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
5. Were you able to obtain this information?                                                 (N=105)
Yes                                                                                          90.5%
No                                                                                           9.5%

                                                                                   Percentage of Respondents
6. Do you have access to the Internet?                                                       (N=311)
Yes                                                                                          92.9%
No                                                                                           7.1%




                                                        82
The World Bank Group                                 Uganda                             Country Opinion Survey 2014


G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)
                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
7. Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?                                          (N=302)
Yes                                                                                            73.8%
No                                                                                             26.2%

                                                                                     Percentage of Respondents
8. Which do you primarily use?                                                                 (N=285)
The World Bank Group's country website (www.worldbank.org/uganda)                              39.3%
The World Bank Group's main website (www.worldbank.org)                                        60.7%

9.   Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank       Percentage of Respondents
     Group website?                                                                            (N=279)
High speed                                                                                     73.8%
Dial-up                                                                                        26.2%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.                        Level of Agreement
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)                                         N       DK      Mean       SD
10. I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few
                                                                             277         29       5.68     2.77
    years ago
11. I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.                 259         41       6.69     2.27
12. I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.        246         46       7.00     2.29
13. The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                             256         39       6.71     3.03
    information about the institution.
14. When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to
                                                                             282         23       6.66     2.94
    find it.
15. The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                             262         46       6.31     3.18
    inquiries.



H. Background Information
1. Which of the following best describes your current position?                      Percentage of Respondents
     (Please mark only ONE response)                                                           (N=316)
NGO                                                                                             23.4%
Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency                         22.8%
Media                                                                                           15.8%
Private Sector Organization                                                                     7.6%
Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank                                                          7.3%
Faith-Based Group                                                                               6.6%
Private Foundation                                                                              5.1%
Community-Based Organization                                                                    3.8%
Other                                                                                           2.5%
Independent Government Institution                                                              1.9%
Office of Parliamentarian                                                                       1.6%
Multilateral Agency                                                                             1.3%
Financial Sector/Private Bank                                                                    .3%




                                                       83
The World Bank Group                                  Uganda                       Country Opinion Survey 2014


H. Background Information (continued)

2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work.                      Percentage of Respondents
    (Please mark only ONE response)                                                       (N=317)
Education                                                                                  23.3%
Information and communications technology                                                  12.6%
Agriculture/ rural development / food security                                             10.4%
Public sector governance / public financial management / anti-corruption                   9.8%
Other                                                                                      8.8%
Generalist                                                                                 6.6%
Natural resource management / environmental sustainability                                 5.7%
Law and justice / regulatory framework                                                     5.0%
Water and sanitation                                                                       3.8%
Health / communicable/non-communicable diseases                                            3.2%
Transport                                                                                  3.2%
Energy                                                                                     2.8%
Financial markets / banking                                                                1.6%
Social protection                                                                          1.3%
Gender equity / equality of opportunity                                                     .9%
Job creation/employment                                                                     .9%

3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group   Percentage of Respondents
   in your country?                                                                       (N=307)
Yes                                                                                        39.4%
No                                                                                         60.6%

4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in   Percentage of Respondents
  Uganda? (Select all that apply)                                                         (N=292)
None                                                                                       57.9%
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)                                                                  39.4%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                6.8%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)                                        2.1%

5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank      Percentage of Respondents
  Group in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)                                              (N=286)
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)                  49.0%
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                                          28.7%
Collaborate as part of my professional duties                                              26.9%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.                         24.5%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities                             11.2%

                                                                                 Percentage of Respondents
6. Which best represents your geographic location?                                        (N=311)
Kampala City                                                                               67.2%
Central Uganda                                                                             19.6%
Eastern Uganda                                                                             8.0%
Western Uganda                                                                             3.2%
Northern Uganda                                                                            1.9%




                                                        84
The World Bank Group                                                                       Uganda                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014


Appendix B: Responses to All Questions by Stakeholder Groups

Employee of a Ministry N=72  Private Sector/Financial Sector/Private Bank N=25  NGO N=74
CBO N=12  Media N=50  Faith-Based Group N=21  Academia N=23  Other N=23

A. General Issues Facing Uganda

In general, how would you say that Uganda is headed in...?
                                                  Employee of   Private Sector/Financial       Private                            Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                          a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank        Foundation   NGO      CBO    Media      Group      Academia        Other
The right direction                                   49.3%              36.0%                 50.0%      45.8%   41.7%   40.8%      50.0%       47.8%          47.8%
The wrong direction                                   34.8%              28.0%                 18.8%      29.2%   16.7%   34.7%      15.0%       21.7%          26.1%
Not sure                                              15.9%              36.0%                 31.3%      25.0%   41.7%   24.5%      35.0%       30.4%          26.1%




                                                                                           85
The World Bank Group                                                                              Uganda                                                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Uganda. Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in Uganda. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                             Employee of      Private Sector/Financial       Private                                            Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                   a Ministry        Sector/Private Bank        Foundation      NGO          CBO         Media          Group         Academia          Other
Social protection*                                       1.5%                    4.3%                  0.0%         12.3%        0.0%        4.2%            0.0%           0.0%            13.6%
Transport*                                               16.2%                  21.7%                 12.5%         5.5%         0.0%        16.7%           4.8%           0.0%            22.7%
Public sector governance/reform*                         17.6%                  30.4%                 12.5%         5.5%         0.0%        12.5%           0.0%          17.4%            22.7%
Global/regional integration                              0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Gender equity*                                           0.0%                   13.0%                  0.0%         2.7%        41.7%        2.1%            4.8%           0.0%            9.1%
Domestic private sector development                      2.9%                    0.0%                  6.3%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Foreign direct investment*                               0.0%                   13.0%                 31.3%         12.3%        0.0%        0.0%            9.5%           0.0%            0.0%
Water and sanitation*                                    4.4%                   30.4%                  0.0%         13.7%        0.0%        4.2%            0.0%          21.7%            22.7%
Anti-corruption*                                         13.2%                  34.8%                 18.8%         46.6%       33.3%        35.4%          66.7%          47.8%            13.6%
Job creation/employment*                                 26.5%                  13.0%                  6.3%         8.2%         0.0%        27.1%           4.8%          60.9%            31.8%
Rural development*                                       4.4%                    4.3%                  0.0%         13.7%        0.0%        8.3%            0.0%           0.0%            22.7%
Financial markets                                        0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         5.5%         0.0%        2.1%            4.8%           0.0%            0.0%
Urban development                                        0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         5.5%         0.0%        4.2%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Environmental sustainability                             2.9%                    0.0%                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Equality of opportunity*                                 0.0%                    8.7%                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%          21.7%            0.0%
Health*                                                  10.3%                  13.0%                 31.3%         37.0%       25.0%        43.8%          23.8%           8.7%            4.5%
Education*                                               35.3%                  34.8%                 37.5%         23.3%       100.0%       52.1%           4.8%          21.7%            22.7%
Poverty reduction*                                       29.4%                  17.4%                  0.0%         23.3%       33.3%        35.4%          42.9%          17.4%            4.5%
Energy*                                                  27.9%                   0.0%                 31.3%         16.4%       16.7%        33.3%          33.3%           8.7%            36.4%
Food security                                            1.5%                    0.0%                  0.0%         5.5%         0.0%        2.1%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Climate change                                           0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Agricultural development*                                30.9%                  17.4%                 31.3%         4.1%         0.0%        0.0%            4.8%          17.4%            18.2%
Trade and exports*                                       14.7%                   0.0%                 25.0%         1.4%         8.3%        0.0%            9.5%           0.0%            9.1%
Crime and violence                                       0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         5.5%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Economic growth*                                         39.7%                  30.4%                 37.5%         35.6%        0.0%        6.3%           76.2%          43.5%            18.2%
Law and justice                                          0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         1.4%         0.0%        2.1%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Regulatory framework                                     0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.0%                    0.0%                  0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%           0.0%            0.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the
                                                         19.1%                   8.7%                      0.0%     11.0%        0.0%         6.3%           4.8%            0.0%           22.7%
oil and gas sector*
Disaster management                                       0.0%                   0.0%                  0.0%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%           0.0%           0.0%             0.0%
Information and communications technology*                1.5%                   4.3%                  18.8%         4.1%       41.7%         2.1%           4.8%           13.0%            4.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                  86
The World Bank Group                                                                     Uganda                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty
in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                         Employee of     Private Sector/Financial     Private                                         Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                               a Ministry       Sector/Private Bank     Foundation       NGO         CBO       Media          Group       Academia       Other
Water and sanitation                                  4.2%                  4.2%                0.0%         2.7%        0.0%       4.1%           0.0%         0.0%         13.0%
Equality of opportunity*                              4.2%                  0.0%                0.0%         5.4%       33.3%       16.3%          0.0%         21.7%         0.0%
Economic growth*                                     29.2%                 29.2%               37.5%        13.5%       25.0%       40.8%          4.8%         0.0%          4.3%
Climate change                                        2.8%                  0.0%                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Global/regional integration                           0.0%                  4.2%                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Gender equity*                                        1.4%                 16.7%                0.0%        18.9%       41.7%       4.1%           0.0%         4.3%          4.3%
Rural development*                                   13.9%                 29.2%               68.8%        33.8%       25.0%       44.9%          4.8%         30.4%         8.7%
Urban development*                                    0.0%                  0.0%               18.8%         2.7%       33.3%       2.0%           9.5%         0.0%          0.0%
Regulatory framework                                  0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Social protection                                     2.8%                  0.0%                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          8.7%
Law and justice                                       0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%         4.1%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          4.3%
Transport*                                           33.3%                 16.7%                6.3%         6.8%        0.0%       16.3%          4.8%         17.4%        21.7%
Crime and violence                                    0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*               0.0%                 20.8%                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         4.3%          4.3%
Information and communications technology*            0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%         2.7%        0.0%       4.1%          28.6%         0.0%          4.3%
Anti-corruption*                                     36.1%                 20.8%               18.8%        27.0%        0.0%       18.4%         42.9%         34.8%         4.3%
Domestic private sector development*                 23.6%                  0.0%               12.5%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%         26.1%
Foreign direct investment*                            0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%         4.1%        0.0%       0.0%          19.0%         0.0%          0.0%
Education*                                           25.0%                 20.8%               25.0%        27.0%       66.7%       53.1%         19.0%         8.7%         21.7%
Energy*                                               9.7%                  0.0%               18.8%        24.3%        0.0%       4.1%           9.5%         13.0%        13.0%
Public sector governance/reform                       6.9%                 16.7%                0.0%        13.5%        0.0%       6.1%           0.0%         13.0%        21.7%
Sustainable and transparent development of the
                                                      0.0%                  4.2%                0.0%        16.2%        0.0%       2.0%           0.0%         4.3%          8.7%
oil and gas sector*
Environmental sustainability*                         1.4%                 25.0%                0.0%         4.1%        0.0%       2.0%           0.0%         4.3%         17.4%
Disaster management*                                  0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%         0.0%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         17.4%         0.0%
Health*                                               9.7%                 16.7%                0.0%        18.9%       75.0%       30.6%         81.0%         17.4%         8.7%
Agricultural development*                            50.0%                 50.0%               56.3%        32.4%        0.0%       26.5%         14.3%         30.4%        52.2%
Job creation/employment*                             29.2%                 20.8%               31.3%        20.3%        0.0%       14.3%         52.4%         65.2%        26.1%
Financial markets                                     0.0%                  4.2%                0.0%         5.4%        0.0%       2.0%           4.8%         4.3%          0.0%
Trade and exports*                                   16.7%                  0.0%                6.3%         4.1%        0.0%       6.1%           4.8%         8.7%         26.1%
Food security*                                        0.0%                  0.0%                0.0%         9.5%        0.0%       0.0%           0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                          87
The World Bank Group                                                                           Uganda                                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in Uganda? (Choose no more than
THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                             Employee of   Private Sector/Financial       Private                                   Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                   a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank        Foundation    NGO      CBO       Media         Group       Academia          Other
Energy*                                                  57.0%               29.0%                 31.0%       20.0%   58.0%      48.0%          5.0%        13.0%            26.0%
Gender equity*                                           3.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       1.0%     0.0%      16.0%          0.0%         0.0%            0.0%
Equality of opportunity*                                 3.0%                13.0%                  0.0%       0.0%     0.0%      0.0%           0.0%        17.0%            0.0%
Social protection*                                       0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       1.0%     0.0%      0.0%          19.0%         0.0%            0.0%
Global/regional integration                              11.0%                4.0%                  0.0%       4.0%     0.0%      4.0%          19.0%         0.0%            4.0%
Climate change                                           0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%     0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%
Anti-corruption*                                         8.0%                21.0%                  6.0%       27.0%    0.0%      14.0%         48.0%        13.0%            17.0%
Disaster management                                      0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%     0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%
Rural development*                                       6.0%                13.0%                 25.0%       15.0%   67.0%      24.0%          5.0%        22.0%            9.0%
Foreign direct investment*                               4.0%                 8.0%                 19.0%       11.0%    0.0%      12.0%          5.0%         9.0%            35.0%
Urban development                                        0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%     0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%
Water and sanitation                                     6.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       12.0%    0.0%      2.0%          10.0%         0.0%            4.0%
Education*                                               43.0%               25.0%                 63.0%       20.0%   100.0%     48.0%          5.0%         0.0%            22.0%
Information and communications technology                4.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       4.0%     0.0%      10.0%          5.0%        13.0%            0.0%
Regulatory framework*                                    14.0%               21.0%                  6.0%       1.0%     0.0%      0.0%          10.0%         4.0%            17.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%     0.0%      0.0%           0.0%         0.0%            0.0%
Trade and exports*                                       7.0%                17.0%                 44.0%       27.0%    0.0%      24.0%         10.0%        48.0%            17.0%
Public sector governance/reform*                         10.0%               29.0%                  0.0%       5.0%     0.0%      6.0%           0.0%        13.0%            26.0%
Domestic private sector development*                     4.0%                21.0%                  0.0%       5.0%    33.0%      2.0%           5.0%        22.0%            4.0%
Job creation/employment                                  25.0%               29.0%                 13.0%       24.0%   42.0%      22.0%         38.0%         0.0%            17.0%
Agricultural development*                                64.0%               33.0%                 75.0%       42.0%    0.0%      28.0%         52.0%        57.0%            57.0%
Food security*                                           3.0%                17.0%                  0.0%       18.0%    0.0%      20.0%          0.0%         0.0%            0.0%
Transport*                                               25.0%                8.0%                  0.0%       16.0%    0.0%      12.0%         10.0%        13.0%            30.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the
                                                         3.0%                0.0%                       0.0%   8.0%     0.0%       0.0%          0.0%         35.0%            0.0%
oil and gas sector*
Environmental sustainability                             0.0%                0.0%                   0.0%       3.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
Health*                                                  1.0%                4.0%                   19.0%      9.0%     0.0%       0.0%         52.0%         17.0%            4.0%
Law and justice                                          0.0%                0.0%                   0.0%       0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
Crime and violence                                       0.0%                0.0%                   0.0%       0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%             0.0%
Financial markets*                                       0.0%                4.0%                   0.0%       16.0%    0.0%       8.0%         5.0%          0.0%             9.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                               88
The World Bank Group                                                                                         Uganda                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of     Private Sector/Financial    Private                                           Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                  a Ministry       Sector/Private Bank     Foundation        NGO        CBO         Media         Group       Academia                                        Other
Better employment opportunities for young
                                                        19.7%                 18.2%              12.5%           39.4%     66.7%        45.7%         61.9%         63.2%                                         42.9%
people*
Better employment opportunities for women*              7.6%                   4.5%              43.8%           5.6%      41.7%        10.9%         47.6%         15.8%                                         0.0%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor*           10.6%                 22.7%              43.8%           12.7%     25.0%        21.7%         14.3%          0.0%                                         19.0%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to
                                                        13.6%                 27.3%              18.8%           25.4%      0.0%        19.6%          0.0%         15.8%                                         19.0%
help ensure greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for
                                                        0.0%                   0.0%               0.0%           0.0%      33.3%        8.7%           0.0%          0.0%                                          4.8%
citizens*
Greater access to social services for citizens
                                                        16.7%                 36.4%              18.8%           22.5%      0.0%        8.7%          14.3%         10.5%                                          9.5%
across Uganda
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start
                                                        24.2%                  4.5%               6.3%           18.3%     33.3%        15.2%         23.8%         21.1%                                         28.6%
small and medium sized businesses)
A growing middle class*                                 0.0%                   0.0%               0.0%           11.3%      0.0%        6.5%           0.0%          0.0%                                          9.5%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural
                                                        10.6%                  4.5%               0.0%           2.8%       0.0%        19.6%          0.0%          0.0%                                          4.8%
areas*
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban
                                                        0.0%                   0.0%               0.0%           4.2%       0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%                                          4.8%
areas
Consistent economic growth*                             45.5%                 31.8%              37.5%           21.1%      0.0%        10.9%          9.5%         10.5%                                         19.0%
More reliable social safety net                         0.0%                   0.0%               0.0%           1.4%       0.0%        2.2%           0.0%          0.0%                                         9.5%
Greater equity of fiscal policy*                        0.0%                   0.0%               0.0%           0.0%       0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%                                         14.3%
Education and training that better ensure job
                                                        36.4%                 45.5%               0.0%           21.1%      0.0%        21.7%          9.5%         36.8%                                          9.5%
opportunity*
Better quality public services*                         15.2%                  0.0%              18.8%           5.6%       0.0%        8.7%           0.0%         26.3%                                          4.8%
Other                                                   0.0%                   4.5%               0.0%           7.0%       0.0%        0.0%           0.0%          0.0%                                          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                          Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry            Private Bank       Private Foundation          NGO                   CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD            N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N    Mean        SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work
of the World Bank Group in           72    7.64   2.02   25     4.96   2.97    16    6.50   1.93     70   5.49    2.29     12   6.58   2.11   48   8.19    2.29    21   4.52   2.48   21     3.33   2.01    21    6.62    3.26
Uganda?*
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                 89
The World Bank Group                                                                                           Uganda                                                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

                                                           Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a        Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry             Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                    CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia               Other
                                     N Mean SD             N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N   Mean         SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD         N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your
impression of the World Bank         69    6.09   2.21    19    6.11   1.20    16    6.75   2.18   66    5.83     1.86    12   6.67   2.46   39   7.51    2.54    21   4.52   2.46   19     3.16     1.57   17   6.76    1.52
Group’s effectiveness in Uganda.*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                           Private Sector/
                                      Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                        Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation         NGO                   CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia               Other
                                     N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD     N   Mean         SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD     N     Mean      SD     N    Mean    SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group's staff is well
prepared to help Uganda solve its    69    6.38   2.01    24    6.33   1.58    13    7.00   1.63   62    6.23     2.17    12   7.00   1.81   47   8.49    2.00    21   5.38   1.56   20     6.60     1.85   18   6.78    1.70
most complicated development
challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                90
The World Bank Group                                                                    Uganda                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Uganda, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus
most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of     Private Sector/Financial   Private                                      Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                  a Ministry       Sector/Private Bank    Foundation  NGO         CBO        Media          Group       Academia      Other
Social protection                                        0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        4.3%
Public sector governance/reform*                         8.3%                 12.0%              0.0%    24.3%       0.0%         8.0%           4.8%         13.0%       21.7%
Transport*                                              29.2%                 28.0%              6.3%     4.1%       0.0%         8.0%          47.6%         17.4%       26.1%
Poverty reduction*                                      58.3%                 16.0%             12.5%    44.6%       0.0%         50.0%         19.0%         30.4%       17.4%
Global/regional integration                              4.2%                  0.0%              0.0%     1.4%       0.0%         2.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Gender equity*                                           2.8%                 32.0%              0.0%     6.8%       33.3%        8.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Crime and violence*                                      0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     8.1%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        4.3%
Domestic private sector development*                     0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       33.3%        4.0%           0.0%          8.7%        0.0%
Rural development*                                       5.6%                  8.0%              0.0%    14.9%       0.0%         20.0%         66.7%         13.0%       26.1%
Foreign direct investment                                2.8%                  4.0%             18.8%     5.4%       0.0%         2.0%           4.8%          0.0%        4.3%
Water and sanitation                                     2.8%                  0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         2.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Energy*                                                 45.8%                  4.0%             25.0%     9.5%       25.0%        34.0%         57.1%         21.7%        8.7%
Job creation/employment*                                 6.9%                 16.0%             50.0%     9.5%       41.7%        10.0%          9.5%         21.7%        4.3%
Financial markets*                                       0.0%                  4.0%              0.0%     8.1%       0.0%         0.0%           4.8%         17.4%        0.0%
Urban development*                                       2.8%                 32.0%              0.0%     2.7%       0.0%         6.0%           0.0%          0.0%        4.3%
Environmental sustainability                             0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Equality of opportunity*                                 1.4%                  0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%         21.7%        8.7%
Health*                                                 13.9%                  0.0%             43.8%    31.1%       25.0%        42.0%         23.8%          4.3%       13.0%
Education*                                              40.3%                 48.0%             25.0%    23.0%      100.0%        66.0%         14.3%         34.8%       26.1%
Food security                                            0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     5.4%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Climate change*                                         13.9%                  0.0%              0.0%     1.4%       0.0%         4.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Agricultural development*                               20.8%                 48.0%             37.5%    31.1%       0.0%         10.0%         38.1%         30.4%       39.1%
Trade and exports                                       15.3%                 12.0%             18.8%     8.1%       0.0%         6.0%           0.0%          4.3%       26.1%
Economic growth*                                         4.2%                  0.0%             12.5%     2.7%       41.7%        2.0%           0.0%          0.0%        8.7%
Law and justice                                          0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     1.4%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Regulatory framework*                                   13.9%                 24.0%             18.8%     2.7%       0.0%         4.0%           0.0%         17.4%       17.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                   0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the
                                                         0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     9.5%       0.0%         4.0%           0.0%         13.0%       21.7%
oil and gas sector*
Anti-corruption*                                         4.2%                  8.0%              6.3%    43.2%       0.0%         8.0%           9.5%         17.4%       13.0%
Information and communications technology*               0.0%                  4.0%             18.8%     1.4%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          4.3%        0.0%
Disaster management                                      0.0%                  0.0%              0.0%     0.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                         91
The World Bank Group                                                                           Uganda                                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Uganda?
Greatest Value                                        Employee of   Private Sector/Financial       Private                                         Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                              a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank        Foundation    NGO          CBO        Media          Group      Academia        Other
Convening/Facilitating                                   0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Data                                                     2.9%                 0.0%                  0.0%       6.3%        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          5.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                        26.1%                4.2%                 20.0%       0.0%        0.0%        12.5%           0.0%        0.0%          25.0%
Financial resources*                                     21.7%               16.7%                 33.3%       47.6%       0.0%        25.0%          47.6%       66.7%          35.0%
Capacity development*                                    46.4%               75.0%                 20.0%       36.5%       0.0%        31.3%          42.9%       23.8%          20.0%
Technical assistance*                                    2.9%                 0.0%                 26.7%       4.8%        42.9%       22.9%           4.8%        0.0%          10.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources*              0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       1.6%        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%        9.5%          0.0%
Donor coordination*                                      0.0%                 4.2%                  0.0%       3.2%        57.1%       4.2%            4.8%        0.0%          0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                            0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        4.2%            0.0%        0.0%          5.0%
Other                                                    0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

 nd
2 Greatest Value                                      Employee of   Private Sector/Financial       Private                                         Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                              a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank        Foundation    NGO         CBO         Media          Group      Academia        Other
Convening/Facilitating*                                  20.3%               50.0%                 20.0%       4.8%        0.0%        20.8%           0.0%        0.0%          15.0%
Data                                                     1.4%                 0.0%                 13.3%       3.2%        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses*                        14.5%               20.8%                  0.0%       1.6%        0.0%        10.4%           0.0%        4.8%          10.0%
Financial resources*                                     5.8%                 8.3%                 26.7%       7.9%       100.0%       27.1%          47.6%       19.0%          0.0%
Capacity development*                                    0.0%                 8.3%                 40.0%       20.6%       0.0%        8.3%            9.5%       23.8%          0.0%
Technical assistance*                                    13.0%                0.0%                  0.0%       19.0%       0.0%        2.1%           33.3%       23.8%          10.0%
Mobilizing third party financial resources               8.7%                 4.2%                  0.0%       12.7%       0.0%        18.8%           0.0%        0.0%          20.0%
Donor coordination*                                      4.3%                 0.0%                  0.0%       22.2%       0.0%        0.0%            0.0%       28.6%          20.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*                           31.9%                8.3%                  0.0%       7.9%        0.0%        12.5%           9.5%        0.0%          25.0%
Other                                                    0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%       0.0%        0.0%        0.0%            0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                               92
The World Bank Group                                                                                           Uganda                                                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Uganda’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                                           Private Sector/
                                       Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                         Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                    CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                       N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N   Mean         SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Convening/Facilitating*                61   5.15   3.18   13    7.08   2.99    12    7.92   1.78   69    6.01     2.05    12   3.58   1.62   29   4.86    3.69    16   6.69   0.95   20     4.70   2.70    16    5.06   1.84
Data*                                  62   6.98   2.00   10    7.00   2.54    13    8.38   1.45   63    6.25     2.12    12   5.58   2.81   33   7.97    2.38    21   5.14   1.46   10     6.40   2.68    17    5.41   1.91
Policy advice, studies, analyses*      65   6.88   2.69   12    7.83   2.08    11    7.36   2.25   66    6.73     2.04    12   7.67   2.39   38   8.37    2.16    17   6.18   1.67   20     5.90   1.97    16    6.69   2.15
Financial resources                    68   6.88   2.58   14    8.00   2.25    13    7.62   2.90   71    7.39     2.00    12   7.67   2.39   46   7.41    3.25    17   7.94   1.09   20     7.35   1.46    17    6.00   2.18
Technical assistance*                  49   6.04   2.51   12    7.50   2.78    11    4.36   2.11   59    5.85     2.30    12   6.50   2.51   30   8.33    2.25    17   5.41   1.94   20     5.70   2.54    16    5.94   2.44
Mobilizing third party financial
                                       59   5.47   2.37   11    6.45   2.58    12    6.17   2.21   60    6.37     2.26    9    6.89   1.05   23   6.83    2.57    15   6.13   0.92   20     4.65   1.73    12    5.25   2.05
resources*
Donor coordination*                    61   5.13   2.58   11    6.82   3.03    13    6.38   3.28   66    6.73     2.31    12   9.08   0.79   38   7.76    2.52    21   7.05   1.53   14     5.86   2.48    17    5.41   2.32
Linkage to non-Bank expertise          50   5.16   2.11    8    5.88   2.36     9    4.78   2.64   57    5.77     1.68    5    6.00   0.00   16   5.50    2.53    16   7.00   0.52   15     5.87   2.10    16    5.81   2.23
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Uganda. To what degree would Uganda benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                                           Private Sector/
                                       Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                         Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                    CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                       N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N   Mean         SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Groups outside of government
(e.g., civil society, media) to help
them more effectively engage and       65   7.80   2.37   17    8.12   2.09    16    8.63   2.36   72    7.25     2.64    12   8.75   1.55   43   7.79    3.41    21   6.10   1.58   21     5.81   3.49    20    7.35   2.78
participate in development
efforts*
The public sector , related to
implementation of specific
                                       65   7.86   1.70   15    7.60   1.35    16    7.13   2.16   70    6.96     1.76    12   7.92   2.58   36   8.56    1.70    17   7.47   1.23   21     6.24   2.17    20    8.30   1.46
development projects on the
ground*
The public sector , related to
changing institutions
                                       67   7.09   1.74   20    6.40   2.98    16    6.44   2.50   68    6.66     1.75    12   7.33   1.67   39   7.90    2.17    19   5.11   2.36   20     4.45   1.73    20    7.55   2.26
(organizations or sociopolitical
conditions)*
The private sector , related to
                                       67   7.13   1.88   17    6.47   3.32    16    8.25   2.89   71    6.87     2.11    11   5.64   2.69   36   6.14    3.42    21   3.81   2.87   20     4.90   3.67    20    7.65   2.35
institutional and policy change*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                93
The World Bank Group                                                                                         Uganda                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the following areas in Uganda?
                                                             Private Sector/
                                        Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                          Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                   CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                        N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean        SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        68    7.18   2.22   11    6.73   2.37    13    8.38   2.29   61   6.36    2.06     11   6.55   3.33   38   6.74    3.29    21   6.19   1.29   8      3.75   2.38    17    6.88   1.93
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        60    5.03   1.97   10    5.40   1.78    13    5.46   2.30   65   5.46    1.95     11   5.91   2.43   37   5.62    3.28    21   5.86   1.49   15     3.00   2.00    17    6.06   1.78
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       64    7.06   2.10   11    6.36   2.01    10    7.60   2.07   62   6.63    1.59     9    5.67   1.58   29   7.41    2.16    20   5.65   0.67   8      3.75   1.83    17    7.12   1.90
goals)*
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Uganda to help ensure better development results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved
in the following aspects of capacity building?
                                                             Private Sector/
                                        Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                          Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                   CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                        N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean        SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other
                                        69    7.75   1.94   11    7.91   2.07    13    9.46   0.88   65   7.40    2.40     12   8.33   2.06   40   8.48    2.08    21   7.95   1.60   12     8.50   2.75    19    7.32   2.98
organizational strengthening)*
Citizen engagement (incorporating
                                        66    6.61   2.83   11    7.73   2.41    15    8.60   1.40   65   7.58    2.14     9    8.33   1.58   30   7.37    2.39    20   7.55   1.67   15     8.80   2.51    19    7.32   2.21
citizens' voices into development)*
Policy design (for clarity and better
incentives to achieve development       66    7.15   2.45   11    8.00   2.32    11    9.45   0.93   63   7.65    1.84     12   8.42   1.31   40   8.35    2.10    21   7.52   1.25   11     7.36   2.80    19    8.58   2.24
goals)*
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                                 94
The World Bank Group                                                                    Uganda                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)
Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                           Employee of     Private Sector/Financial   Private                                     Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                 a Ministry       Sector/Private Bank    Foundation      NGO        CBO       Media       Group      Academia        Other
Staff too inaccessible*                                2.9%                   0.0%              31.3%        19.2%      0.0%       4.1%       52.4%       30.4%          0.0%
Not exploring alternative policy options*              17.6%                  8.0%              18.8%        15.1%      0.0%       6.1%       19.0%        0.0%          38.1%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social
                                                       16.2%                  8.0%              18.8%        5.5%       0.0%       8.2%      42.9%        13.0%           0.0%
realities in Uganda*
Not enough public disclosure of its work*              7.4%                   4.0%              0.0%         32.9%      0.0%       12.2%     4.8%         65.2%          9.5%
Arrogant in its approach*                              30.9%                  4.0%              0.0%         2.7%       0.0%       8.2%      0.0%         0.0%           9.5%
Not aligned with country priorities*                   0.0%                   0.0%              0.0%         11.0%      0.0%       0.0%      14.3%        0.0%           9.5%
The credibility of its knowledge/data*                 2.9%                   0.0%              0.0%         4.1%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%         0.0%           19.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex*              4.4%                  32.0%              12.5%        6.8%       0.0%       6.1%      0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and
                                                       0.0%                   0.0%              0.0%         0.0%      33.3%       6.1%       0.0%        21.7%           9.5%
reform efforts in the country*
Too influenced by developed countries                  32.4%                 28.0%              37.5%        32.9%      0.0%       40.8%     33.3%        13.0%          14.3%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard
                                                       0.0%                   0.0%              0.0%         0.0%       0.0%       2.0%       0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
to political realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                 10.3%                 32.0%              25.0%        8.2%       0.0%       6.1%       0.0%         0.0%          14.3%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                       35.3%                 16.0%              6.3%         2.7%      33.3%       12.2%      9.5%         4.3%           9.5%
procedures*
Not aligned with other donors’ work*                   14.7%                  4.0%              18.8%        0.0%       0.0%       4.1%       0.0%        0.0%           14.3%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors*        11.8%                  8.0%              18.8%        30.1%      0.0%       10.2%      9.5%        13.0%          4.8%
Not client focused                                     0.0%                   0.0%              0.0%         0.0%       0.0%       0.0%       0.0%        0.0%           0.0%
Other*                                                 1.5%                   0.0%              6.3%         1.4%      25.0%       20.4%      4.8%        0.0%           4.8%
Don't know*                                            1.5%                  24.0%              0.0%         8.2%      41.7%       4.1%       4.8%        17.4%          19.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                        Employee of    Private Sector/Financial      Private                                      Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                              a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank       Foundation      NGO        CBO       Media        Group      Academia        Other
Capacity development*                               27.5%                 76.0%                31.3%        62.2%     0.0%       28.6%        81.0%       60.9%          17.4%
Policy based lending / budget support to the
                                                    24.6%                 12.0%                18.8%        18.9%     58.3%      38.8%       14.3%        13.0%          26.1%
Government*
Knowledge products/services*                        14.5%                 4.0%                 37.5%        5.4%      0.0%       6.1%        0.0%         0.0%           26.1%
Investment lending                                  71.0%                 64.0%                37.5%        50.0%     58.3%      69.4%       52.4%        69.6%          56.5%
Technical assistance                                11.6%                 24.0%                18.8%        18.9%     0.0%       20.4%       0.0%         34.8%          21.7%
Trust Fund management*                               4.3%                 4.0%                 25.0%        24.3%     0.0%       8.2%        47.6%        0.0%           13.0%
Other                                                0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%        5.4%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%           0.0%
Don't know*                                          0.0%                 0.0%                  0.0%        0.0%      41.7%      8.2%        0.0%         8.7%           8.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                         95
The World Bank Group                                                                                     Uganda                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your
country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                              Employee of    Private Sector/Financial      Private                                        Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                    a Ministry       Sector/Private Bank      Foundation      NGO        CBO         Media        Group       Academia       Other
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes*                 54.9%                 24.0%               25.0%         21.6%      0.0%        16.0%        42.9%         43.5%        34.8%
Donor Community*                                          2.8%                  36.0%                0.0%         14.9%      0.0%        10.0%        19.0%          0.0%        17.4%
Media*                                                    8.5%                  12.0%               31.3%         24.3%      0.0%        30.0%        14.3%          0.0%        17.4%
NGOs*                                                     2.8%                  16.0%               37.5%         56.8%     41.7%        6.0%         14.3%         13.0%        4.3%
Local Government*                                         32.4%                 12.0%                0.0%         5.4%       0.0%        14.0%         4.8%         21.7%        17.4%
Private Sector*                                           50.7%                 72.0%               25.0%         13.5%     33.3%        30.0%        23.8%         30.4%        39.1%
Parliament*                                               5.6%                  4.0%                 0.0%         4.1%       0.0%        2.0%          4.8%          0.0%        30.4%
Beneficiaries*                                            9.9%                  16.0%               12.5%         27.0%     75.0%        12.0%        14.3%         39.1%        4.3%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)*                     23.9%                 4.0%                25.0%         23.0%     25.0%        48.0%        14.3%         17.4%        13.0%
Foundations*                                              0.0%                  0.0%                18.8%         5.4%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%
Faith-Based Organizations*                                8.5%                  0.0%                25.0%         4.1%      25.0%        24.0%        47.6%         13.0%        0.0%
Other                                                     0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%          0.0%          0.0%        4.3%
Don't know*                                               0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        4.0%          0.0%          8.7%        8.7%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Uganda? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                         Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                   CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean        SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Overall the World Bank Group
currently plays a relevant role in   70   6.01   2.39   15    7.33   2.26    16    5.81   2.66   70   6.07    2.22     12   4.92   3.26   46   5.30    3.97    21   6.67   1.74   19     5.32   2.98    18    7.22   2.32
development in Uganda
The World Bank Group’s work is
aligned with what I consider the
                                     67   6.48   1.59   11    6.00   2.05    11    5.64   2.06   65   5.97    2.11     12   4.33   2.06   43   5.28    2.96    21   6.43   1.81   19     3.84   3.02    18    6.61   2.45
development priorities for
Uganda*
The World Bank Group supports
programs and strategies that are     68   6.96   1.55   11    6.45   1.81    13    7.00   2.55   65   6.14    2.04     12   4.50   3.43   43   5.67    3.22    21   6.14   1.59   19     4.79   2.46    18    6.89   2.08
realistic for Uganda*
The World Bank Group treats
clients and stakeholders in Uganda   69   5.58   2.72   15    6.60   2.10     8    6.38   2.56   67   6.39    1.82     12   7.08   3.61   45   6.64    3.77    21   6.14   1.65   14     4.21   3.09    17    7.18   1.85
with respect*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                             96
The World Bank Group                                                                                      Uganda                                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Uganda, in terms of each of the following? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                          Private Sector/
                                      Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                        Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                  CBO                 Media           Faith-Based Group          Academia              Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean        SD   N   Mean   SD     N     Mean    SD       N Mean SD            N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Responsiveness*                       56   5.77   1.64    8    6.63   1.19    13    6.23   3.03   67   5.78    2.02     7   3.29   2.14   38     4.61   3.05     12    6.58    1.88   6      4.17   2.48    12    6.92   2.15
Flexibility (in terms of the World
Bank Group’s products and             68   4.94   1.49   10    5.50   1.72    16    5.69   2.65   66   5.76    1.86     7   5.00   3.74   39     4.54   2.60     21    5.43    1.96   9      4.11   1.97    18    5.72   1.53
services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing
                                      60   4.17   2.57   13    6.23   3.17    10    6.90   2.85   65   5.55    2.42     3   1.00   0.00   41     4.51   3.07     20    5.40    2.19   18     3.50   1.43    15    6.13   1.73
country circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                      66   5.23   1.86   10    6.10   1.91    13    6.54   1.94   66   6.24    2.07     7   4.86   4.81   41     6.80   3.01     21    4.76    2.77   13     4.38   2.60    15    6.27   1.34
Openness (sharing data and other
                                      68   6.53   2.37   11    7.64   2.34    16    5.44   2.78   71   6.03    2.17     7   3.29   2.14   41     5.41   3.28     17    3.82    2.33   15     3.80   3.17    17    8.35   1.46
information)*
Staff accessibility*                  66   6.35   1.76   11    5.82   1.54    14    3.71   3.05   68   4.81    1.86     7   1.00   0.00   41     5.22   2.93     20    4.60    2.98   16     1.44   0.81    18    6.28   2.54
Straightforwardness and honesty*      65   6.42   1.74   11    6.73   1.85    13    6.77   2.59   70   6.19    2.08     7   5.00   3.74   41     5.49   3.07     17    3.53    2.10   11     3.45   2.25    16    7.44   1.83
Ease of access to the people at the
World Bank Group who are making       67   6.21   2.11   11    5.64   2.06    16    4.50   3.67   70   4.94    2.19     7   1.57   0.54   42     5.24   2.95     21    6.67    2.11   14     3.43   2.95    17    7.53   2.53
decisions important to my work*
Collaboration with groups outside
                                      53   6.11   1.48   11    5.36   1.91    11    6.18   3.22   67   5.39    2.51     7   5.00   3.74   37     5.11   2.74     21    6.57    1.86   10     4.20   2.53    16    6.25   1.48
of the Government
Collaboration with the
                                      64   7.81   1.64   11    8.09   1.92    10    8.50   2.42   66   7.64    1.60     7   8.86   1.07   42     8.64   1.69     17    6.82    1.19   19     5.89   2.71    18    8.61   1.85
Government*
Collaboration with other
                                      61   6.64   1.78   11    7.55   2.46    13    7.23   2.39   68   7.81    1.41     7   10.00 0.00    34     8.85   1.73     21    7.10    1.41   10     6.90   3.35    16    7.75   2.18
development partners*
The speed in which it gets things
                                      67   4.70   2.55   14    6.86   2.35    16    4.50   2.13   68   6.72    1.67     7   5.00   3.74   41     5.29   3.28     21    5.57    2.14   13     3.38   2.53    17    5.76   1.64
accomplished on the ground*
Being a long-term partner             65   7.46   2.03   11    8.55   1.75    13    7.92   2.47   68   7.94    1.73     7   10.00 0.00    39     9.21   1.36     21    7.86    1.62   19     7.53   2.17    18    9.33   1.03
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To be a more effective development partner in Uganda, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?*
                                                  Employee of      Private Sector/Financial   Private                                                                         Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                          a Ministry        Sector/Private Bank    Foundation     NGO                                  CBO            Media             Group         Academia          Other
More local presence                                  59.7%                  76.5%              76.9%       72.9%                               100.0%          78.9%             95.2%          90.5%            54.5%
The current level of local presence is adequate      28.4%                  17.6%              23.1%       21.4%                                  -            10.5%                -            4.8%            22.7%
Less local presence                                  10.4%                     -                 -         2.9%                                   -            2.6%                 -              -             18.2%
Don't know                                            1.5%                   5.9%                -         2.9%                                   -            7.9%               4.8%           4.8%            4.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                              97
The World Bank Group                                                                        Uganda                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                          Employee of      Private Sector/Financial      Private                                          Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                a Ministry        Sector/Private Bank       Foundation      NGO          CBO        Media         Group      Academia       Other
The World Bank Group does not do adequate
                                                       4.2%                   0.0%                 0.0%        19.4%         0.0%        2.1%         55.0%       33.3%         23.8%
follow through/follow-up*
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil
                                                      43.7%                  20.0%                 31.3%       44.4%        25.0%       50.0%          5.0%       33.3%         23.8%
society participation*
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                      33.8%                  48.0%                 18.8%       23.6%         0.0%       18.8%         15.0%       23.8%         33.3%
political/social realities on the ground*
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in
                                                       8.5%                   0.0%                 6.3%         5.6%        41.7%        4.2%          0.0%       14.3%          4.8%
Government*
High levels of corruption in the country*             39.4%                  20.0%                 75.0%       44.4%        58.3%       62.5%         85.0%       38.1%         19.0%
Poor donor coordination*                               2.8%                   0.0%                 0.0%        11.1%         0.0%        4.2%          0.0%       0.0%          14.3%
The World Bank Group works too slowly*                 2.8%                   0.0%                 0.0%         1.4%         0.0%       16.7%          0.0%       0.0%          0.0%
The Government works inefficiently*                   15.5%                  12.0%                 18.8%        5.6%        75.0%       18.8%         10.0%       4.8%          28.6%
Political pressures and obstacles*                     2.8%                   8.0%                 31.3%       16.7%         0.0%        2.1%         30.0%       23.8%         28.6%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of
                                                      46.5%                  64.0%                 18.8%       15.3%         0.0%       20.8%          0.0%       19.0%         14.3%
country challenges*
Other                                                  0.0%                   0.0%                 0.0%         5.6%         0.0%        0.0%          0.0%        0.0%          0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            98
The World Bank Group                                                                                     Uganda                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Uganda? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                         Private Sector/
                                    Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                      Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                   CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                    N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean        SD   N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Anti-corruption                     66    8.12   1.89   17    8.71   2.23    16    8.69   2.18   68   8.10    2.17     12   8.33   2.06   45   8.27    2.47    21   8.76   1.18   21     8.81   1.91    20    8.90   1.45
Information and communications
                                    64    7.89   1.80   16    7.88   2.13    15    8.67   1.59   69   7.16    1.81     12   5.50   2.39   40   5.58    3.07    7    6.86   1.07   17     7.41   2.72    19    7.68   2.43
technology*
Transport*                          63    8.87   1.29   17    8.94   1.39    16    8.25   2.02   71   8.07    1.35     12   8.42   1.31   44   8.57    1.93    12   7.83   1.03   18     7.89   2.17    20    9.15   1.04
Crime and violence*                 60    5.77   1.65   12    5.92   2.23    15    4.27   1.16   70   6.50    2.28     12   4.92   2.91   40   4.73    2.30    16   7.13   0.50   20     4.80   1.61    18    5.00   2.20
Law and justice                     66    7.23   1.78   17    7.88   2.15    16    8.19   1.97   70   7.61    2.09     12   7.42   1.62   44   7.39    2.37    21   7.52   1.37   21     6.57   2.44    21    6.81   3.17
Urban development                   61    8.07   1.70   17    7.94   2.25    16    7.81   2.69   70   7.53    1.82     12   8.00   1.81   44   8.14    2.16    12   7.92   2.02   18     7.72   1.23    21    7.38   2.77
Environmental sustainability*       66    8.14   1.69   17    8.12   2.09    16    7.00   2.76   70   7.36    1.87     12   8.33   2.06   44   8.34    1.93    17   6.47   1.28   21     8.05   1.50    21    7.71   2.55
Regulatory framework*               64    7.11   1.84   15    8.13   2.10    13    7.00   3.39   63   6.84    1.94     11   3.64   2.29   40   5.50    2.95    20   6.55   1.79   16     7.00   2.25    19    8.21   2.04
Communicable/non-communicable
                                    54    6.63   1.81   15    8.13   2.59    14    6.50   2.88   65   7.95    2.48     12   8.00   1.81   41   7.73    2.27    17   6.06   2.14   16     6.31   2.58    17    7.24   2.31
diseases*
Poverty reduction                   64    8.52   1.30   17    8.94   1.92    16    7.75   2.05   69   7.81    2.46     12   8.75   1.55   43   8.28    2.25    21   8.62   1.12   23     8.96   1.67    22    8.77   2.16
Gender equity*                      63    6.65   1.49   16    8.69   1.54    13    4.00   1.83   68   7.29    2.29     12   2.67   2.06   41   5.90    3.06    20   6.80   1.24   21     7.05   2.38    20    6.80   2.02
Domestic private sector
                                    57    6.61   2.19   16    7.88   2.42    12    5.75   3.08   66   7.55    1.68     12   4.42   2.11   41   5.78    3.05    20   6.70   1.22   20     7.50   2.07    17    7.35   2.03
development*
Foreign direct investment*          66    8.08   1.60   16    8.63   1.54    16    6.25   3.19   64   7.47    1.73     12   8.42   1.31   44   8.68    1.36    17   8.47   1.13   20     8.40   1.47    19    8.63   1.57
Water and sanitation                63    7.65   1.70   16    8.88   1.36    14    8.00   1.62   69   7.97    2.08     12   8.58   1.24   44   7.93    1.99    21   7.81   0.93   20     7.15   2.18    21    7.05   2.22
Trade and exports*                  65    8.05   1.69   16    8.81   1.52    14    6.86   3.30   69   7.00    1.96     7    2.14   1.07   41   5.63    3.24    21   8.19   2.32   20     8.45   1.47    21    8.38   1.66
Economic growth*                    66    8.48   1.50   17    9.06   1.44    16    7.56   2.34   70   7.99    1.62     12   8.75   1.55   44   8.66    1.63    18   8.44   0.98   23     9.09   0.90    22    9.05   1.40
Energy*                             64    8.97   0.91   16    9.13   1.20    16    8.56   1.83   70   7.84    1.63     7    8.29   1.60   36   9.11    1.04    21   8.14   1.11   20     7.40   2.46    21    8.71   1.82
Disaster management*                66    6.48   1.92   16    8.06   1.95    16    7.06   2.41   71   7.92    1.67     12   8.33   2.06   44   7.75    2.13    21   7.52   1.08   20     6.35   1.73    20    5.35   2.78
Public sector governance/reform*    65    8.02   1.52   16    8.88   1.71    14    8.93   2.13   65   7.80    1.86     12   10.00 0.00    44   8.36    1.97    21   7.05   1.50   20     7.30   2.58    21    8.62   1.63
Job creation/employment*            64    7.89   1.77   17    8.53   1.94    16    8.13   2.06   71   7.51    1.87     12   10.00 0.00    44   8.00    1.79    21   8.10   1.34   21     8.71   2.05    21    7.81   2.09
Financial markets*                  62    7.27   2.29   16    8.19   1.83    16    5.88   2.66   70   7.26    1.50     7    2.14   1.07   42   5.33    3.08    21   8.05   2.29   20     9.20   0.77    18    7.89   1.97
Equality of opportunity*            62    6.45   1.85   16    8.25   1.95    16    4.25   2.11   67   7.39    2.10     12   4.83   2.48   43   5.47    2.87    12   6.58   2.07   19     7.21   2.37    21    6.71   2.08
Health                              64    7.95   1.65   16    8.88   1.67    16    7.19   2.93   67   8.31    2.23     12   7.92   2.58   44   8.68    1.61    21   7.90   1.04   20     7.50   2.26    21    7.57   2.14
Rural development*                  66    7.83   1.37   16    8.81   1.60    16    7.13   2.42   71   7.76    1.77     12   7.67   1.67   44   8.39    1.69    21   8.90   1.30   20     7.65   1.76    21    8.00   1.82
Global/regional integration*        66    6.42   1.74   17    7.76   2.08    16    5.44   2.10   68   7.07    1.47     3    10.00 0.00    42   7.76    1.92    21   5.86   2.69   21     6.71   2.35    20    7.35   1.76
Food security*                      64    7.39   1.35   15    8.93   1.44    16    7.31   2.02   67   7.66    1.99     7    8.86   1.07   43   8.26    1.38    13   7.69   1.55   18     7.94   1.77    22    5.95   2.17
Education                           66    8.29   1.98   16    9.44   0.89    16    8.31   2.36   71   8.15    2.02     7    8.86   1.07   43   8.60    1.68    21   8.10   0.70   20     8.25   0.85    21    7.90   2.30
Social protection*                  53    6.62   2.20   16    8.19   2.01    14    5.00   2.11   65   7.18    1.68     12   4.50   2.51   42   5.38    2.88    21   7.10   1.76   20     7.05   2.33    19    5.79   2.37
Climate change                      63    6.83   1.88   16    7.31   2.82    14    6.14   3.21   69   6.80    2.61     12   8.50   0.91   44   7.64    1.66    21   7.19   1.44   16     6.94   2.05    21    6.48   2.46
Agricultural development*           65    8.69   1.60   16    8.81   1.91    14    9.36   1.28   68   7.69    2.15     12   9.58   0.52   44   8.57    1.58    21   9.05   1.16   22     8.18   2.13    22    8.23   1.77
Sustainable and transparent
development of the oil and gas      65    8.55   1.51   16    6.19   3.82    14    8.93   2.13   66   8.11    1.46     12   9.58   0.52   44   8.55    1.50    21   7.43   1.25   20     7.70   1.95    20    7.30   2.77
sector*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                             99
The World Bank Group                                                                                     Uganda                                                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)
How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Uganda? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                         Private Sector/
                                    Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                      Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia              Other
                                    N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD          N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Anti-corruption*                    63    4.83   1.93   10    5.20   1.99    14    3.21   2.83   54   5.94   2.10   7    3.29   2.14   37   5.59    3.53    21   6.00   2.10   8      4.38   2.13    13    4.23   1.48
Information and communications
                                    63    5.83   1.94   10    5.60   1.96    11    5.27   1.85   55   5.98   1.82   7    6.14   4.81   37   5.38    3.07    17   5.76   1.39   5      4.40   2.19    14    5.79   1.48
technology
Transport*                          65    6.89   1.84   10    7.70   1.16    11    7.36   1.21   56   7.68   1.31   7    10.00 0.00    40   8.73    1.43    21   6.86   1.15   13     5.85   1.91    17    7.53   1.74
Crime and violence*                 56    4.63   1.51    9    4.22   1.48    11    3.55   2.30   48   5.50   1.75   7    1.57   0.54   22   2.68    1.91    21   5.33   2.29   5      2.80   1.64    15    3.67   1.50
Law and justice*                    58    5.38   1.25    9    4.78   2.05    13    4.54   2.40   55   6.07   1.99   4    4.00   0.00   22   5.68    1.56    20   5.55   1.93   8      4.75   2.96    15    4.27   1.98
Urban development*                  60    6.17   1.52   10    5.60   2.27    11    7.73   1.27   56   6.54   1.86   7    8.86   1.07   38   7.32    2.59    21   6.43   1.99   8      5.50   1.31    18    4.39   1.38
Environmental sustainability*       63    5.62   1.86   10    5.40   1.78    13    5.62   2.82   56   6.68   1.67   7    9.43   0.54   32   8.06    2.17    12   7.33   1.78   5      5.40   2.19    17    4.94   1.89
Regulatory framework*               56    6.95   1.72    9    6.00   2.00    11    7.55   1.44   47   6.34   1.70   7    6.00   3.74   36   8.53    1.93    12   6.17   1.90   5      5.80   4.38    17    6.47   2.04
Communicable/non-communicable
                                    63    5.43   1.92   10    6.10   2.51    11    6.36   3.14   51   6.86   1.94   12   7.83   1.59   36   7.36    2.28    12   7.67   1.56   5      2.80   1.64    13    4.31   1.55
diseases*
Poverty reduction                   65    6.51   2.43   10    6.90   2.28    12    7.17   2.59   60   6.28   2.20   12   6.92   3.68   37   6.41    3.22    20   6.30   1.30   13     8.00   1.35    18    5.44   1.76
Gender equity*                      60    5.63   1.69   10    5.80   1.81    10    5.20   2.10   53   6.26   1.94   7    2.14   1.07   33   5.06    2.73    20   6.50   1.47   8      5.75   0.46    17    4.53   1.77
Domestic private sector
                                    61    5.61   1.31    9    5.11   1.17    12    5.33   1.07   56   6.14   1.85   7    4.43   3.21   30   4.50    2.53    20   6.45   1.61   8      4.38   2.13    17    4.88   1.05
development*
Foreign direct investment*          65    7.69   1.20    9    6.89   1.97     9    7.78   1.48   56   6.88   1.96   12   5.58   2.91   39   6.33    3.09    20   7.15   1.04   8      7.00   2.07    16    6.19   1.47
Water and sanitation*               67    6.42   2.06    9    6.78   2.28    14    6.21   2.86   53   6.66   1.74   7    8.86   1.07   40   7.55    2.55    21   7.43   0.98   8      5.25   1.67    18    6.22   1.70
Trade and exports*                  65    6.37   1.96   10    5.80   1.99    12    4.83   1.90   56   6.57   1.62   4    9.00   0.00   29   6.97    2.18    19   6.32   1.49   8      6.63   1.41    16    5.38   2.03
Economic growth*                    64    7.97   1.47   10    7.80   1.69    11    7.64   1.63   57   7.04   1.51   7    10.00 0.00    41   8.22    2.28    12   7.42   1.93   10     7.90   1.10    18    7.22   1.63
Energy*                             63    7.59   1.16   10    7.00   1.41    11    7.73   1.01   51   7.35   1.47   7    8.86   1.07   38   7.97    1.85    21   6.33   2.27   8      5.00   0.93    17    8.06   0.75
Disaster management*                58    5.12   1.65    9    5.11   2.03    10    5.60   3.20   51   6.04   2.15   4    9.00   0.00   25   5.84    2.43    11   6.91   1.87   5      4.00   2.74    16    3.31   2.09
Public sector governance/reform*    67    6.91   1.67   10    6.40   1.71    11    5.64   3.72   58   6.50   1.73   7    3.86   2.67   40   5.08    3.23    21   6.90   1.81   8      6.50   2.93    17    6.71   2.11
Job creation/employment*            62    5.27   2.02   10    5.70   1.89    13    4.08   2.22   58   6.24   2.16   12   7.00   3.62   37   5.35    3.20    21   5.24   2.00   13     5.92   2.99    18    4.83   2.77
Financial markets                   57    6.47   1.23    9    5.44   1.42     9    6.67   2.00   47   6.06   1.73   8    6.00   4.14   27   5.11    2.72    20   5.95   2.28   8      5.13   3.44    13    5.77   1.64
Equality of opportunity*            60    4.98   1.32   10    5.40   1.51    15    5.07   1.28   47   6.38   1.76   7    3.29   2.14   31   4.32    2.37    11   7.18   1.40   5      4.00   2.74    12    4.50   1.83
Health*                             67    6.25   1.85   10    6.40   1.84    16    7.19   2.56   66   7.00   1.91   12   9.17   1.03   41   7.80    2.04    21   7.43   0.87   14     6.64   1.34    18    5.44   1.82
Rural development*                  65    5.65   1.85   10    5.50   2.51    12    5.00   1.95   57   6.21   2.04   9    7.56   0.53   31   6.81    2.10    20   6.95   1.19   8      5.88   1.25    18    4.39   1.72
Global/regional integration*        59    6.53   1.18   10    6.20   1.81    9     6.67   1.32   44   5.66   1.63   5    8.00 0.00     23   6.65    1.61    20   6.30   1.13   5      4.00   2.74    14    5.64   1.95
Food security*                      64    5.70   1.72    9    5.44   1.88    13    6.08   2.93   56   5.98   1.94   7    10.00 0.00    38   7.34    2.50    21   6.48   1.47   8      5.25   1.39    18    4.00   1.82
Education*                          68    7.38   1.16   10    7.60   1.17    13    7.38   1.39   66   6.95   1.78   7    10.00 0.00    41   8.34    1.39    21   6.14   2.15   14     7.07   1.90    18    6.78   1.87
Social protection*                  61    5.57   1.84    9    5.33   1.58    10    5.50   2.27   53   5.62   1.87   7    5.43   4.28   34   6.62    2.75    12   7.42   2.07   5      3.20   1.10    18    4.78   1.90
Climate change*                     63    5.46   1.61   10    5.20   1.48    13    6.08   2.84   58   5.60   1.97   7    8.86   1.07   39   6.49    2.55    12   7.42   1.68   5      2.80   1.64    18    4.56   2.15
Agricultural development*           68    5.91   1.77   10    6.30   2.36    13    6.15   2.44   60   6.43   1.87   7    7.14   2.67   43   7.63    2.24    21   6.33   1.83   13     5.31   0.86    18    4.72   1.74
Sustainable and transparent
development of the oil and gas      65    6.20   1.30   10    5.70   2.50    13    5.62   2.53   55   5.45   2.36   3    1.00   0.00   37   4.86    2.54    12   6.17   1.70   5      4.20   1.10    17    4.53   2.29
sector*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups


                                                                                                         100
The World Bank Group                                                                                           Uganda                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Uganda?
                                                 Employee of      Private Sector/Financial   Private                                                                            Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                         a Ministry        Sector/Private Bank    Foundation                                NGO           CBO           Media             Group         Academia          Other
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)            26.2%                  28.6%              46.7%                                  16.4%        25.0%          27.7%             25.0%          38.1%            25.0%
In the country                                      10.8%                  14.3%              20.0%                                  32.9%          -            19.1%              5.0%           4.8%            10.0%
Don't know                                          63.1%                  57.1%              33.3%                                  50.7%        75.0%          53.2%             70.0%          57.1%            65.0%

                                                          Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation         NGO                   CBO                 Media          Faith-Based Group           Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean      SD     N    Mean     SD    N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD             N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
To what extent does the World
Bank Group’s work help to achieve   68    5.87   2.12    12    6.25   1.82    16    6.19   2.26    72    6.42     1.97   12   5.00    2.76   45    4.82   3.56     21    5.86    1.68   16     5.38   1.03    18    6.67   1.78
development results in Uganda?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Uganda? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                          Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation         NGO                   CBO                 Media           Faith-Based Group          Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean      SD     N    Mean     SD    N    Mean    SD       N Mean SD            N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
The World Bank Group's financial
instruments meet the needs of       68    5.94   1.94    12    5.67   1.61    16    5.63   1.78    72    5.88     1.90   7    10.00 0.00     41    6.93   3.46     21    5.19    2.14   20     3.35   2.13    18    5.83   1.54
Uganda*
The World Bank Group meets
Uganda’s needs for knowledge        59    6.24   2.64    12    6.00   2.05    16    5.31   3.09    71    5.73     2.01   7    2.14    1.07   42    6.33   3.64     21    5.33    2.15   15     3.47   1.64    18    6.11   2.27
services*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                          Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry            Private Bank      Private Foundation         NGO                   CBO                 Media          Faith-Based Group           Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD            N Mean SD            N Mean SD           N    Mean      SD     N    Mean     SD    N    Mean    SD      N Mean SD             N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
To what extent do you believe the
World Bank Group’s internal
evaluation mechanisms hold the      54    6.22   1.86    12    6.08   1.17    16    5.56   3.37    65    6.08     1.83   3    1.00    0.00   36    6.14   3.66     21    5.52    1.60   8      4.88   1.36    14    6.21   0.98
institution accountable for
achieving results in Uganda?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                               101
The World Bank Group                                                                                     Uganda                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*
                                                 Employee of    Private Sector/Financial      Private                                                                     Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                         a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank       Foundation                         NGO           CBO           Media             Group         Academia          Other
Weekly                                              1.4%                    -                    -                               -            -              -                  -              -               -
Monthly                                             11.3%                14.3%                 6.3%                            18.9%        25.0%          22.0%              4.8%           8.7%            17.4%
A few times a year                                  70.4%                28.6%                 43.8%                           36.5%          -            34.0%             23.8%           4.3%            47.8%
Rarely                                              15.5%                28.6%                 12.5%                           20.3%        33.3%          28.0%             66.7%          34.8%            8.7%
Never                                               1.4%                 28.6%                 37.5%                           24.3%        41.7%          16.0%              4.8%          52.2%            26.1%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

In Uganda, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities: (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                         Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO               CBO                 Media           Faith-Based Group          Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N   Mean     SD    N    Mean    SD       N Mean SD            N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
Are timely*                          67   6.21   1.69   12    5.83   1.95    13    5.38   1.56   71   5.97   1.91   7   2.71    1.60   40    6.18   3.54     21    6.24    1.70   16     4.56   2.16    16    6.44   1.83
Include appropriate level of
stakeholder involvement during       63   6.22   1.70   11    5.00   2.05    13    4.92   2.14   61   5.21   2.03   7   8.29    1.60   38    8.53   1.84     8     5.63    2.07   7      4.57   1.90    17    5.41   1.46
preparation*
Are relevant to Uganda's
                                     66   6.95   2.41   12    6.08   2.50    13    7.85   2.70   67   6.21   1.91   7   10.00 0.00     42    7.17   3.52     21    7.48    1.75   16     8.13   2.19    18    6.67   2.03
development priorities*
Lead to practical solutions          64   5.38   2.18   10    5.80   2.15    16    4.69   2.50   62   5.69   2.47   7   2.71    1.60   39    5.95   3.70     19    4.89    1.88   14     6.21   2.67    18    5.56   2.01
Are accessible (well written and
                                     65   6.65   2.28   11    6.18   2.48    14    4.21   3.42   70   5.49   2.28   3   1.00    0.00   40    6.43   3.78     21    7.71    2.81   15     5.27   3.31    17    7.65   1.80
easy to understand)*
Are source of relevant information
                                     66   7.71   1.90   10    7.00   2.31    13    7.08   2.99   67   6.09   2.51   7   7.71    2.14   42    8.76   2.12     21    8.00    2.43   14     8.50   1.51    18    7.94   1.47
on global good practices*
Enhance your knowledge and/or
                                     66   7.05   2.36   10    7.10   2.38    13    6.31   3.64   67   5.97   2.56   7   4.86    4.81   41    6.51   3.80     21    6.24    1.61   14     7.07   1.64    18    7.33   2.09
skills
Are adequately disseminated*         62   6.02   2.23   10    6.30   2.11    16    3.75   3.47   61   5.13   2.53   7   1.00    0.00   33    4.70   3.55     20    4.15    2.82   14     2.79   1.81    17    7.65   2.23
Are translated enough into local
                                     65   3.91   1.49   10    4.10   1.66    13    3.85   2.61   59   3.75   2.44   3   1.00    0.00   37    2.89   2.55     20    3.80    2.57   15     2.20   1.66    14    2.86   1.61
language*
Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific
development challenges and           66   5.14   1.80   11    4.82   2.23    13    4.92   1.61   71   5.07   2.38   7   5.00    3.74   41    5.78   3.66     21    4.57    2.11   15     5.53   2.45    18    5.72   2.14
country circumstances
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                         102
The World Bank Group                                                                                           Uganda                                                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014

D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                           Private Sector/
                                      Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                        Ministry            Private Bank       Private Foundation         NGO                   CBO                  Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia               Other
                                      N Mean SD            N Mean SD             N Mean SD           N    Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD      N    Mean     SD     N Mean SD          N      Mean SD         N    Mean    SD
Overall, how significant a
contribution do you believe the
World Bank Group's knowledge
                                      66   6.24   2.01    12     6.25   1.29    13    6.46   2.26    71    6.11   2.01    12     5.67   3.60    44    6.23   3.39    21   5.38   1.28   20     4.95     1.47   18   6.56    1.92
work and activities make to
development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the
technical quality of the World Bank
                                      66   8.26   1.37    17     7.59   1.91    13    8.31   1.97    69    6.83   1.61    12     6.25   2.26    43    8.95   1.66    21   5.71   1.90   14     7.36     2.56   18   8.44    1.15
Group's knowledge work and
activities?*
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute to solving Uganda’s development challenges?
                                                           Private Sector/
                                      Employee of a       Financial Sector/
                                        Ministry            Private Bank       Private Foundation          NGO                   CBO                 Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia               Other
                                      N    Mean    SD      N    Mean    SD      N    Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD      N    Mean    SD      N    Mean     SD     N    Mean   SD     N     Mean      SD     N    Mean    SD
Conceptualization (understanding
                                      66   6.15   2.40    12     5.67   1.92    13    6.54   2.79    68    5.84   2.11    12     5.00   2.76    41    6.17   3.66    11   5.73   1.74   8      5.00     0.00   17   6.35    2.09
and framing the problem)
Design (appraising and planning
                                      69   6.58   1.84    12     6.08   1.51    13    6.69   2.25    68    6.03   2.18    12     7.67   1.67    41    8.46   1.95    20   5.95   1.61   11     5.55     1.04   17   6.53    1.74
the solutions)*
Implementation (executing,
carrying out, monitoring, and         71   6.13   1.76    15     6.00   1.36    13    4.69   1.32    67    5.72   2.02    12     4.08   2.07    44    6.05   3.43    20   5.10   1.83   15     5.93     1.28   16   6.44    1.86
making appropriate adjustments)*
Evaluation (assessing the impact
                                      69   6.06   2.04    12     6.00   2.22    13    5.31   1.80    70    6.03   2.12    12     4.83   2.48    42    4.69   3.70    20   4.95   1.54   16     5.00     2.92   18   7.06    1.86
and results)*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                               103
The World Bank Group                                                                                     Uganda                                                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                         Private Sector/
                                     Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                       Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                   CBO                Media           Faith-Based Group              Academia              Other
                                     N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD         N   Mean    SD    N    Mean    SD       N Mean SD                N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
The World Bank Group disburses
                                     63   6.33   1.84   18    6.11   2.68     8    4.38   2.50   54   6.06   2.47       7   1.00   0.00   41    6.59   3.69     11    5.73    2.20       12     6.08   1.93    14    6.14   2.41
funds promptly*
The World Bank Group effectively
monitors and evaluates the           67   6.28   2.08   16    6.25   1.95    11    5.55   2.54   68   6.53   2.40       7   5.00   3.74   42    6.64   3.57     20    5.40    1.35       16     5.44   2.50    17    6.88   2.03
projects and programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals
and reviews are done in a timely     63   7.52   1.62   15    5.80   2.11    13    4.38   2.53   66   6.33   2.07       7   3.86   2.67   38    6.66   3.67     20    5.40    1.64       16     4.75   1.48    15    6.93   1.62
fashion*
The World Bank Group’s
“Safeguard Policy? requirements      52   7.13   1.56   10    7.00   2.21    10    6.50   1.84   59   6.61   2.30       3   7.00   5.20   35    9.09   1.38     20    6.00    1.62       10     6.00   1.83    13    6.69   1.32
are reasonable*
The World Bank Group’s conditions
                                     65   5.23   2.23   11    6.36   2.11    11    4.36   1.63   66   5.91   2.19       7   5.00   3.74   42    4.48   3.61     20    6.00    1.62       15     6.27   2.76    16    6.19   1.72
on its lending are reasonable*
The World Bank Group takes
                                     68   5.54   2.41   10    6.10   1.79    15    3.67   2.50   69   5.38   2.00       7   3.29   2.14   40    4.00   3.25     20    4.65    2.23       15     4.27   1.34    16    6.13   2.19
decisions quickly in Uganda*
Working with the World Bank
Group increases Uganda’s             68   6.41   2.21   10    6.80   1.75    13    6.77   2.68   63   6.78   1.81       7   6.14   4.81   40    4.93   3.82     20    6.40    1.43       14     7.00   2.08    16    6.88   2.03
institutional capacity*
The World Bank Group ensures
consistency and continuity through   61   6.28   1.71   14    7.36   1.95    13    4.92   2.47   59   6.17   1.80       7   3.29   2.14   36    6.14   3.63     20    4.90    1.80       10     4.90   1.52    12    6.67   1.83
staff changes*
Where country systems are
adequate, the World Bank Group       68   6.85   1.94   13    6.92   1.80    13    6.77   2.05   67   6.40   2.10       7   8.14   3.19   39    8.92   1.71     11    6.91    2.21       5      5.80   0.45     7    6.43   1.51
makes appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides
                                     68   6.21   1.72   16    6.06   1.95    16    5.56   2.13   69   6.30   2.28       7   7.00   3.00   41    6.93   3.36     20    5.35    1.90       16     4.31   1.89    17    6.82   1.70
effective implementation support*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Uganda?
                                                   Employee of    Private Sector/Financial                     Private                                                       Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank                      Foundation            NGO         CBO            Media             Group             Academia          Other
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in
                                                         -                    -                                     -              3%           -               -                5%                     -              -
Uganda
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk
                                                       17%                  12%                                   25%              30%          -             18%               25%                    33%           11%
in Uganda
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is
                                                       28%                  12%                                   19%              17%          -             26%                    -                 19%           47%
appropriate
Don't know                                             51%                  68%                                   38%              37%         100%           56%               60%                    43%           42%
Prefer not to answer                                    4%                   8%                                   19%              13%           -             -                10%                     5%            -

                                                                                                         104
The World Bank Group                                                                        Uganda                                                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                         Employee of    Private Sector/Financial      Private                                             Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                               a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank       Foundation     NGO        CBO             Media          Group       Academia         Other
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/
                                                     4.2%                  12.0%                0.0%        6.8%       0.0%            14.6%         42.9%          17.4%          18.2%
statistics/figures on Uganda’s economy*
Collaborate more effectively with Government
                                                     18.3%                 12.0%                0.0%       14.9%       0.0%             6.3%         19.0%          13.0%           9.1%
clients
Offer more innovative financial products*            15.5%                 4.0%                18.8%       13.5%      33.3%            31.3%          0.0%          47.8%           4.5%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing
                                                     40.8%                 40.0%               18.8%        8.1%       0.0%            16.7%          0.0%           0.0%          22.7%
compared to markets*
Reach out more to groups outside of
                                                     28.2%                 16.0%               68.8%       40.5%      25.0%            37.5%         57.1%          52.2%          45.5%
Government*
Improve the quality of its experts as related to
                                                     1.4%                  20.0%                0.0%       27.0%       0.0%             4.2%         38.1%           4.3%          31.8%
Uganda’s specific challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge services*            5.6%                  20.0%               37.5%        4.1%       0.0%            0.0%           0.0%          39.1%          4.5%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work*              5.6%                  40.0%                0.0%        4.1%       0.0%            22.9%          0.0%          0.0%           13.6%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                     19.7%                 4.0%                31.3%       31.1%      75.0%            18.8%         14.3%           0.0%           4.5%
country*
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank
                                                     45.1%                 20.0%                0.0%       29.7%       0.0%            14.6%         23.8%          17.4%          31.8%
Group financing*
Work faster*                                         1.4%                  0.0%                 6.3%        1.4%      25.0%            20.8%          4.8%           0.0%           0.0%
Other                                                0.0%                  4.0%                 0.0%        8.1%       0.0%            2.1%           0.0%           0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Uganda, and taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe
the World Bank Group should offer more of in Uganda?*
                                                   Employee of    Private Sector/Financial     Private                                             Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank      Foundation       NGO           CBO         Media         Group        Academia      Other
Financial services                                    32.4%                20.0%                18.8%        24.3%           -          26.0%         81.0%           50.0%      21.7%
Knowledge products                                    15.5%                 8.0%                6.3%         34.3%         33.3%         6.0%          9.5%           11.1%      30.4%
Convening services                                    22.5%                36.0%                31.3%        21.4%           -          32.0%          4.8%             -         8.7%
None of the above                                     1.4%                    -                 6.3%          1.4%         25.0%        20.0%          4.8%             -           -
The combination is appropriate for Uganda             28.2%                32.0%                37.5%        18.6%           -           8.0%            -            33.3%      34.8%
Don't know                                              -                   4.0%                  -             -          41.7%         8.0%            -            5.6%        4.3%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                            105
The World Bank Group                                                                       Uganda                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda (continued)

Please identify two areas related to sustainable development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda, where greater support from the World Bank Group would be most valuable. (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of     Private Sector/Financial      Private                                       Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                  a Ministry       Sector/Private Bank      Foundation       NGO        CBO        Media        Group       Academia      Other
Support in mitigation of macro-economic risks*          40.8%                 36.0%                 0.0%        23.0%       0.0%       22.0%        23.8%         4.8%        45.5%
Support efforts to ensure participation of civil
                                                        22.5%                 12.0%                 6.3%        50.0%      33.3%       12.0%        14.3%         38.1%       13.6%
society and citizens*
Technical aspects related to the sector*                11.3%                 24.0%                31.3%        12.2%       0.0%       24.0%         0.0%         4.8%        9.1%
Support in monitoring of operations*                    5.6%                  44.0%                37.5%        33.8%      25.0%       32.0%        47.6%         0.0%        0.0%
Advisory role in contract negotiations*                 9.9%                   4.0%                 0.0%        21.6%       0.0%        4.0%        42.9%         19.0%       27.3%
Support in management of foreign exchange and
                                                        7.0%                   0.0%                 6.3%         6.8%      25.0%       36.0%         4.8%         0.0%        9.1%
revenues*
Support in governance, anti-corruption, access to
information and transparency related to overall         54.9%                 48.0%                81.3%        33.8%       0.0%       26.0%        61.9%         66.7%       50.0%
management of oil and gas resources*
Support in improving quality of public
                                                        15.5%                 16.0%                37.5%         9.5%      33.3%        8.0%         4.8%         19.0%       22.7%
expenditures*
Other*                                                  0.0%                   0.0%                 0.0%         0.0%       0.0%        0.0%         0.0%         0.0%        0.0%
Don’t know*                                             0.0%                   4.0%                 0.0%         2.7%      41.7%        8.0%         0.0%         23.8%       4.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Would you like to see more, less, or just about the same level of World Bank Group involvement in the sustainable development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda?
                                                      Employee of    Private Sector/Financial    Private                                           Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                              a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank    Foundation       NGO         CBO        Media           Group       Academia      Other
More                                                     44.9%                83.3%               75.0%        81.4%      33.3%       52.0%           91.7%        72.2%        57.1%
Just about the same                                      52.2%                16.7%               25.0%        12.9%      25.0%       38.0%            8.3%         5.6%        33.3%
Less                                                     2.9%                    -                  -             -         -             -              -            -         4.8%
Don't know                                                 -                     -                  -          5.7%       41.7%       10.0%              -         22.2%        4.8%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                           106
The World Bank Group                                                                   Uganda                                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                        Employee of      Private Sector/Financial   Private                                 Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                              a Ministry        Sector/Private Bank    Foundation      NGO        CBO    Media      Group      Academia       Other
Local newspapers*                                   63.4%                  92.0%             68.8%        53.4%      41.7%   61.7%       9.5%       52.2%         65.0%
International newspapers*                           15.5%                   0.0%              0.0%         1.4%       0.0%   4.3%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Local radio*                                        8.5%                   68.0%             25.0%        21.9%       0.0%   23.4%      66.7%       26.1%         10.0%
International radio                                 0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%         4.1%       0.0%   0.0%        0.0%        0.0%         0.0%
Local television*                                   31.0%                  12.0%             50.0%        52.1%       0.0%   27.7%      66.7%       60.9%         40.0%
International television*                           2.8%                    0.0%              0.0%         1.4%      33.3%   2.1%       23.8%        0.0%         10.0%
Periodicals*                                        2.8%                    0.0%              6.3%         0.0%      25.0%   21.3%       4.8%        0.0%         0.0%
Internet                                            42.3%                  24.0%             50.0%        42.5%      25.0%   38.3%      14.3%       30.4%         40.0%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
                                                    0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%        12.3%      33.3%   6.4%       0.0%        17.4%          5.0%
Flickr)*
Blogs                                               0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%         4.1%       0.0%   0.0%      0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Mobile phones*                                      0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%         5.5%       0.0%   0.0%      14.3%         0.0%          5.0%
Instant messaging                                   0.0%                    0.0%              0.0%         0.0%       0.0%   0.0%      0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
Other                                               2.8%                    0.0%              0.0%         0.0%       0.0%   2.1%      0.0%          0.0%          5.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                         Employee of    Private Sector/Financial   Private                                  Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                               a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank    Foundation     NGO         CBO     Media      Group      Academia       Other
Blogs*                                                2.8%                36.0%              0.0%        8.1%       0.0%     6.3%        0.0%        0.0%         9.1%
Direct contact with World Bank Group*                 0.0%                 0.0%              18.8%       20.3%      33.3%    4.2%        0.0%        4.3%         4.5%
e-Newsletters*                                       69.0%                 8.0%              43.8%       13.5%      41.7%    20.8%       0.0%       13.0%         50.0%
Instant messaging*                                    2.8%                 4.0%              31.3%       6.8%       41.7%    4.2%       33.3%       13.0%         4.5%
World Bank Group's
                                                     21.1%                44.0%              0.0%        41.9%      0.0%     8.3%      47.6%        30.4%         22.7%
seminars/workshops/conferences*
World Bank Group's publications and other
                                                     16.9%                40.0%              12.5%       31.1%      25.0%    35.4%     19.0%        52.2%         40.9%
written materials*
Mobile phones*                                        7.0%                48.0%              56.3%       39.2%      0.0%     18.8%     42.9%        21.7%          4.5%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube,
                                                     28.2%                12.0%              0.0%        25.7%      33.3%    37.5%     14.3%        39.1%         36.4%
Flickr)*
World Bank Group's website*                          18.3%                 4.0%              37.5%       6.8%       25.0%    35.4%      4.8%         0.0%         13.6%
Other                                                 1.4%                 0.0%              0.0%        1.4%       0.0%     2.1%       0.0%         0.0%         0.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                       107
The World Bank Group                                                                           Uganda                                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*
                                                  Employee of      Private Sector/Financial     Private                                             Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                           a Ministry       Sector/Private Bank      Foundation       NGO          CBO        Media            Group         Academia      Other
Yes                                                   27.1%                 45.0%                37.5%        46.6%        25.0%       37.5%            42.9%             -         43.5%
No                                                    72.9%                 55.0%                62.5%        53.4%        75.0%       62.5%            57.1%          100.0%       56.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*
                                                 Employee of     Private Sector/Financial       Private                                             Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                         a Ministry        Sector/Private Bank       Foundation        NGO          CBO        Media          Group        Academia        Other
Yes                                                 29.7%                    4.0%               56.3%           35.7%       66.7%       33.3%          42.9%            -           43.5%
No                                                 70.30%                   96.0%               43.8%           64.3%       33.3%       66.7%          57.1%         100.0%         56.5%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Were you able to obtain this information?*
                                                      Employee of   Private Sector/Financial       Private                                          Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                              a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank        Foundation     NGO         CBO         Media          Group        Academia        Other
Yes                                                     100.0%                  -                  100.0%       83.3%      100.0%       75.0%         100.0%            -          100.0%
No                                                         -                 100.0%                   -         16.7%         -         25.0%             -             -             -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you have access to the Internet?*
                                                      Employee of   Private Sector/Financial       Private                                          Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                              a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank        Foundation     NGO         CBO         Media          Group        Academia        Other
Yes                                                     100.0%               100.0%                100.0%       92.9%      100.0%       100.0%         42.9%         78.3%         100.0%
No                                                         -                    -                     -         7.1%          -            -           57.1%         21.7%            -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*
                                                Employee of         Private Sector/Financial       Private                                          Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                        a Ministry           Sector/Private Bank        Foundation     NGO          CBO        Media          Group        Academia        Other
Yes                                                98.6%                     40.0%                 81.3%        77.6%       41.7%       78.7%          42.9%          9.5%         100.0%
No                                                  1.4%                     60.0%                 18.8%        22.4%       58.3%       21.3%          57.1%         90.5%            -
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which do you primarily use?*
                                                      Employee of   Private Sector/Financial       Private                                          Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                              a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank        Foundation     NGO          CBO        Media          Group        Academia        Other
The World Bank Group’s country website                   6.9%                83.3%                 63.6%        57.1%       41.7%       65.8%          42.9%          6.7%          17.4%
The World Bank Group’s main website                      93.1%               16.7%                 36.4%        42.9%       58.3%       34.2%          57.1%         93.3%          82.6%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups



                                                                                               108
The World Bank Group                                                                                      Uganda                                                                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014

G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?*
                                                  Employee of      Private Sector/Financial                     Private                                                      Faith-Based
Percentage of Respondents                          a Ministry        Sector/Private Bank                      Foundation          NGO           CBO           Media             Group         Academia          Other
High speed                                           58.5%                  68.0%                               100.0%            72.9%        41.7%          73.3%            100.0%          100.0%           81.0%
Dial-up                                              41.5%                  32.0%                                  -              27.1%        58.3%          26.7%                -              -             19.0%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                          Private Sector/
                                      Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                        Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation        NGO                 CBO                 Media           Faith-Based Group          Academia              Other
                                      N Mean SD           N Mean SD            N Mean SD          N    Mean   SD     N     Mean     SD    N    Mean    SD       N Mean SD            N      Mean SD        N    Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group’s
data more often than I did a few      72   6.33   2.08   17    2.41   1.18    13    3.77   1.64   64   4.73   2.09   8     6.63    4.66   37    6.86   2.98     21    6.24    2.19   19     5.37   3.82    21    7.14   3.14
years ago*
I find the World Bank Group’s
                                      69   6.71   1.25   12    4.92   2.02    11    4.91   1.76   64   5.63   2.19   8     8.13    2.59   37    9.27   1.31     21    6.62    2.11   11     5.00   3.29    21    7.62   1.88
websites easy to navigate*
I find the information on the World
                                      70   7.10   1.80   12    4.92   2.02    10    6.60   2.07   62   5.87   1.92   8     10.00 0.00     26    9.08   1.50     21    7.19    2.52   11     5.36   3.64    21    8.43   1.17
Bank Group’s websites useful*
The World Bank Group’s social
media channels are valuable
                                      42   7.67   2.10   25    8.64   1.58    11    6.73   3.13   67   6.36   1.93   8     5.50    4.81   38    4.42   4.19     21    7.33    2.87   20     7.00   3.80    19    7.32   2.71
sources of information about the
institution*
When I need information from the
World Bank Group I know how to        72   6.83   2.67   13    3.85   3.36    13    4.62   2.60   68   5.82   2.33   8     7.88    2.95   46    9.26   1.96     21    7.19    2.52   15     3.93   3.35    21    7.14   2.82
find it*
The World Bank Group is
responsive to my information          70   7.10   2.75   19    6.21   3.87     7    3.86   0.38   64   5.78   2.68   8     2.88    3.04   39    6.41   4.01     21    7.52    2.80   13     4.38   3.50    16    7.81   2.26
requests and inquiries*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                                          109
The World Bank Group                                                                       Uganda                                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014

H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Uganda? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents                          Employee of    Private Sector/Financial      Private                               Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                a Ministry      Sector/Private Bank     Foundation        NGO      CBO    Media      Group      Academia       Other
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)*                            61.4%                 8.0%                50.0%         16.2%   63.6%   52.1%       0.0%       40.0%         54.5%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)           12.9%                 4.0%                 0.0%         7.4%    9.1%    0.0%        0.0%        6.7%         9.1%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
                                                      5.7%                  0.0%                 0.0%         1.5%    0.0%    0.0%       0.0%         0.0%          0.0%
(MIGA)
None*                                                 37.1%                88.0%                50.0%         80.9%   36.4%   47.9%     100.0%       53.3%         36.4%
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents                            Employee of   Private Sector/Financial   Private                                 Faith-Based
(Responses Combined)                                  a Ministry     Sector/Private Bank    Foundation     NGO        CBO     Media      Group      Academia       Other
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                        26.8%               54.5%             66.7%       57.6%       33.3%   50.0%     100.0%       78.6%         43.5%
conversations, etc.)*
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                      32.4%               18.2%             20.0%       24.2%       33.3%   41.7%      0.0%        50.0%         13.0%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                        11.3%                4.5%             13.3%        6.1%       55.6%   12.5%      0.0%        14.3%         13.0%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*          63.4%               18.2%             26.7%       12.1%       0.0%    10.4%     23.1%         0.0%         30.4%
Use World Bank Group website for information,
                                                        9.9%                50.0%              0.0%       33.3%       22.2%   29.2%     30.8%         0.0%         34.8%
data, research, etc.*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups




                                                                                           110
The World Bank Group                                          Uganda                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix C: Responses to All Questions across Geographic Locations
Kampala City N=209               Central Uganda N=61        Other Areas N=41

A. General Issues Facing Uganda

In general, how would you say that Uganda is headed in...?

Percentage of Respondents                                        Kampala City         Central Uganda           Other Areas
The right direction                                                 44.8%                 49.2%                  41.5%
The wrong direction                                                 32.5%                 23.7%                  17.1%
Not sure                                                            22.7%                 27.1%                  41.5%

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Uganda. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Uganda. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                             Kampala City         Central Uganda           Other Areas
Social protection                                                   5.5%                   3.3%                   5.1%
Transport                                                           14.4%                  6.6%                  12.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                     14.9%                 13.1%                   7.7%
Global/regional integration                                         0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Gender equity                                                       6.5%                   1.6%                   0.0%
Domestic private sector development                                 1.5%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Foreign direct investment                                           5.0%                   8.2%                   5.1%
Water and sanitation*                                               10.0%                 16.4%                   0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                     29.9%                 42.6%                  30.8%
Job creation/employment                                             21.4%                 19.7%                  25.6%
Rural development                                                   8.0%                   8.2%                   5.1%
Financial markets                                                   2.5%                   1.6%                   0.0%
Urban development                                                   2.0%                   0.0%                   5.1%
Environmental sustainability                                        1.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                             2.5%                   1.6%                   2.6%
Health                                                              22.9%                 19.7%                  33.3%
Education                                                           35.3%                 29.5%                  28.2%
Poverty reduction                                                   24.9%                 18.0%                  38.5%
Energy                                                              25.4%                 23.0%                  15.4%
Food security*                                                      1.5%                   8.2%                   2.6%
Climate change                                                      0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Agricultural development                                            12.9%                 19.7%                   7.7%
Trade and exports                                                   6.0%                   8.2%                   5.1%
Crime and violence                                                  1.0%                   0.0%                   5.1%
Economic growth*                                                    26.9%                 37.7%                  51.3%
Law and justice                                                     1.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                              0.0%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                       10.9%                6.6%                   10.3%
gas sector
Disaster management                                                    0.0%                 0.0%                    0.0%
Information and communications technology                              6.5%                 6.6%                    2.6%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                               111
The World Bank Group                                     Uganda                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                        Kampala City        Central Uganda         Other Areas
Water and sanitation                                           3.8%                  4.9%                 0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                        8.1%                  8.2%                 5.1%
Economic growth                                                21.5%                21.3%                30.8%
Climate change                                                 1.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
Global/regional integration                                    0.5%                  0.0%                 0.0%
Gender equity                                                  9.6%                  6.6%                12.8%
Rural development                                              26.3%                37.7%                30.8%
Urban development                                              3.3%                  6.6%                 0.0%
Regulatory framework                                           0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
Social protection                                              1.9%                  0.0%                 0.0%
Law and justice                                                1.0%                  1.6%                 0.0%
Transport                                                      18.2%                 8.2%                20.5%
Crime and violence                                             0.0%                  0.0%                 0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         2.4%                  3.3%                 0.0%
Information and communications technology                      2.4%                  8.2%                 2.6%
Anti-corruption                                                27.3%                24.6%                15.4%
Domestic private sector development                            9.6%                  6.6%                 5.1%
Foreign direct investment*                                     0.5%                  4.9%                 7.7%
Education                                                      33.0%                23.0%                25.6%
Energy*                                                        10.0%                11.5%                25.6%
Public sector governance/reform                                9.6%                  8.2%                 5.1%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                  3.8%               4.9%                  12.8%
gas sector
Environmental sustainability                                      5.3%              8.2%                   0.0%
Disaster management                                               1.0%              3.3%                   0.0%
Health                                                            23.4%             19.7%                  20.5%
Agricultural development*                                         32.5%             37.7%                  53.8%
Job creation/employment*                                          30.1%             21.3%                  12.8%
Financial markets                                                 2.9%              3.3%                   0.0%
Trade and exports                                                 9.1%              9.8%                   7.7%
Food security                                                     1.0%              4.9%                   5.1%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          112
The World Bank Group                                     Uganda                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                        Kampala City       Central Uganda        Other Areas
Energy                                                         39.7%               29.5%               32.5%
Gender equity                                                  4.3%                 0.0%                5.0%
Equality of opportunity                                        3.3%                 3.3%                0.0%
Social protection*                                             0.5%                 4.9%                2.5%
Global/regional integration                                    4.8%                 8.2%                7.5%
Climate change                                                 0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                16.3%               23.0%               15.0%
Disaster management                                            0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%
Rural development                                              15.8%               16.4%               12.5%
Foreign direct investment                                      11.0%               11.5%                2.5%
Urban development                                              0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%
Water and sanitation                                           5.3%                 3.3%                5.0%
Education                                                      32.5%               26.2%               45.0%
Information and communications technology                      6.7%                 4.9%                2.5%
Regulatory framework                                           6.7%                13.1%                5.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                         0.0%                 0.0%                0.0%
Trade and exports*                                             16.3%               34.4%               25.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                11.0%                4.9%                5.0%
Domestic private sector development                            8.1%                 6.6%                7.5%
Job creation/employment                                        22.0%               23.0%               27.5%
Agricultural development                                       45.9%               50.8%               40.0%
Food security*                                                 8.1%                 1.6%               27.5%
Transport                                                      18.7%               14.8%                7.5%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                  4.3%              1.6%                 15.0%
gas sector*
Environmental sustainability                                      1.4%              0.0%                  0.0%
Health                                                            8.1%              9.8%                  5.0%
Law and justice                                                   0.0%              0.0%                  0.0%
Crime and violence                                                0.0%              0.0%                  0.0%
Financial markets                                                 6.7%              6.6%                  0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                          113
The World Bank Group                                                  Uganda                                               Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Kampala City              Central Uganda              Other Areas
Better employment opportunities for young people                             41.6%                      28.1%                     31.7%
Better employment opportunities for women                                    14.7%                      14.0%                      9.8%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                 18.4%                      10.5%                     14.6%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                               13.7%                      22.8%                    24.4%
greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                            3.7%                       3.5%                        0.0%
Greater access to social services for citizens across
                                                                               14.7%                      14.0%                    24.4%
Uganda
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small
                                                                               21.1%                      26.3%                       7.3%
and medium sized businesses)
A growing middle class                                                         4.2%                       7.0%                     4.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                        8.4%                       3.5%                     4.9%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                        1.1%                       1.8%                     0.0%
Consistent economic growth*                                                    18.4%                      33.3%                    39.0%
More reliable social safety net                                                1.6%                       1.8%                     0.0%
Greater equity of fiscal policy                                                1.6%                       0.0%                     0.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                      24.2%                      19.3%                    31.7%
Better quality public services                                                 10.5%                      5.3%                     4.9%
Other                                                                          1.6%                       3.5%                     0.0%
*Significantly different between locations



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                    Kampala City          Central Uganda             Other Areas
                                                                                   N Mean SD              N Mean SD              N      Mean SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Uganda?*            204       6.45   2.85   59      5.61   2.50    38     7.13   2.17
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between locations


                                                                                    Kampala City          Central Uganda             Other Areas
                                                                                   N Mean SD              N Mean SD              N      Mean SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                  182       6.12   2.44   53      5.94   1.79    38     6.13   2.21
effectiveness in Uganda.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


                                                                                    Kampala City          Central Uganda             Other Areas
                                                                                   N Mean SD              N Mean SD              N      Mean SD
To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared
                                                                                  189       6.91   2.09   55      6.58   1.72    38     6.42   2.34
to help Uganda solve its most complicated development challenges?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




                                                                        114
The World Bank Group                                       Uganda                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Uganda, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Kampala City        Central Uganda          Other Areas
Social protection                                                0.5%                  0.0%                  0.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                  12.4%                16.4%                  2.4%
Transport                                                        21.5%                13.1%                  9.8%
Poverty reduction                                                38.8%                31.1%                 43.9%
Global/regional integration                                      2.4%                  3.3%                  2.4%
Gender equity                                                    6.2%                  9.8%                  9.8%
Crime and violence                                               2.4%                  1.6%                  0.0%
Domestic private sector development                              2.9%                  3.3%                  2.4%
Rural development                                                16.3%                14.8%                 14.6%
Foreign direct investment                                        4.3%                  9.8%                  2.4%
Water and sanitation                                             1.4%                  0.0%                  0.0%
Energy                                                           29.2%                21.3%                 22.0%
Job creation/employment                                          14.4%                14.8%                  4.9%
Financial markets                                                4.8%                  3.3%                  0.0%
Urban development                                                5.3%                  1.6%                  9.8%
Environmental sustainability                                     0.5%                  0.0%                  0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                          2.9%                  3.3%                  0.0%
Health                                                           22.5%                16.4%                 34.1%
Education                                                        40.7%                29.5%                 48.8%
Food security                                                    1.0%                  0.0%                  4.9%
Climate change                                                   4.8%                  0.0%                  4.9%
Agricultural development                                         22.0%                36.1%                 31.7%
Trade and exports                                                9.6%                 16.4%                  7.3%
Economic growth                                                  5.3%                  6.6%                  0.0%
Law and justice                                                  0.5%                  0.0%                  0.0%
Regulatory framework                                             8.1%                 14.8%                 12.2%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                           0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                    4.8%                1.6%                  14.6%
gas sector*
Anti-corruption                                                     12.9%              21.3%                  14.6%
Information and communications technology*                          1.0%               6.6%                   0.0%
Disaster management                                                 0.0%               0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            115
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Uganda?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                  Kampala City          Central Uganda           Other Areas
Convening/Facilitating                                                        0.0%                    0.0%                   0.0%
Data                                                                          2.6%                    0.0%                   5.7%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                              12.0%                  12.7%                   8.6%
Financial resources*                                                          29.7%                  49.1%                  34.3%
Capacity development                                                          39.1%                  25.5%                  42.9%
Technical assistance                                                          9.9%                    9.1%                   5.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    1.0%                    0.0%                   2.9%
Donor coordination                                                            4.2%                    3.6%                   0.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 1.6%                    0.0%                   0.0%
Other                                                                         0.0%                    0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                  Kampala City          Central Uganda           Other Areas
Convening/Facilitating*                                                       13.5%                  14.5%                  31.4%
Data                                                                          1.6%                    3.6%                   0.0%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                              10.9%                   3.6%                   5.7%
Financial resources                                                           19.8%                  10.9%                   5.7%
Capacity development*                                                         8.9%                   25.5%                   2.9%
Technical assistance                                                          12.5%                   9.1%                  17.1%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    10.9%                   3.6%                  11.4%
Donor coordination                                                            7.3%                   14.5%                   8.6%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 14.6%                  14.5%                  17.1%
Other                                                                         0.0%                    0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Uganda’s efforts to achieve development results?
                                                                                     Kampala City      Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                                    N Mean SD          N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Convening/Facilitating                                                             165   5.47   2.77   48   5.85   2.48    30     5.60   3.07
Data                                                                               159   6.80   2.32   46   6.30   2.04    31     6.81   2.50
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                   174   7.12   2.31   46   7.11   2.32    33     7.12   2.51
Financial resources                                                                189   7.36   2.41   49   7.22   2.44    36     7.00   2.54
Technical assistance                                                               151   6.53   2.55   43   6.00   2.39    27     5.74   2.73
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                         144   6.10   2.24   45   6.11   2.29    27     5.33   2.54
Donor coordination                                                                 165   6.65   2.54   50   6.42   2.67    34     5.82   2.77
Linkage to non-Bank expertise*                                                     124   5.75   1.90   39   6.10   2.25    25     4.80   2.22
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between locations




                                                                         116
The World Bank Group                                                 Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Uganda. To what degree would Uganda
benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
                                                                                Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                               N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                               190   7.41   2.75   58   7.48   2.52    35     8.09   2.71
more effectively engage and participate in development efforts
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development
                                                                               182   7.66   1.86   55   7.55   1.88    31     7.29   1.83
projects on the ground
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                               185   6.84   2.24   56   6.75   2.25    36     6.89   1.98
sociopolitical conditions)
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                182   6.49   2.84   58   6.78   2.80    34     6.79   2.46
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Uganda?
                                                                                Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                               N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                 163   6.69   2.50   45   7.31   2.04    36     6.19   2.65
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)           158   5.27   2.33   49   6.00   2.10    36     5.06   2.56
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                               147   6.71   1.95   43   6.91   2.02    34     6.76   2.19
goals)
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Uganda to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
                                                                                Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                               N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                 171   7.94   2.19   49   7.78   2.24    36     8.25   1.93
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)           158   7.34   2.44   52   8.00   2.08    34     7.24   2.63
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                               165   7.81   2.21   47   8.13   1.84    36     7.44   2.22
goals)
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




                                                                         117
The World Bank Group                                            Uganda                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Uganda? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Kampala City   Central Uganda       Other Areas
Staff too inaccessible*                                               10.9%           23.3%               4.9%
Not exploring alternative policy options                              11.9%           20.0%              14.6%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                         12.4%        8.3%                  7.3%
Uganda
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                 17.4%        18.3%                22.0%
Arrogant in its approach                                                 10.9%        5.0%                 14.6%
Not aligned with country priorities                                      3.0%         8.3%                 4.9%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                    3.5%         1.7%                 0.0%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex                                 7.0%         5.0%                 9.8%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts
                                                                         5.5%         5.0%                  0.0%
in the country
Too influenced by developed countries                                    27.9%        35.0%                34.1%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                         0.5%         0.0%                  0.0%
realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow                                    10.9%        3.3%                  9.8%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                         15.4%        11.7%                17.1%
procedures
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                      5.0%         10.0%                7.3%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors*                          11.9%        8.3%                 31.7%
Not client focused                                                       0.5%         0.0%                 0.0%
Other                                                                    7.5%         1.7%                 4.9%
Don't know                                                               10.4%        11.7%                2.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Uganda? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                               Kampala City   Central Uganda       Other Areas
Capacity development                                                  42.4%           44.3%              48.8%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government               25.9%           19.7%              22.0%
Knowledge products/services                                           8.3%            16.4%               7.3%
Investment lending                                                    62.4%           49.2%              70.7%
Technical assistance                                                  18.5%           18.0%               7.3%
Trust Fund management                                                 12.7%           19.7%              12.2%
Other                                                                 1.0%             0.0%               4.9%
Don't know                                                            4.4%             4.9%               2.4%




                                                                 118
The World Bank Group                                              Uganda                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                   Kampala City         Central Uganda           Other Areas
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                  31.7%                 26.2%                  34.1%
Donor Community                                                           10.1%                 14.8%                  12.2%
Media                                                                     16.8%                 18.0%                  17.1%
NGOs                                                                      18.8%                 23.0%                  26.8%
Local Government                                                          16.8%                  9.8%                  22.0%
Private Sector                                                            36.1%                 31.1%                  34.1%
Parliament                                                                6.3%                   6.6%                   0.0%
Beneficiaries                                                             18.3%                 29.5%                  12.2%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                      24.5%                 23.0%                  26.8%
Foundations                                                               1.4%                   3.3%                   4.9%
Faith-Based Organizations                                                 15.4%                  6.6%                   4.9%
Other                                                                     0.5%                   0.0%                   0.0%
Don't know                                                                1.4%                   3.3%                   2.4%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Uganda?
                                                                               Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                              N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                              188   6.04   2.91   55   6.13   2.24    39     6.05   3.01
in Uganda
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                              177   5.85   2.45   49   5.98   2.08    36     5.81   2.35
development priorities for Uganda
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                              179   6.16   2.49   50   6.52   1.99    36     6.44   2.46
for Uganda
 The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Uganda with
                                                                              176   6.22   2.82   49   6.37   2.40    39     6.33   2.77
 respect
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                   119
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda                                          Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Uganda, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                                 Kampala City      Central Uganda             Other Areas
                                                                                N Mean SD          N Mean SD              N      Mean SD
Responsiveness                                                                 144   5.54   2.43   39      6.28   1.76    33     5.33   2.18
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)         165   5.11   2.06   48      5.90   1.84    36     5.14   2.15
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)                       164   4.82   2.60   41      5.56   2.62    35     4.91   2.93
Being inclusive                                                                164   5.87   2.47   47      6.17   2.27    36     5.72   2.50
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                  175   5.84   2.80   48      6.29   2.54    35     6.17   2.75
Staff accessibility                                                            171   5.04   2.58   50      5.20   2.58    35     5.34   2.51
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                166   5.92   2.55   45      6.33   2.17    35     5.54   2.20
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                               173   5.54   2.63   51      5.47   2.91    36     5.06   2.68
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                            151   5.65   2.29   44      6.16   1.92    34     5.00   2.73
Collaboration with the Government                                              171   7.91   1.93   44      7.70   2.08    35     7.89   1.49
Collaboration with other donors                                                156   7.76   1.99   46      7.33   1.92    34     7.35   2.13
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground                   171   5.32   2.55   51      5.84   2.38    37     6.11   2.87
Being a long-term partner                                                      172   8.24   1.90   53      8.06   1.94    32     8.22   1.77
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To be a more effective development partner in Uganda, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?

Percentage of Respondents                                                Kampala City        Central Uganda              Other Areas
More local presence                                                         70.5%                71.4%                     82.4%
The current level of local presence is adequate                             17.5%                25.0%                     17.6%
Less local presence                                                         7.1%                  1.8%                        -
Don't know                                                                  4.9%                  1.8%                        -

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                     Kampala City        Central Uganda              Other Areas
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                             11.9%                 15.3%                    10.0%
through/follow-up
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                             38.1%                 30.5%                    42.5%
participation
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                             26.2%                 27.1%                    25.0%
political/social realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                          7.9%                  8.5%                     0.0%
High levels of corruption in the country                                     46.0%                 52.5%                    42.5%
Poor donor coordination                                                      4.5%                  5.1%                     5.0%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                        4.5%                  0.0%                     5.0%
The Government works inefficiently                                           15.8%                 23.7%                    7.5%
Political pressures and obstacles                                            12.4%                 15.3%                    10.0%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                             26.7%                 13.6%                    47.5%
challenges*
Other                                                                        1.0%                  0.0%                        5.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                     120
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Uganda? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                              Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                             N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                              191   8.21   2.18   56   8.66   1.86    35     8.34   1.55
Information and communications technology                                    174   7.02   2.49   49   7.59   1.98    33     7.64   1.98
Transport*                                                                   179   8.59   1.58   55   7.96   1.61    35     8.49   1.42
Crime and violence                                                           176   5.57   2.17   50   5.86   2.35    32     5.59   1.66
Law and justice                                                              192   7.30   2.15   57   7.72   2.19    34     7.12   2.03
Urban development                                                            178   7.84   1.96   55   7.40   2.23    35     8.43   1.50
Environmental sustainability                                                 191   7.81   1.97   54   7.91   2.20    34     7.94   1.50
Regulatory framework*                                                        175   6.52   2.44   49   7.31   2.27    33     7.30   2.10
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       169   7.16   2.42   44   7.25   2.40    31     7.68   1.97
Poverty reduction                                                            188   8.38   1.97   58   8.19   2.02    36     8.61   1.64
Gender equity                                                                183   6.48   2.41   52   6.79   2.36    34     6.79   2.58
Domestic private sector development                                          177   6.64   2.45   48   7.21   2.20    32     7.13   2.15
Foreign direct investment                                                    185   8.19   1.64   52   7.94   1.92    33     8.03   1.67
Water and sanitation                                                         186   7.85   1.85   54   7.59   1.88    35     7.97   2.01
Trade and exports                                                            181   7.21   2.57   53   7.51   2.36    35     7.40   2.40
Economic growth                                                              191   8.50   1.57   57   8.35   1.71    35     8.63   1.42
Energy*                                                                      178   8.65   1.46   55   7.98   1.84    33     8.39   1.35
Disaster management                                                          190   7.11   2.18   56   7.20   1.93    35     7.57   1.80
Public sector governance/reform                                              186   8.10   1.92   54   8.44   1.84    33     7.97   1.53
Job creation/employment                                                      190   8.01   1.91   57   8.02   1.89    35     8.14   1.63
Financial markets                                                            178   6.88   2.64   54   7.28   2.21    35     7.49   2.11
Equality of opportunity                                                      175   6.41   2.50   53   6.40   2.36    35     7.14   2.03
Health*                                                                      185   8.16   1.90   56   7.52   2.30    35     8.49   1.67
Rural development                                                            191   7.96   1.65   56   7.96   1.93    35     8.20   1.51
Global/regional integration                                                  182   6.93   2.06   53   6.87   1.94    35     7.11   1.45
Food security                                                                171   7.70   1.75   54   7.50   2.00    36     8.03   1.21
Education                                                                    186   8.29   1.84   55   8.35   1.77    35     8.66   1.26
Social protection*                                                           173   6.29   2.53   53   6.53   2.02    33     7.42   2.05
Climate change                                                               184   7.08   2.18   52   6.77   2.33    35     7.54   1.72
Agricultural development                                                     187   8.45   1.85   56   8.36   1.91    36     8.72   1.09
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector            186   8.03   2.07   53   8.08   2.07    35     8.66   1.16
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                     121
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Uganda? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                              Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                             N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                              146   5.04   2.47   45   5.42   2.28    31     5.74   2.72
Information and communications technology                                    145   5.59   2.29   39   6.33   1.72    30     5.43   2.33
Transport                                                                    160   7.58   1.80   44   7.55   1.39    31     7.35   1.87
Crime and violence                                                           123   4.22   1.98   36   4.89   2.12    26     4.65   2.23
Law and justice                                                              127   5.34   1.85   44   5.75   1.71    27     5.78   1.97
Urban development                                                            150   6.41   2.11   43   6.70   1.75    31     6.65   2.09
Environmental sustainability                                                 140   6.53   2.22   43   6.09   2.14    28     6.75   2.12
Regulatory framework                                                         133   7.10   2.13   40   6.48   1.95    27     7.11   2.19
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       138   6.33   2.25   40   6.18   2.33    28     6.21   2.53
Poverty reduction                                                            165   6.41   2.53   47   6.96   1.96    30     6.50   2.50
Gender equity                                                                142   5.45   2.05   41   5.73   2.03    30     5.80   2.12
Domestic private sector development                                          147   5.47   1.93   42   6.07   1.72    27     5.30   2.00
Foreign direct investment                                                    158   6.85   2.20   43   7.63   1.13    30     6.63   2.14
Water and sanitation                                                         158   6.94   2.05   44   6.45   1.95    31     6.42   2.38
Trade and exports                                                            141   6.40   1.87   44   6.48   1.92    29     6.31   2.07
Economic growth                                                              154   7.81   1.83   42   7.67   1.43    31     7.87   1.63
Energy                                                                       151   7.54   1.70   41   7.51   1.47    31     7.45   1.43
Disaster management                                                          120   5.43   2.29   36   5.89   2.32    29     5.72   2.15
Public sector governance/reform                                              159   6.23   2.49   44   7.07   1.95    31     6.35   2.33
Job creation/employment                                                      161   5.50   2.59   47   6.13   2.33    31     5.52   2.54
Financial markets                                                            131   5.91   2.17   39   6.54   1.82    25     5.96   2.01
Equality of opportunity                                                      126   5.15   2.02   40   5.60   1.53    29     5.14   2.15
Health                                                                       173   7.06   1.96   49   6.76   2.05    35     6.46   2.11
Rural development                                                            151   6.03   1.91   45   5.84   2.09    29     5.97   2.20
Global/regional integration                                                  122   6.16   1.52   37   6.38   1.48    27     6.07   2.02
Food security                                                                154   6.20   2.24   44   5.98   2.13    31     6.03   2.20
Education                                                                    170   7.35   1.72   47   7.53   1.57    36     7.25   1.83
Social protection                                                            135   5.79   2.28   40   5.38   2.03    31     5.87   2.31
Climate change                                                               147   5.97   2.25   43   5.30   1.81    31     5.61   2.25
Agricultural development                                                     170   6.42   2.08   47   5.94   1.95    31     6.42   2.25
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector            143   5.37   2.23   40   5.85   2.12    31     5.77   1.94
*Significantly different between locations

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                              Kampala City        Central Uganda           Other Areas
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                  24.0%                29.3%                  28.9%
In the country                                                            16.7%                25.9%                  13.2%
Don't know                                                                59.4%                44.8%                  57.9%




                                                                     122
The World Bank Group                                                  Uganda                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

                                                                                    Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                                   N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                  185    5.78   2.51   53   6.34   1.62    36     5.50   2.51
development results in Uganda?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Uganda?
                                                                                    Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                                   N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Uganda             179    5.97   2.51   54   5.67   1.89    36     6.19   2.56
The World Bank Group meets Uganda’s needs for knowledge services                  169    5.70   2.70   53   5.81   2.64    34     5.85   2.87
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)


                                                                                    Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                                   N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation
 mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving results in             145    6.10   2.47   47   5.91   2.18    32     5.69   2.10
 Uganda?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)



D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Kampala City            Central Uganda          Other Areas
Weekly                                                                        .5%                        -                     -
Monthly                                                                      16.6%                    11.5%                 10.0%
A few times a year                                                           38.5%                    45.9%                 45.0%
Rarely                                                                       25.4%                    21.3%                 20.0%
Never                                                                        19.0%                    21.3%                 25.0%

In Uganda, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                                    Kampala City       Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                                   N Mean SD           N Mean SD           N      Mean SD
Are timely                                                                        172    5.84   2.34   50   6.02   1.82    36     6.17   2.44
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*          146    6.48   2.26   44   5.32   1.71    33     6.09   2.42
Are relevant to Uganda’s development priorities                                   174    7.03   2.56   49   6.94   2.34    34     6.59   2.54
Lead to practical solutions                                                       162    5.54   2.64   49   5.39   2.18    34     5.29   2.85
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                              168    6.07   2.91   47   6.30   2.69    36     6.56   2.76
Are source of relevant information on global good practices*                      170    7.65   2.30   47   7.36   2.19    36     6.58   2.75
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                                              169    6.51   2.84   47   6.60   2.69    36     6.31   2.81
Are adequately disseminated                                                       153    4.92   2.88   50   5.70   2.94    32     5.13   2.72
Are translated enough into local language*                                        154    3.27   2.06   43   4.12   2.14    36     3.94   2.55
Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                  174    5.20   2.60   48   5.50   2.06    36     5.11   2.44
circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between locations



                                                                       123
The World Bank Group                                                    Uganda                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

                                                                                      Kampala City          Central Uganda            Other Areas
                                                                                     N Mean SD              N Mean SD             N      Mean SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
Group's knowledge work and activities make to development results in your           184    6.11    2.44     52     6.00   1.85    36     5.86   2.18
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                    182    7.77    1.94     50     7.24   2.01    36     7.69   1.82
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Uganda’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
                                                                                      Kampala City          Central Uganda            Other Areas
                                                                                     N Mean SD              N Mean SD             N      Mean SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                           162    5.98    2.65     47     6.00   1.93    36     5.64   2.47
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)                                      173    6.86    2.10     49     6.47   1.89    36     6.14   2.03
Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making appropriate
                                                                                    179    5.83    2.33     50     6.00   1.81    39     5.67   2.06
adjustments)
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                                       180    5.64    2.63     51     6.31   2.04    36     5.25   2.40

To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                                      Kampala City          Central Uganda            Other Areas
                                                                                     N Mean SD              N Mean SD             N      Mean SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                       150    5.99    2.76     41     6.22   2.37    37     6.11   2.44
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                    175    6.39    2.68     48     6.46   1.99    36     5.81   2.44
programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion           164    6.34    2.54     48     6.33   2.36    36     6.86   2.32
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable               137    7.18    2.13     40     7.05   1.65    34     7.00   2.30
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                     167    5.40    2.68     45     6.18   1.84    36     5.17   2.75
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Uganda                              170    4.86    2.52     49     5.65   2.11    36     5.22   2.50
Working with the World Bank Group increases Uganda’s institutional
                                                                                    165    6.28    2.77     47     6.91   1.69    34     5.94   2.45
capacity
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                    147    5.88    2.46     45     6.44   1.90    34     6.24   2.20
changes
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                    148    7.13    2.25     41     7.22   1.85    38     6.82   2.28
appropriate use of them
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support                      177    6.25    2.44     52     6.23   2.11    36     5.89   2.27


Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                                   Kampala City             Central Uganda              Other Areas
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Uganda                             1.0%                         -                       2.5%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in
                                                                                 17.3%                     27.6%                    22.5%
Uganda
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is appropriate                           21.8%                     22.4%                    30.0%
Don't know                                                                       54.5%                     39.7%                    42.5%
Prefer not to answer                                                             5.4%                      10.3%                    2.5%



                                                                         124
The World Bank Group                                           Uganda                                Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Uganda?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                              Kampala City    Central Uganda         Other Areas
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures
                                                                        12.7%          6.6%                   7.3%
on Uganda’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                    11.2%          8.2%                  22.0%
Offer more innovative financial products                                18.0%          21.3%                 14.6%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                        20.5%          14.8%                 24.4%
markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government                          35.6%          44.3%                 43.9%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Uganda’s
                                                                        11.2%          23.0%                 12.2%
specific challenges
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                10.2%          11.5%                 0.0%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work*                                 11.2%          1.6%                  17.1%
Increase the level of capacity development in the
                                                                        22.0%          31.1%                  2.4%
country*
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                        28.3%          16.4%                 31.7%
financing
Work faster                                                             6.8%           1.6%                   4.9%
Other                                                                   2.0%           4.9%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Uganda, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                         Kampala City    Central Uganda         Other Areas
Financial services                                                   29.4%            31.7%                30.8%
Knowledge products                                                   14.9%            30.0%                12.8%
Convening services                                                   22.9%            15.0%                25.6%
None of the above                                                    7.0%              1.7%                 5.1%
The combination is appropriate for Uganda                            20.9%            18.3%                25.6%

Please identify two areas related to sustainable development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda, where greater support
from the World Bank Group would be most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                              Kampala City    Central Uganda         Other Areas
Support in mitigation of macro-economic risks*                       26.4%            16.9%                40.0%
Support efforts to ensure participation of civil society and
                                                                        23.6%          20.3%                 37.5%
citizens
Technical aspects related to the sector                                 13.5%          18.6%                 10.0%
Support in monitoring of operations                                     23.1%          25.4%                 25.0%
Advisory role in contract negotiations                                  16.3%          16.9%                 7.5%
Support in management of foreign exchange and
                                                                        13.0%          3.4%                  15.0%
revenues
Support in governance, anti-corruption, access to
information and transparency related to overall                         43.8%          49.2%                 30.0%
management of oil and gas resources
Support in improving quality of public expenditures                     14.4%          25.4%                 12.5%
Other                                                                   0.0%           0.0%                  0.0%
Don’t know                                                              6.3%           8.5%                  0.0%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                125
The World Bank Group                                      Uganda                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda (continued)

Would you like to see more, less, or just about the same level of World Bank Group involvement in the sustainable
development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                     Kampala City        Central Uganda         Other Areas
More                                                             61.5%                66.0%                67.5%
Just about the same                                              29.7%                28.3%                27.5%
Less                                                             1.5%                    -                    -
Don't know                                                       7.2%                  5.7%                 5.0%



G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Uganda?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Kampala City        Central Uganda         Other Areas
Local newspapers                                                 58.9%                50.0%                65.9%
International newspapers                                         5.0%                  0.0%                 7.3%
Local radio                                                      20.8%                26.7%                36.6%
International radio*                                             0.0%                  0.0%                 7.3%
Local television                                                 36.6%                41.7%                31.7%
International television                                         5.0%                  8.3%                 0.0%
Periodicals                                                      7.4%                  1.7%                 2.4%
Internet                                                         41.1%                41.7%                24.4%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)          5.9%                 11.7%                 4.9%
Blogs*                                                           0.0%                  0.0%                 7.3%
Mobile phones*                                                   1.5%                  6.7%                 0.0%
Instant messaging                                                0.5%                  0.0%                 0.0%
Other                                                            2.5%                  0.0%                 0.0%
*Significantly different between locations

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                          Kampala City        Central Uganda         Other Areas
Blogs*                                                           5.9%                  3.3%                19.5%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                             6.3%                  6.6%                17.1%
e-Newsletters                                                    34.6%                31.1%                17.1%
Instant messaging*                                               7.8%                 21.3%                 2.4%
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences                27.3%                19.7%                22.0%
World Bank Group's publications and other written
                                                                   34.1%               26.2%                 12.2%
materials*
Mobile phones*                                                     18.0%               32.8%                 48.8%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)            27.8%               21.3%                 31.7%
World Bank Group's website                                         17.6%               18.0%                 9.8%
Other                                                              1.5%                3.3%                  2.4%
*Significantly different between locations

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?*

Percentage of Respondents                                     Kampala City        Central Uganda         Other Areas
Yes                                                              29.1%                49.1%                52.8%
No                                                               70.9%                50.9%                47.2%
*Significantly different between locations




                                                            126
The World Bank Group                                                 Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                               Kampala City          Central Uganda          Other Areas
Yes                                                                        29.0%                  50.0%                 20.0%
No                                                                         71.0%                  50.0%                 80.0%
*Significantly different between locations

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                               Kampala City          Central Uganda          Other Areas
Yes                                                                        89.8%                  93.5%                 77.8%
No                                                                         10.2%                   6.5%                 22.2%

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                               Kampala City          Central Uganda          Other Areas
Yes                                                                        93.5%                  96.7%                 86.1%
No                                                                         6.5%                    3.3%                 13.9%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                               Kampala City          Central Uganda          Other Areas
Yes                                                                        74.5%                  74.1%                 67.6%
No                                                                         25.5%                  25.9%                 32.4%

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                               Kampala City          Central Uganda          Other Areas
The World Bank Group’s country website                                     37.2%                  39.2%                 51.4%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                        62.8%                  60.8%                 48.6%

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                               Kampala City          Central Uganda          Other Areas
High speed                                                                 70.2%                  86.0%                 70.0%
Dial-up                                                                    29.8%                  14.0%                 30.0%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                               Kampala City        Central Uganda          Other Areas
                                                                              N     Mean   SD      N    Mean   SD      N     Mean     SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few years
                                                                              185   5.87   2.83    52   5.27   2.72    31     5.29   2.57
ago.
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.*                     170   7.16   2.27    48   6.10   2.03    33     5.33   1.88
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.*            159   7.40   2.12    47   6.89   2.32    32     5.38   2.45
The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                              160   6.54   3.25    53   7.04   2.86    36     6.97   2.37
information about the institution.
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it.      185   6.99   2.95    53   6.17   2.74    35     5.97   2.96
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                              168   6.34   3.29    47   6.17   2.90    39     6.44   3.18
inquiries.
*Significantly different between locations




                                                                      127
The World Bank Group                                      Uganda                                    Country Opinion Survey 2014




H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Uganda? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                         Kampala City        Central Uganda         Other Areas
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)*                                      45.2%                38.6%                17.9%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)                     6.4%                  7.0%                 7.7%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)             2.1%                  0.0%                 2.6%
None*                                                           52.7%                57.9%                76.9%
*Significantly different between locations

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                         Kampala City        Central Uganda         Other Areas
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                                   44.1%              58.8%                   55.0%
conversations, etc.)
Use World Bank Group reports/data                                  30.6%              27.5%                   22.5%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                   13.4%              5.9%                    5.0%
events/activities
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                     32.8%              17.6%                   17.5%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data,
                                                                   23.1%              25.5%                   27.5%
research, etc.
*Significantly different between locations




                                                           128
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix D: Responses to All Questions across Collaborators
Collaborators N=121              Non-Collaborators N=186

A. General Issues Facing Uganda

In general, how would you say that Uganda is headed in...?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The right direction                                                           50.4%            43.4%
The wrong direction                                                           31.1%            25.3%
Not sure                                                                      18.5%            31.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Uganda. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Uganda. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                              6.8%             4.5%
Transport                                                                     11.9%            12.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                               12.7%            14.0%
Global/regional integration                                                    0.0%             0.0%
Gender equity                                                                  2.5%             5.6%
Domestic private sector development                                            2.5%             0.6%
Foreign direct investment                                                      4.2%             7.3%
Water and sanitation                                                           8.5%            11.2%
Anti-corruption                                                               30.5%            32.4%
Job creation/employment                                                       21.2%            19.6%
Rural development                                                              7.6%             7.8%
Financial markets*                                                             0.0%             3.4%
Urban development*                                                             0.0%             3.4%
Environmental sustainability                                                   0.0%             1.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                        0.0%             2.2%
Health                                                                        22.0%            26.3%
Education                                                                     34.7%            34.6%
Poverty reduction*                                                            33.1%            19.6%
Energy                                                                        25.4%            22.9%
Food security                                                                  4.2%             2.2%
Climate change                                                                 0.0%             0.0%
Agricultural development                                                      16.1%            10.6%
Trade and exports                                                              7.6%             6.1%
Crime and violence                                                             1.7%             1.1%
Economic growth                                                               29.7%            33.0%
Law and justice                                                                0.0%             1.1%
Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%             0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         0.0%             0.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                                13.6%           8.4%
gas sector
Disaster management                                                             0.0%            0.0%
Information and communications technology                                       3.4%            8.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        129
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Water and sanitation                                                           4.2%             3.2%
Equality of opportunity                                                        7.5%             6.5%
Economic growth*                                                              32.5%            16.8%
Climate change                                                                 0.0%             1.1%
Global/regional integration                                                    0.8%             0.0%
Gender equity                                                                  7.5%            11.4%
Rural development                                                             34.2%            25.4%
Urban development                                                              4.2%             3.8%
Regulatory framework                                                           0.0%             0.0%
Social protection                                                              0.0%             2.2%
Law and justice                                                                0.8%             1.6%
Transport*                                                                    25.8%            10.8%
Crime and violence                                                             0.0%             0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         0.8%             3.2%
Information and communications technology*                                     0.0%             5.9%
Anti-corruption                                                               23.3%            25.9%
Domestic private sector development*                                          15.0%             4.9%
Foreign direct investment*                                                     0.0%             3.8%
Education                                                                     30.0%            30.8%
Energy                                                                        10.8%            13.5%
Public sector governance/reform                                                8.3%            10.8%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                                5.0%            5.9%
gas sector
Environmental sustainability                                                    4.2%           5.9%
Disaster management                                                             0.8%           0.5%
Health                                                                          18.3%          22.7%
Agricultural development                                                        33.3%          39.5%
Job creation/employment                                                         24.2%          24.3%
Financial markets*                                                              0.0%           4.3%
Trade and exports                                                               8.3%           9.7%
Food security*                                                                  0.0%           3.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        130
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Energy*                                                                       47.1%            30.3%
Gender equity                                                                  3.3%             3.8%
Equality of opportunity                                                        0.8%             3.2%
Social protection                                                              0.0%             2.7%
Global/regional integration                                                    5.8%             6.5%
Climate change                                                                 0.0%             0.0%
Anti-corruption                                                               19.8%            15.7%
Disaster management                                                            0.0%             0.0%
Rural development                                                             15.7%            15.7%
Foreign direct investment                                                      9.1%            11.4%
Urban development                                                              0.0%             0.0%
Water and sanitation                                                           2.5%             7.0%
Education*                                                                    43.8%            27.6%
Information and communications technology                                      4.1%             7.0%
Regulatory framework                                                           7.4%             8.1%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         0.0%             0.0%
Trade and exports*                                                            14.9%            24.9%
Public sector governance/reform                                               10.7%             9.2%
Domestic private sector development                                            5.8%             7.0%
Job creation/employment                                                       21.5%            24.3%
Agricultural development                                                      46.3%            43.8%
Food security                                                                  5.8%            11.9%
Transport                                                                     19.8%            14.6%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                                5.8%            3.2%
gas sector
Environmental sustainability                                                    0.8%            1.1%
Health                                                                          5.8%            8.1%
Law and justice                                                                 0.0%            0.0%
Crime and violence                                                              0.0%            0.0%
Financial markets*                                                              2.5%            9.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        131
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

When thinking about the idea of 'shared prosperity' in your country, which of the following TWO best illustrate how this
would be achieved in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators           Non-Collaborators
Better employment opportunities for young people                              33.9%                    37.4%
Better employment opportunities for women                                     15.7%                    11.7%
Greater access to micro-finance for the poor                                  20.0%                    13.5%
Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure
                                                                                14.8%                     20.5%
greater accountability
Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens                             3.5%                      2.9%
Greater access to social services for citizens across
                                                                                14.8%                     18.1%
Uganda
Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small
                                                                                22.6%                     17.5%
and medium sized businesses)
A growing middle class                                                          3.5%                      5.8%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas                         7.0%                      7.0%
Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas                         0.9%                      1.8%
Consistent economic growth                                                      28.7%                     21.6%
More reliable social safety net                                                 2.6%                      0.6%
Greater equity of fiscal policy*                                                2.6%                      0.0%
Education and training that better ensure job opportunity                       20.0%                     27.5%
Better quality public services                                                  7.8%                      8.8%
Other                                                                           1.7%                      2.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                 N   Mean     SD      N     Mean    SD

How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Uganda?*             117     7.03    2.52    180    6.11   2.75

(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N      Mean     SD      N     Mean   SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                                   113     6.42    2.34    156    6.02   2.17
 effectiveness in Uganda.
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                              N      Mean     SD      N     Mean   SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group's staff is well prepared
                                                                                     113 7.11 2.11 164 6.52 2.04
 to help Uganda solve its most complicated development challenges?*
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        132
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Uganda, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services) in
Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Social protection                                                              0.0%             0.5%
Public sector governance/reform                                               11.6%            13.4%
Transport*                                                                    23.1%            14.0%
Poverty reduction                                                             39.7%            37.6%
Global/regional integration                                                    4.1%             1.6%
Gender equity                                                                  4.1%             9.7%
Crime and violence                                                             0.8%             3.2%
Domestic private sector development                                            5.0%             1.6%
Rural development                                                             14.9%            14.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                      5.8%             4.8%
Water and sanitation                                                           0.8%             1.1%
Energy*                                                                       34.7%            19.9%
Job creation/employment                                                        8.3%            15.1%
Financial markets*                                                             0.8%             5.9%
Urban development*                                                             0.8%             8.1%
Environmental sustainability                                                   0.8%             0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                        0.0%             2.7%
Health                                                                        24.8%            23.1%
Education*                                                                    46.3%            34.9%
Food security                                                                  0.0%             2.2%
Climate change                                                                 5.8%             3.2%
Agricultural development                                                      21.5%            28.5%
Trade and exports                                                             11.6%            10.2%
Economic growth                                                                2.5%             6.5%
Law and justice                                                                0.0%             0.5%
Regulatory framework                                                           8.3%            11.3%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                         0.0%             0.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and
                                                                                6.6%            4.8%
gas sector
Anti-corruption                                                                 11.6%          18.3%
Information and communications technology                                       2.5%           1.6%
Disaster management                                                             0.0%           0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        133
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                              Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest VALUE and which activity is of
  second greatest value in Uganda?
Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators         Non-Collaborators
Convening/Facilitating                                                         0.0%                   0.0%
Data                                                                           0.9%                   3.6%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                              13.9%                  10.7%
Financial resources                                                           28.7%                  35.7%
Capacity development                                                          33.3%                  39.9%
Technical assistance*                                                         17.6%                   4.2%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                     0.9%                   1.2%
Donor coordination                                                             4.6%                   3.0%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                  0.0%                   1.8%
Other                                                                          0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

 nd
2 Greatest Value
Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators         Non-Collaborators
Convening/Facilitating                                                        13.0%                  18.5%
Data                                                                           0.9%                   2.4%
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                               9.3%                   9.5%
Financial resources*                                                          23.1%                  11.3%
Capacity development                                                           7.4%                  11.9%
Technical assistance                                                           9.3%                  13.7%
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                    12.0%                   8.9%
Donor coordination                                                             6.5%                  10.7%
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                 18.5%                  13.1%
Other                                                                          0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How effectively do the World Bank Groups’ activities below support Uganda’s efforts to achieve development results?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                          Yes                   No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N     Mean     SD      N    Mean       SD
Convening/Facilitating*                                                            97    4.96    2.84    141       6.01   2.64
Data                                                                              100    6.98    2.38    136       6.60   2.21
Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                  106    7.40    2.30    142       6.94   2.35
Financial resources                                                               110    7.64    2.20    159       7.07   2.60
Technical assistance                                                               87    6.69    2.54    129       6.03   2.52
Mobilizing third party financial resources                                         83    6.24    2.43    129       6.00   2.25
Donor coordination                                                                103    6.61    2.61    144       6.43   2.65
Linkage to non-Bank expertise                                                      71    5.80    2.15    114       5.54   2.00
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        134
The World Bank Group                                                 Uganda                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Uganda. To what degree would Uganda
benefit, if capacity building were to support…?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                      Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                         N     Mean   SD     N     Mean    SD
Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society, media) to help them
                                                                               113   8.26   2.33   165   7.15    2.76
more effectively engage and participate in development efforts*
The public sector , related to implementation of specific development
                                                                               112   7.96   1.79   151   7.36    1.85
projects on the ground*
The public sector , related to changing institutions (organizations or
                                                                               112   7.34   2.21   160   6.60    2.08
sociopolitical conditions)*
The private sector , related to institutional and policy change                111   6.87   2.88   159   6.65    2.56
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in each of the
following areas in Uganda?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                      Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                          N    Mean    SD     N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)                 107   6.81   2.57   135    6.77   2.37
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)           102   5.36   2.52   139    5.50   2.14
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                               95    6.99   2.07   129    6.70   1.90
goals)
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)

When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Uganda to help ensure better development results, looking
forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following aspects of capacity building?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                      Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                          N    Mean    SD     N    Mean     SD
Project implementation (or other organizational strengthening)*                111   8.41   1.86   143    7.55   2.31
Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices into development)           99    7.73   2.47   143    7.27   2.26
Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to achieve development
                                                                               107   8.23   1.99   139    7.60   2.15
goals)*
(1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)




                                                                         135
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its work in Uganda? (Choose no
 more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Staff too inaccessible                                                         8.5%            12.8%
Not exploring alternative policy options                                      16.1%            13.3%
Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in
                                                                                11.9%           9.4%
Uganda
Not enough public disclosure of its work                                        16.9%          17.8%
Arrogant in its approach                                                        14.4%          7.8%
Not aligned with country priorities                                             1.7%           5.6%
The credibility of its knowledge/data                                           3.4%           2.8%
World Bank Group’s processes too complex*                                       1.7%           10.6%
Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts
                                                                                4.2%            3.3%
in the country
Too influenced by developed countries                                           31.4%          29.4%
Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political
                                                                                0.0%            0.6%
realities
World Bank Group’s processes too slow*                                          4.2%           14.4%
Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and
                                                                                22.9%           9.4%
procedures*
Not aligned with other donors’ work                                             7.6%           5.6%
Not collaborating enough with non-state actors                                  12.7%          16.1%
Not client focused                                                              0.8%           0.0%
Other*                                                                          11.0%          2.8%
Don't know*                                                                     4.2%           13.3%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty in Uganda?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Capacity development                                                          38.3%            46.4%
Policy based lending / budget support to the Government                       28.3%            22.4%
Knowledge products/services                                                   10.8%             9.3%
Investment lending                                                            62.5%            56.8%
Technical assistance                                                          14.2%            18.6%
Trust Fund management                                                         15.8%            14.2%
Other                                                                          1.7%             1.1%
Don't know                                                                     2.5%             5.5%




                                                                        136
The World Bank Group                                              Uganda                                        Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which TWO of the following groups
should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to ensure better development results there? (Choose no
more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Collaborators        Non-Collaborators
Academia/Think Tanks/Research Institutes                                  37.2%                 27.0%
Donor Community*                                                           6.6%                 15.1%
Media                                                                     14.9%                 18.9%
NGOs*                                                                     14.9%                 27.6%
Local Government                                                          20.7%                 13.0%
Private Sector                                                            33.9%                 34.6%
Parliament                                                                 5.0%                  5.4%
Beneficiaries                                                             16.5%                 20.0%
Community-Based Organizations (CBOs)                                      28.1%                 21.6%
Foundations                                                                0.8%                  3.2%
Faith-Based Organizations*                                                17.4%                  8.1%
Other                                                                      0.8%                  0.0%
Don't know                                                                 1.7%                  2.2%

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Uganda?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                     Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                        N     Mean    SD    N     Mean   SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in development
                                                                              117   6.07   2.99   161   6.11   2.65
in Uganda
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                              112   6.07   2.53   146   5.88   2.15
development priorities for Uganda
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that are realistic
                                                                              113   6.63   2.58   148   6.14   2.17
for Uganda
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Uganda with
                                                                              112   6.54   2.99   150   6.10   2.48
respect
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)




                                                                   137
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group (continued)

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Uganda, in terms of each of the following?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean     SD      N     Mean    SD
Responsiveness                                                                     99   5.42    2.34    121    5.80   2.30
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s products and services)            114   5.11    2.20    136    5.43   1.94
Flexibility (in terms of changing country circumstances)*                          99   4.30    2.56    137    5.54   2.66
Being inclusive                                                                   107   5.96    2.65    139    5.92   2.21
Openness (sharing data and other information)                                     115   5.89    2.84    141    6.14   2.55
Staff accessibility                                                               114   5.02    2.64    138    5.34   2.41
Straightforwardness and honesty                                                   110   5.76    2.62    135    6.23   2.23
Ease of access to the people at the World Bank Group who are making
                                                                                  116   5.09    2.88    143    5.68   2.47
decisions important to my work
Collaboration with groups outside of the Government                               101   5.72    2.63    128    5.62   2.12
Collaboration with the Government*                                                110   8.37    1.56    135    7.65   1.96
Collaboration with other donors*                                                  104   8.01    2.03    133    7.35   1.92
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on the ground*                     115   5.05    2.68    143    6.00   2.39
Being a long-term partner*                                                        114   8.56    1.66    138    7.96   2.01
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

To be a more effective development partner in Uganda, do you believe that the World Bank Group should have…?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators        Non-Collaborators
More local presence                                                           73.4%                 69.2%
The current level of local presence is adequate                               22.0%                 18.9%
Less local presence                                                            4.6%                  5.7%
Don't know                                                                                           6.3%

When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the following would you attribute
this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators        Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow
                                                                                8.4%                   12.9%
through/follow-up
There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society
                                                                                45.4%                  34.3%
participation
The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to
                                                                                23.5%                  27.5%
political/social realities on the ground
Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government                             5.9%                   8.4%
High levels of corruption in the country*                                       55.5%                  39.3%
Poor donor coordination*                                                        1.7%                   7.3%
The World Bank Group works too slowly                                           3.4%                   3.9%
The Government works inefficiently                                              18.5%                  15.2%
Political pressures and obstacles                                               7.6%                   14.0%
Reforms are not well thought out in light of country
                                                                                27.7%                  27.5%
challenges
Other                                                                           0.0%                   2.2%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        138
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Uganda? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                       Yes                 No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                          N     Mean   SD     N     Mean   SD
Anti-corruption*                                                                114   8.67   1.74   163   8.09   2.25
Information and communications technology                                       103   7.23   2.47   152   7.21   2.24
Transport                                                                       110   8.67   1.47   158   8.30   1.62
Crime and violence                                                              103   5.61   2.34   152   5.68   2.05
Law and justice                                                                 115   7.43   2.29   164   7.38   2.02
Urban development                                                               110   8.09   1.88   157   7.66   2.07
Environmental sustainability*                                                   115   8.34   1.75   160   7.44   2.05
Regulatory framework                                                            105   6.65   2.64   149   6.83   2.26
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                          98    7.33   2.35   143   7.30   2.37
Poverty reduction*                                                              117   8.65   1.76   161   8.07   2.11
Gender equity*                                                                  108   5.93   2.64   157   6.96   2.19
Domestic private sector development                                             102   6.70   2.58   150   6.89   2.23
Foreign direct investment                                                       114   8.17   1.86   151   8.00   1.74
Water and sanitation*                                                           114   8.17   1.71   157   7.59   1.95
Trade and exports*                                                              113   6.84   2.88   152   7.57   2.16
Economic growth*                                                                117   8.76   1.44   162   8.24   1.67
Energy*                                                                         111   8.80   1.33   151   8.28   1.61
Disaster management                                                             114   7.13   2.40   163   7.25   1.93
Public sector governance/reform*                                                114   8.46   1.65   155   8.02   1.94
Job creation/employment                                                         115   8.14   1.97   163   7.85   1.81
Financial markets*                                                              111   6.49   2.83   152   7.33   2.15
Equality of opportunity*                                                        105   5.80   2.67   156   6.90   2.12
Health                                                                          114   8.32   1.92   158   7.92   2.05
Rural development*                                                              115   8.31   1.61   163   7.75   1.73
Global/regional integration                                                     109   6.73   2.06   156   7.07   1.87
Food security                                                                   111   7.90   1.67   150   7.47   1.87
Education                                                                       114   8.45   1.81   158   8.21   1.91
Social protection*                                                              104   6.05   2.71   149   6.78   2.11
Climate change                                                                  111   7.33   2.19   158   6.82   2.30
Agricultural development*                                                       115   8.79   1.57   160   8.16   1.94
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector*              113   8.59   1.67   156   7.83   2.13
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        139
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Uganda? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean       SD    N     Mean   SD
Anti-corruption*                                                                 101      4.58   2.39   121   5.66   2.49
Information and communications technology                                        100      5.59   2.47   115   5.82   2.01
Transport*                                                                       104      7.88   1.83   129   7.36   1.62
Crime and violence*                                                              81       3.65   1.71   105   4.96   2.13
Law and justice*                                                                 84       5.02   1.54   115   5.78   2.03
Urban development                                                                103      6.74   2.14   123   6.33   1.96
Environmental sustainability                                                     98       6.57   2.33   117   6.38   2.05
Regulatory framework                                                             92       7.18   2.31   109   6.83   1.93
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                           90       6.31   2.49   120   6.31   2.17
Poverty reduction                                                                103      6.33   2.69   137   6.64   2.28
Gender equity                                                                    94       5.32   2.18   119   5.77   1.99
Domestic private sector development                                              91       5.26   1.94   125   5.77   1.87
Foreign direct investment                                                        99       6.75   2.24   131   7.18   1.91
Water and sanitation                                                             108      6.98   2.09   125   6.59   2.11
Trade and exports                                                                91       6.33   1.87   125   6.46   1.95
Economic growth*                                                                 101      8.09   1.70   127   7.54   1.74
Energy*                                                                          102      7.81   1.64   120   7.39   1.48
Disaster management                                                              78       5.33   2.39   111   5.71   2.22
Public sector governance/reform                                                  106      6.21   2.66   129   6.50   2.19
Job creation/employment                                                          103      5.40   2.84   134   5.77   2.30
Financial markets                                                                80       5.78   2.27   114   6.33   1.93
Equality of opportunity*                                                         86       4.92   1.92   112   5.50   1.92
Health*                                                                          110      7.23   2.06   145   6.70   1.96
Rural development                                                                93       5.82   2.05   133   6.06   1.97
Global/regional integration                                                      74       6.27   1.46   111   6.20   1.67
Food security                                                                    102      6.43   2.38   127   5.92   2.08
Education                                                                        111      7.60   1.62   140   7.20   1.70
Social protection                                                                92       5.83   2.40   117   5.61   2.07
Climate change                                                                   99       6.02   2.28   126   5.60   2.09
Agricultural development                                                         107      6.33   2.18   139   6.37   2.02
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector                96       5.23   2.36   121   5.64   2.03
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)                                      26.5%                   24.6%
In the country                                                                19.5%                   18.1%
Don't know                                                                    54.0%                   57.3%




                                                                        140
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group Effectiveness and Results (continued)

          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                           Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N       Mean     SD      N     Mean     SD
 To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve
                                                                                 115      5.75    2.56    157    6.01    2.26
 development results in Uganda?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Uganda?
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N    Mean       SD       N     Mean    SD

The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet the needs of Uganda*           115      6.50    2.43    150    5.68    2.24

The World Bank Group meets Uganda’s needs for knowledge services                 108      5.69    2.97    146    5.91    2.48
(1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                           Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                            N       Mean     SD      N     Mean     SD
 To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation
 mechanisms hold the institution accountable for achieving results in             95      5.68    2.71    129     6.28   2.10
 Uganda?
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work you do?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
Weekly                                                                         .8%
Monthly                                                                       22.3%                      10.5%
A few times a year                                                            51.2%                      36.5%
Rarely                                                                        13.2%                      27.6%
Never                                                                         12.4%                      25.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        141
The World Bank Group                                                    Uganda                                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities (continued)

In Uganda, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                            Yes                        No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                N    Mean      SD         N     Mean    SD
Are timely                                                                           108    5.88    2.38    148       6.05    2.13
Include appropriate level of stakeholder involvement during preparation*             104    6.72    2.15    122       5.68    2.18
Are relevant to Uganda’s development priorities*                                     109    7.42    2.45    146       6.53    2.50
Lead to practical solutions                                                          112    5.17    2.68    131       5.78    2.50
Are accessible (well written and easy to understand)                                 109    6.27    2.92    140       6.01    2.74
Are source of relevant information on global good practices*                         110    7.85    2.12    141       7.04    2.51
Enhance your knowledge and/or skills*                                                110    6.96    2.85    140       6.08    2.77
Are adequately disseminated                                                          107    4.99    2.95    126       5.38    2.81
Are translated enough into local language                                            97     3.29    2.06    132       3.78    2.25
Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific development challenges and country
                                                                                     111    5.23    2.51    145       5.24    2.43
circumstances
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree) *Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators


          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                             Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                 N    Mean      SD        N     Mean     SD
Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank
Group's knowledge work and activities make to development results in your            113     6.11    2.60       155    6.15   2.08
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's
                                                                                     113     7.93    1.81       153    7.50   1.95
knowledge work and activities?
(1-Not significant at all, 10-Very significant; 1-Very low technical quality, 10-Very high technical quality)



E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/advisory work contribute
to solving Uganda’s development challenges? (1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                             Yes                       No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                                 N    Mean      SD        N     Mean     SD
Conceptualization (understanding and framing the problem)                            105     5.92    2.76       145    5.97   2.33
Design (appraising and planning the solutions)*                                      111     7.20    1.96       149    6.33   2.08
Implementation (executing, carrying out, monitoring and making appropriate
                                                                                     108     5.74    2.44       159    5.88   2.03
adjustments)
Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)                                        111     5.74    2.68       155    5.80   2.35
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                         142
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




E. Working with the World Bank Group (continued)
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                         Yes                     No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                             N    Mean      SD     N      Mean   SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly                                      99     5.69   2.82   128     6.28   2.54
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the projects and
                                                                                  110     6.36   2.77   148     6.40   2.36
programs it supports
The World Bank Group’s approvals and reviews are done in a timely fashion         108     6.56   2.75   139     6.42   2.21
The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy? requirements are reasonable*             90     7.50   1.90   119     6.92   2.15
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are reasonable                   107     5.46   2.71   140     5.48   2.46
The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly in Uganda                            111     5.10   2.60   143     5.10   2.38
Working with the World Bank Group increases Uganda’s institutional
                                                                                  107     6.34   2.89   138     6.37   2.31
capacity
The World Bank Group ensures consistency and continuity through staff
                                                                                  100     5.86   2.57   128     6.23   2.10
changes
Where country systems are adequate, the World Bank Group makes
                                                                                   98     7.49   2.23   134     6.81   2.10
appropriate use of them*
The World Bank Group provides effective implementation support*                   114     6.62   2.40   150     6.05   2.22
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Uganda                             .9%                     1.1%
The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in
                                                                                13.8%                   23.3%
Uganda
The World Bank Group's approach to risk is appropriate                          33.6%                   16.7%
Don't know                                                                      46.6%                   51.1%
Prefer not to answer                                                            5.2%                    7.8%


F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda
Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in Uganda?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures
                                                                                11.6%                   8.8%
on Uganda’s economy
Collaborate more effectively with Government clients                            10.7%                   14.3%
Offer more innovative financial products                                        17.4%                   17.0%
Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to
                                                                                18.2%                   20.9%
markets
Reach out more to groups outside of Government*                                 50.4%                   29.7%
Improve the quality of its experts as related to Uganda’s
                                                                                6.6%                    19.2%
specific challenges*
Offer more innovative knowledge services                                        6.6%                    9.9%
Ensure greater selectivity in its work                                          6.6%                    12.6%
Increase the level of capacity development in the country                       24.8%                   20.3%
Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group
                                                                                24.0%                   28.0%
financing
Work faster*                                                                    10.7%                   2.2%
Other                                                                           0.8%                    3.8%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators



                                                                        143
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




F. The Future Role of the World Bank Group in Uganda (continued)

When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Uganda, and taking into account its
limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World Bank Group should offer more of in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Financial services                                                            28.8%            28.7%
Knowledge products                                                            23.7%            14.9%
Convening services                                                            14.4%            27.6%
None of the above                                                             11.0%             2.2%
The combination is appropriate for Uganda                                     21.2%            20.4%

Please identify two areas related to sustainable development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda, where greater support
from the World Bank Group would be most valuable. (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Support in mitigation of macro-economic risks                                 24.4%            28.8%
Support efforts to ensure participation of civil society and
                                                                                26.9%          23.9%
citizens
Technical aspects related to the sector*                                        9.2%           17.4%
Support in monitoring of operations                                             20.2%          27.7%
Advisory role in contract negotiations*                                         20.2%          10.9%
Support in management of foreign exchange and
                                                                                14.3%           9.8%
revenues
Support in governance, anti-corruption, access to
information and transparency related to overall                                 42.9%          42.4%
management of oil and gas resources
Support in improving quality of public expenditures                             21.0%          13.0%
Other                                                                           0.0%           0.0%
Don’t know*                                                                     1.7%           7.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Would you like to see more, less, or just about the same level of World Bank Group involvement in the sustainable
development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
More                                                                          52.3%            71.0%
Just about the same                                                           42.3%            21.0%
Less                                                                           1.8%             .6%
Don't know                                                                     3.6%             7.4%




                                                                        144
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing
How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in Uganda?
(Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Local newspapers                                                              56.8%            61.3%
International newspapers                                                       6.8%             3.3%
Local radio*                                                                  12.7%            29.8%
International radio                                                            0.0%             1.7%
Local television*                                                             28.8%            40.9%
International television                                                       5.1%             4.4%
Periodicals*                                                                  11.9%             1.7%
Internet*                                                                     49.2%            32.6%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                        7.6%             5.5%
Blogs                                                                          0.0%             1.7%
Mobile phones                                                                  0.8%             3.9%
Instant messaging                                                              0.8%             0.0%
Other                                                                          2.5%             1.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Blogs*                                                                         0.8%            11.5%
Direct contact with World Bank Group                                           9.9%             7.7%
e-Newsletters                                                                 36.4%            28.6%
Instant messaging*                                                             5.8%            13.2%
World Bank Group's seminars/workshops/conferences                             25.6%            25.8%
World Bank Group's publications and other written
                                                                                35.5%          25.3%
materials
Mobile phones*                                                                  11.6%          34.1%
Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr)                         24.8%          26.4%
World Bank Group's website*                                                     26.4%          10.4%
Other*                                                                          4.1%           0.5%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Are you aware of the World Bank's Access to Information Policy under which the Bank will now disclose any information in
its possession that is not a list of exceptions?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                           36.5%            37.9%
No                                                                            63.5%            62.1%

Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past year?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                           42.7%            28.1%
No                                                                            57.3%            71.9%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Were you able to obtain this information?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                           85.7%            94.3%
No                                                                            14.3%             5.7%




                                                                        145
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014




G. Communication and Information Sharing (continued)

Do you have access to the Internet?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                           94.0%                   96.0%
No                                                                             6.0%                    4.0%

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
Yes                                                                           87.6%                   69.6%
No                                                                            12.4%                   30.4%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which do you primarily use?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
The World Bank Group’s country website                                        29.6%                   49.4%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                           70.4%                   50.6%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                 Collaborators          Non-Collaborators
High speed                                                                    78.4%                   69.7%
Dial-up                                                                       21.6%                   30.3%

Please rate how much you agree with the following statements. (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
          Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with                        Yes                    No
                 the World Bank Group in your country?                           N     Mean       SD    N     Mean   SD
I use/consult World Bank Group's data more often than I did a few years
                                                                                 113      6.83   2.45   151   4.78   2.68
ago.*
I find the World Bank Group's websites easy to navigate.*                        112      7.44   1.71   136   6.08   2.45
I find the information on the World Bank Group's websites useful.*               111      7.65   2.01   124   6.39   2.29
The World Bank Group's social media channels are valuable sources of
                                                                                 92       6.47   3.23   150   6.72   2.87
information about the institution.
When I need information from the World Bank Group I know how to find it.*        119      7.45   2.54   152   5.99   3.07
The World Bank Group is responsive to my information requests and
                                                                                 109      6.54   3.24   142   6.02   3.08
inquiries.
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        146
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                 Country Opinion Survey 2014




H. Background Information

Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Uganda? (Select all that apply)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
The World Bank (IBRD/IDA)*                                                    81.0%            10.1%
The International Finance Corporation (IFC)*                                  14.0%             1.8%
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)*                           4.1%             0.6%
None*                                                                         14.9%            88.1%
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators

Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                      Collaborators   Non-Collaborators
Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal
                                                                                18.3%          70.4%
conversations, etc.)*
Use World Bank Group reports/data*                                              45.0%          17.6%
Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored
                                                                                19.2%           5.7%
events/activities*
Collaborate as part of my professional duties*                                  43.3%          13.2%
Use World Bank Group website for information, data,
                                                                                20.0%          28.9%
research, etc.
*Significantly different between collaborators and non-collaborators




                                                                        147
The World Bank Group                                                   Uganda                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014




Appendix E: Responses to Questions across Country Surveys1
FY04 N=53             FY08 N=306         FY14 N=326

B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group

                                                                                FY04                  FY08                    FY14
                                                                        N       Mean    SD     N      Mean     SD      N      Mean     SD
How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in
                                                                        53      7.72   1.47   303     6.69    2.01    316      6.34    2.75
Uganda?**
(1-Not familiar at all, 10-Extremely familiar) **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys


                                                                                FY04                  FY08                     FY14
                                                                         N      Mean    SD      N     Mean     SD      N       Mean     SD
 Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s
                                                                           53    7.09 1.54 287         6.29    1.87    287     6.05    2.31
 effectiveness in Uganda.**
(1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective) **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys

To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in Uganda?
                                                                              FY04                    FY08                   FY14
                                                                        N     Mean     SD      N      Mean    SD      N      Mean      SD
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a relevant role in
                                                                       52       7.85   2.09   300     7.44    2.18    295     6.07    2.76
development in Uganda* **
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I consider the
                                                                       53       7.00   2.40   296     6.50    2.29    275     5.89    2.33
development priorities for Uganda* **
The World Bank Group supports programs and strategies that
                                                                                              292     5.96    2.31    278     6.29    2.37
are realistic for Uganda
The World Bank Group treats clients and stakeholders in Uganda
                                                                       52       7.23   2.37   272     6.72    2.40    276     6.24    2.70
with respect* **
                                                                                                                                              (1-
Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
*Significantly different FY14 and FY08 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys

To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Uganda, in terms of each of the following?
                                                                              FY04                    FY08                    FY14
                                                                        N     Mean      SD     N      Mean     SD      N      Mean     SD
Staff accessibility* **                                                 53      7.28   2.47   274     6.24    2.69    269      5.08   2.55
Straightforwardness and honesty* **                                     53      7.20   2.33   272     6.91    2.75    259      5.93   2.44
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
Note the response scales for these questions in FY04 and FY08 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY14.
*Significantly different FY14 and FY08 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys




1
    Only those questions with similar response scales/options could be compared.



                                                                        148
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results
In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in
Uganda? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                           FY04                  FY08                 FY14
                                                                     N     Mean     SD     N     Mean    SD      N    Mean     SD
Anti-corruption*                                                                           286   8.94   1.95   295    8.37    2.03
Law and justice**                                                   49       8.30   1.87   285   7.63   2.56   297    7.38    2.14
Environmental sustainability* **                                    51       8.72   1.87   288   8.41   2.00   293    7.82    1.96
Regulatory framework* **                                            51       8.99   1.70   286   8.27   1.87   270    6.75    2.39
Poverty reduction* **                                               53       9.36   1.61   297   9.36   1.58   296    8.38    1.96
Gender equity* **                                                   53       8.26   2.40   288   7.52   2.28   283    6.55    2.39
Domestic private sector development* **                             53       8.98   1.63   293   8.72   1.74   270    6.77    2.39
Economic growth* **                                                 53       9.32   1.63   283   9.33   1.40   297    8.48    1.57
Financial markets* **                                               52       9.22   1.54   290   9.02   1.53   281    7.08    2.48
Health* **                                                          51       9.38   1.20   283   9.09   1.61   290    8.06    2.00
Global/regional integration*                                                               289   8.41   1.88   283    6.88    1.99
Education* **                                                       52       9.35   1.36   287   9.11   1.61   290    8.31    1.83
Social protection* **                                               48       8.45   2.08   279   7.54   2.35   270    6.49    2.38
Climate change*                                                                            285   8.18   2.24   285    7.02    2.22
Agricultural development* **                                        51       9.03   1.81   286   9.15   1.50   293    8.46    1.81
Note the response scales for these questions in FY04 and FY08 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY14.
*Significantly different FY14 and FY08 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in
Uganda? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                           FY04                  FY08                 FY14
                                                                     N     Mean     SD     N     Mean    SD      N    Mean     SD
Anti-corruption*                                                                           275   5.66   2.61   234    5.15    2.44
Law and justice                                                     47       5.74   1.95   254   5.63   2.40   211    5.43    1.86
Environmental sustainability                                        44       6.01   2.37   268   6.12   2.08   222    6.41    2.19
Regulatory framework                                                50       6.58   2.14   257   6.64   2.09   207    6.98    2.10
Poverty reduction                                                   51       6.51   2.08   287   6.28   2.17   255    6.52    2.43
Gender equity*                                                      46       5.89   2.24   266   6.08   2.35   225    5.56    2.05
Domestic private sector development* **                             50       6.31   2.44   278   6.45   2.12   228    5.55    1.88
Economic growth* **                                                 51       6.96   2.15   270   7.09   1.85   238    7.76    1.74
Financial markets* **                                               50       6.94   1.86   272   7.25   2.11   206    6.06    2.08
Health*                                                             47       6.70   1.87   273   6.56   2.11   270    6.91    2.00
Global/regional integration                                                                264   6.15   2.40   197    6.22    1.56
Education*                                                          47       7.08   1.99   272   6.96   2.16   266    7.34    1.71
Social protection                                                   41       5.12   2.61   252   5.52   2.22   216    5.67    2.22
Climate change*                                                                            257   5.32   2.57   232    5.77    2.18
Agricultural development**                                          52       5.50   2.36   270   6.34   2.10   261    6.28    2.06
Note the response scales for these questions in FY04 and FY08 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY14.
*Significantly different FY14 and FY08 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys



                                                                     149
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014




D. The World Bank Group’s Knowledge Work and Activities

In Uganda, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                                             FY04                 FY08                  FY14
                                                                      N      Mean     SD     N    Mean     SD     N     Mean      SD
Are source of relevant information on global good practices          53      7.58    2.57   277    7.47   2.32   266     7.45    2.37
 Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific development challenges and
                                                                       52     6.58 2.11 277 6.31 2.20 271 5.22 2.43
 country circumstances* **
(1-To no degree at all, 10-To a very significant degree)
Note the response scales for these questions in FY04 and FY08 were converted from a 5-pt to 10-pt scale for comparison with FY14.
*Significantly different FY14 and FY08 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys



E. Working with the World Bank Group
To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements? (1-Strongly disagree, 10-Strongly agree)
                                                                           FY04                   FY08                 FY14
                                                                     N     Mean      SD     N     Mean    SD     N     Mean      SD
The World Bank Group disburses funds promptly**                      37      7.46    1.59   165   6.27    2.57   236    6.04    2.64
The World Bank Group effectively monitors and evaluates the
                                                                      37     7.70 1.71 169 7.02 2.13             272    6.31    2.51
projects and programs it supports* **
The World Bank Group’s conditions on its lending are
                                                                                            161 6.19 2.58        261    5.52    2.53
reasonable*
Working with the World Bank Group increases Uganda’s
                                                                      37     7.57 2.17 168 7.15 2.10             259    6.40    2.52
institutional capacity* **
*Significantly different FY14 and FY08 country surveys **Significantly different FY14 and FY04 country surveys




G. Communication and Information Sharing

Do you have access to the Internet?*

Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY04                   FY08                       FY14
Yes                                                                             -                    98.0%                      92.9%
No                                                                              -                    2.0%                       7.1%
*Significantly different FY14 and FY08 country surveys

Do you use/have used the World Bank Group website?

Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY04                   FY08                       FY14
Yes                                                                             -                    75.2%                      73.8%
No                                                                              -                    24.8%                      26.2%

Which do you primarily use?

Percentage of Respondents                                                     FY04                   FY08                       FY14
The World Bank Group’s country website                                          -                    43.3%                      39.3%
The World Bank Group’s main website                                             -                    56.7%                      60.7%




                                                                     150
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Uganda                                                                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix F: Responses to Key Questions by Respondents’ Specializations/Sectors
C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of development in Uganda? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                                                                                                                      Public sector
                                                                                                Health /                                                  Natural     governance /
                             Agriculture/                                                    communicable                                   Law and      resource         public
                                 rural                              Financial Gender equity      /non-      Information                     justice /  management /     financial
                           development /                            markets /  / equality of communicable    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental mgmt. / anti-        Social                 Water and
                            food security   Education    Energy      banking   opportunity     diseases      technology   employment      framework    sustainability  corruption     protection   Transport   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                              N     Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption*             29    7.66     68   8.18   7    9.00   5    8.80    2    10.00   9     8.67    32    7.53     3      8.67    14    9.50     18    7.89    29     8.21    4    10.00   8    9.25   12   9.50    19   8.95    28     8.43
Information and comm.
                             20    7.10     64   6.83   9    9.11   5    9.00    2    10.00   10    8.60    27    6.19     2      9.00    12    3.92     17    7.35    29     7.52                 7    8.57   11   7.09    18   7.94    27     7.81
technology*
Transport*                   21    8.67     63   8.24   9    8.33   5    6.40    2    10.00   10    8.70    29    7.66     3      8.67    15    9.47     18    8.22    29     8.10    4    8.50    8    9.50   12   8.50    18   8.28    28     9.43
Crime and violence*          27    5.74     66   5.59   9    6.22   5    4.40    2    5.00    9     3.89    31    5.65     3      5.67    12    3.25     17    5.65    29     5.93                 7    6.43   12   8.67    17   5.65    18     6.06
Law and justice*             28    7.50     68   6.97   9    8.56   5    9.60    2    5.00    10    4.70    32    6.09     3      7.33    15    9.40     18    7.11    29     7.41    4    9.25    8    8.50   12   9.25    18   7.61    28     7.64
Urban development*           21    7.90     64   7.78   9    7.56   5    6.80    2    6.00    10    6.70    29    6.76     3      8.67    15    9.27     17    8.41    29     7.48    4    10.00   6    8.67   12   8.33    18   7.56    28     8.14
Environmental
                             29    6.86     67   7.72   9    8.00   5    8.20    2    10.00   10    7.50    32    7.25     3      5.33    15    9.27     17    7.35    29     7.72    1    10.00   8    8.50   12   9.58    18   8.50    28     7.61
sustainability*
Regulatory framework*        27    6.63     61   6.16   7    9.00   3   10.00                 9     8.00    32    6.53     2      3.00    11    3.36     15    6.73    29     6.79    3    9.00    7    6.57   12   7.25    17   7.82    27     7.81
Communicable/non-
                             27    5.74     58   7.66   6    8.33   4    6.25    2    10.00   9     7.89    28    6.21     2     10.00    14    9.36     13    6.23    27     5.89    1    10.00   2    7.50   12   8.42    17   7.53    27     8.67
comm. diseases*
Poverty reduction*           30    8.23     68   8.79   9    7.00   5    6.40                 10    7.90    32    7.28     3      8.00    15    9.07     18    8.00    29     7.90    4    8.50    8    9.25   12   9.08    17   8.94    28     8.93
Gender equity*               29    6.79     66   5.86   9    6.33   4    4.50    2    10.00   10    5.10    30    6.67     3      3.67    12    3.67     15    6.93    29     6.03    3    9.00    7    5.86   12   9.00    17   8.41    27     8.15
Domestic private sector
                             25    6.96     64   6.30   7    6.29   4    9.00    2    10.00   9     7.44    32    6.81     2      6.00    11    2.82     15    6.87    25     6.40    3    8.00    6    7.00   12   8.42    18   8.06    27     7.59
development*
Foreign direct
                             26    8.42     66   7.82   6    8.17   5    5.20    2    10.00   9     8.44    32    8.13     2      3.00    14    9.50     17    8.35    29     7.86    1    10.00   8    7.75   12   7.58    18   8.78    28     7.96
investment*
Water and sanitation*        28    7.11     66   7.70   9    6.56   4    9.00    2    10.00   10    8.10    32    7.19     2      9.00    15    9.07     15    8.00    29     7.07    4    8.50    8    8.63   12   9.75    18   7.61    27     8.52
Trade and exports*           28    7.89     67   6.99   9    7.00   4    4.50    2    10.00   10    8.30    32    7.13     2     10.00    15    3.47     15    8.13    25     7.68    4    7.00    8    8.13   12   8.67    17   8.29    27     7.37
Economic growth*             30    8.50     69   8.59   9    8.22   5    8.20    2    10.00   10    8.70    32    8.00     3      7.00    15    9.73     17    8.06    29     7.66    2    9.50    8    9.25   12   8.83    18   8.83    28     8.61
Energy*                      28    8.46     67   7.78   9    7.33   5    9.00    2    8.00    10    8.30    25    8.56     2      9.00    15    9.47     18    8.33    23     8.35    4    8.50    8    9.25   12   9.08    17   8.00    27     9.63
Disaster management*         28    7.36     68   7.18   9    6.67   5    6.60    2    9.00    9     6.78    32    6.72     2     10.00    15    9.33     18    7.17    29     5.97    4    8.50    8    7.63   12   8.50    18   6.67    28     7.68
Public sector
                             25    6.96     68   8.00   8    8.00   4    9.75    2    10.00   10    8.30    32    7.09     2     10.00    15    9.13     15    8.00    29     8.45    4    9.25    8    7.00   12   9.58    18   7.44    27     9.15
governance/reform*
Job creation/
                             29    7.83     66   8.24   9    8.00   5    6.40    2    10.00   10    8.50    32    6.94     3      9.33    15    9.20     18    7.22    29     7.93    4    8.50    8    7.00   12   9.25    18   8.94    28     7.89
employment*
Financial markets*           28    8.39     66   6.92   9    7.89   5    5.60    2    10.00   10    8.40    31    6.68     2      5.00    15    3.27     18    7.06    21     6.86    4    6.25    8    5.88   10   7.10    17   8.53    27     7.56
Equality of opportunity*     21    6.62     66   6.17   4    5.50   5    4.20    2    10.00    9    8.44    28    6.21     2      7.00    14    2.71     18    6.17    27     6.26    4    6.25    8    5.25   12   9.17    18   8.39    28     7.79
Health*                      24    7.67     66   7.98   9    5.44   5    8.80    2    9.00    10    8.90    31    7.94     3      8.67    15    8.80     18    7.00    29     6.93    4    9.25    8    8.88   12   9.58    18   8.67    28     9.00
Rural development*           28    8.43     68   7.74   9    6.44   5    9.20    2    8.00    10    8.00    32    7.81     2      6.00    15    8.80     18    7.22    29     7.45    4    9.25    8    7.75   12   9.17    18   7.94    28     8.54
Global/regional
                             29    5.48     63   6.89   7    5.43   5    5.40    2    9.00    9     7.11    32    6.22     3      5.33    14    9.21     17    7.06    25     6.08    4    8.50    8    7.13   12   7.58    17   8.29    28     7.75
integration*
Food security*               17    7.47     66   7.79   9    6.67   5    9.20    2    10.00   10    6.60    28    7.50     2      7.00    15    8.73     18    7.11    25     6.28    4    8.50    8    7.88   12   7.67    17   8.47    28     8.39
Education*                   28    8.46     67   8.16   9    5.33   5    8.40    2    10.00   10    7.10    32    7.94     2     10.00    15    9.27     18    7.89    25     8.24    4    8.50    8    8.50   12   9.50    17   8.53    28     9.18
Social protection*           28    6.82     65   6.34   7    8.71   4    6.00    2    8.00    9     7.11    31    6.74     2      3.00    13    2.62     14    6.86    25     6.32    4    6.25    2    3.00   12   7.17    18   7.22    27     7.59
Climate change*              28    7.04     64   6.80   9    5.78   4   10.00    2    7.00    10    8.20    32    6.44     2      2.00    15    8.73     15    6.53    27     6.07    4    9.25    8    8.63   12   7.83    18   6.83    27     7.30
Agricultural
                             29    8.21     70   8.17   9    6.78   4   10.00    2    10.00   10    8.40    32    7.84     2     10.00    15    9.13     15    8.33    29     8.59    4    9.25    8    9.25   12   9.33    18   8.72    26     8.85
development*
Sustainable/transparent
                             28    7.11     68   8.01   7    9.43   4   10.00    2    10.00   9     9.11    32    7.53     2     10.00    14    9.64     15    8.20    29     8.31    4    9.25    8    9.25   12   8.67    18   8.00    27     7.56
oil & gas sector dev.*
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                          151
The World Bank Group                                                                                                 Uganda                                                                                         Country Opinion Survey 2014


C. World Bank Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of development in Uganda? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                                                                                                                      Public sector
                                                                                                Health /                                                  Natural     governance /
                             Agriculture/                                                    communicable                                   Law and      resource         public
                                 rural                              Financial Gender equity      /non-      Information                     justice /  management /     financial
                           development /                            markets /  / equality of communicable    and comm.    Job creation/   regulatory environmental mgmt. / anti-        Social                 Water and
                            food security   Education    Energy      banking   opportunity     diseases      technology   employment      framework    sustainability  corruption     protection   Transport   sanitation   Generalist       Other
                              N     Mean    N    Mean   N    Mean   N    Mean    N    Mean     N     Mean     N    Mean     N     Mean     N      Mean   N     Mean     N     Mean    N     Mean   N    Mean   N     Mean   N    Mean    N      Mean
Anti-corruption*             22    5.41     62   4.74   7    5.43   4    2.00                 1     4.00    30    7.17     2      1.00    14    1.93     15    5.40    23     5.30    4    7.00    9    4.33   10   5.80    10   6.50    17     5.06
Information and comm.
                             22    5.45     61   5.36   9    5.00   1    5.00                 2     7.50    28    6.50     2      5.00    15    2.87     14    6.07    23     6.17    1    1.00    9    7.33   12   7.17    6    6.83    17     5.71
technology*
Transport*                   22    6.82     62   7.05   9    7.44   1    7.00                 2     7.00    30    8.00     2      7.00    15    9.07     15    6.53    23     7.00    4    8.50    9    8.33   12   9.08    15   7.40    22     7.77
Crime and violence*          22    4.73     59   4.49   6    4.67   1    5.00                 2     5.50    15    3.93     2      2.00    15    2.27     14    4.71    19     4.26    4    7.00    9    4.33    7   5.14    3    5.33    16     4.69
Law and justice*             22    5.41     56   5.23   9    6.67   4    5.50                 2     6.50    25    5.12     2      1.00     5    5.80     14    5.29    21     5.86    3    8.00    8    5.13   12   5.42    7    6.86    17     4.82
Urban development*           22    5.64     61   6.62   9    7.56   1    9.00                 2     5.50    30    5.93     2      8.00    15    8.53     15    5.80    25     5.72    4    9.25    9    6.33   12   7.17    10   7.60    15     5.20
Environmental
                             13    5.38     58   6.78   9    6.11   2    5.00                 2     5.00    19    6.58     2      9.00    15    8.40     18    5.39    23     5.04    4    8.50    9    6.11   12   6.67    10   7.00    20     6.40
sustainability*
Regulatory framework*        14    6.29     58   6.38   9    8.44                             2     7.00    26    7.65     2      6.00    14    9.14     14    5.86    19     7.11    4    7.75    3    8.00   12   6.17    10   8.00    16     6.25
Communicable/non-
                             14    5.14     59   6.20   6    4.33   1    9.00                 1     7.00    25    5.88     2     10.00    15    8.67     15    5.80    29     5.55    4    9.25    9    7.33   10   7.00    10   6.00    13     6.62
comm. diseases*
Poverty reduction*           22    5.50     61   5.66   9    6.67   2    6.50    2    10.00   2     7.00    30    6.93     2     10.00    12    3.67     18    6.67    29     7.24    3    8.00    8    8.25   12   7.42    17   8.59    21     6.05
Gender equity*               22    5.09     62   5.27   7    5.29   1    7.00                 1     6.00    28    6.04     2      5.00    11    2.64     15    5.87    21     4.86    3    9.00    8    6.25   12   6.58    8    6.88    20     6.75
Domestic private sector
                             22    5.00     57   5.60   7    5.71   2    7.00    2    10.00   1     7.00    23    4.87     2      5.00    11    2.73     16    5.50    26     5.50    3    8.00    8    6.38   12   6.50    10   6.80    21     5.67
development*
Foreign direct
                             22    6.18     61   6.97   7    7.57   2    9.00    2    10.00   1     8.00    28    7.14                    11    3.27     18    7.06    29     7.45    3    8.00    8    7.13   12   7.42    11   8.73    20     6.40
investment*
Water and sanitation*        21    5.76     62   7.19   9    5.44   4    4.75                 2     7.50    31    6.55     2     10.00    15    8.67     15    6.47    25     5.44    4    8.50    9    7.44   12   8.33    10   6.70    17     6.12
Trade and exports*           20    4.80     58   6.81   9    5.67   2    7.50                 2     9.00    29    6.41     2      4.00     5    6.60     17    7.18    25     5.72    3    8.00    8    6.50    9   6.44    10   7.50    21     5.81
Economic growth*             14    6.71     59   8.12   9    7.78   1    9.00    2    10.00   2     7.50    27    7.37     2      9.00    15    9.33     15    7.47    25     6.88    4    9.25    9    8.89   11   7.09    16   8.31    20     6.55
Energy*                      22    6.32     62   7.61   9    8.56   1    9.00                 2     8.00    28    6.79     2      8.00    15    9.20     15    6.87    19     7.32    4    9.25    9    8.11   11   7.82    8    6.75    20     7.30
Disaster management*         14    4.14     55   6.00   9    5.67   1    7.00    2    10.00   1     6.00    22    5.50     2     10.00     5    5.00     15    5.20    23     4.74    3    8.00    8    5.50    5   4.60    7    7.29    20     4.90
Public sector
                             22    7.00     62   6.34   9    8.56   1    9.00    2    10.00   2     8.00    30    5.87     2      1.00    15    3.00     15    6.00    25     6.80    4    7.00    9    6.44   12   6.83    10   7.50    20     6.10
governance/reform*
Job creation/
                             22    4.09     64   5.50   9    6.33   2    7.00                 2     8.50    28    6.14     2      3.00    15    2.67     18    5.33    25     5.72    4    6.25    9    6.33   12   6.17    14   7.14    21     6.76
employment*
Financial markets*           19    5.16     55   6.27   6    8.83   2    5.50    2    9.00    1     7.00    22    5.59                    11    3.00     16    5.06    25     6.92    3    9.00    8    6.25   5    4.60    8    8.38    18     5.67
Equality of opportunity*     12    4.92     58   5.22   6    4.83   5    5.80                 1     8.00    25    5.40     2      5.00    11    2.27     18    5.33    23     4.83    3    8.00    8    4.75   4    6.50    8    7.00    17     6.35
Health*                      22    5.91     63   7.03   6    4.67   5    7.40    2    10.00   8     7.00    30    6.70     2     10.00    15    8.60     18    6.33    29     5.93    4    8.50    9    7.44   12   8.00    17   7.53    23     7.04
Rural development*           22    5.09     59   6.07   9    3.89   2    8.00                 2     7.00    30    6.23     2      6.00     5    5.80     18    6.22    27     5.37    3    8.00    8    6.38   12   7.42    11   6.91    23     5.74
Global/regional
                             22    5.45     53   6.32   7    6.29   2    6.00                 1     6.00    25    6.08                    4     6.75     17    5.65    25     6.96    3    8.00    8    7.00   4    5.25    5    6.60    16     5.75
integration*
Food security*               21    4.52     62   6.52   9    5.00   2    6.50    2    10.00   2     5.50    29    5.90     2     10.00    15    8.47     18    6.00    23     4.91    4    8.50    9    6.78   10   5.70    11   6.91    18     5.33
Education*                   22    5.55     64   7.25   9    6.11   2    8.00    2    9.00    8     7.25    30    7.13     2      7.00    15    9.20     18    7.44    25     7.08    4    9.25    9    8.22   12   8.17    16   8.00    23     7.09
Social protection*           14    4.00     60   6.32   9    4.67   1    7.00                 2     7.00    24    5.33                    15    8.47     18    5.61    23     4.13    4    9.25    9    4.89    5   4.40    7    5.43    21     5.71
Climate change*              14    4.57     61   6.52   9    4.33   2    6.50                 2     6.00    25    4.60     2     10.00    15    8.47     18    5.28    23     4.00    4    8.50    9    6.11   12   5.58    9    5.11    21     5.86
Agricultural
                             22    4.32     63   6.33   9    4.78   2    9.00    2    10.00   2     7.50    30    6.27     2      8.00    15    8.67     18    6.61    25     5.24    4    9.25    9    6.11   12   6.08    16   6.50    23     6.65
development*
Sustainable/transparent
                             14    5.36     57   5.32   7    5.14   2    9.50                 1     5.00    26    5.85     2      4.00    14    2.57     17    6.76    25     6.16    4    5.50    9    5.67   10   6.40    11   6.00    21     4.62
oil & gas sector dev.*
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                                                                          152
The World Bank Group                                         Uganda




In instances where more than 10% of respondents come from a specific sector, additional analyses are
conducted to further examine their perceptions as opposed to those from other sectors. In the case of
Uganda, there were 23% of respondents from the Education sector and 13% of respondents from the
Information and communications technology sector.


Education Sector vs. Others
Education Sector N=74               All Others N=215

A. General Issues Facing Uganda

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Uganda. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Uganda. (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Education Sector         All Others
Economic growth*                                                           49.3%                 30.1%
Education                                                                  35.6%                 32.5%
Poverty reduction                                                          32.9%                 22.3%
Job creation/employment                                                    27.4%                 20.4%
Health                                                                     23.3%                 26.2%
Energy                                                                     21.9%                 21.4%
Agricultural development                                                   17.8%                 11.7%
Anti-corruption*                                                           16.4%                 41.7%
Foreign direct investment*                                                 13.7%                  4.4%
Trade and exports                                                          9.6%                   6.3%
Water and sanitation                                                       8.2%                   7.8%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                           8.2%                  12.1%
sector
Information and communications technology                                  8.2%                  6.3%
Transport                                                                  5.5%                  13.6%
Public sector governance/reform*                                           4.1%                  12.6%
Social protection                                                          2.7%                  2.9%
Domestic private sector development                                        2.7%                  0.5%
Environmental sustainability*                                              2.7%                  0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                    2.7%                  2.4%
Food security                                                              2.7%                  3.4%
Gender equity                                                              1.4%                  6.3%
Rural development*                                                         1.4%                  9.7%
Financial markets                                                          1.4%                  2.4%
Global/regional integration                                                0.0%                  0.0%
Urban development                                                          0.0%                  1.9%
Climate change                                                             0.0%                  0.0%
Crime and violence                                                         0.0%                  0.0%
Law and justice                                                            0.0%                  1.0%
Regulatory framework                                                       0.0%                  0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                     0.0%                  0.0%
Disaster management                                                        0.0%                  0.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                              153
The World Bank Group                                         Uganda




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Education Sector       All Others
Agricultural development*                                                  47.3%               30.5%
Anti-corruption*                                                           36.5%               23.5%
Economic growth*                                                           33.8%               18.8%
Rural development                                                          24.3%               30.5%
Job creation/employment                                                    23.0%               29.6%
Health                                                                     21.6%               25.8%
Education*                                                                 18.9%               32.9%
Energy                                                                     14.9%               11.7%
Transport                                                                  12.2%               17.4%
Urban development*                                                         9.5%                 2.3%
Domestic private sector development                                        8.1%                 7.5%
Public sector governance/reform                                            8.1%                 8.0%
Trade and exports                                                          8.1%                10.3%
Equality of opportunity                                                    6.8%                 8.5%
Disaster management*                                                       5.4%                 0.0%
Gender equity                                                              4.1%                10.8%
Information and communications technology                                  4.1%                 3.8%
Climate change*                                                            2.7%                 0.0%
Social protection                                                          2.7%                 0.9%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                           2.7%                4.7%
sector
Water and sanitation                                                       1.4%                4.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                  1.4%                2.8%
Environmental sustainability                                               1.4%                4.2%
Financial markets                                                          1.4%                3.3%
Global/regional integration                                                0.0%                0.5%
Regulatory framework                                                       0.0%                0.0%
Law and justice                                                            0.0%                1.9%
Crime and violence                                                         0.0%                0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                     0.0%                0.9%
Food security                                                              0.0%                3.3%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                              154
The World Bank Group                                         Uganda




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Education Sector      All Others
Education*                                                                 51.4%              29.4%
Agricultural development                                                   47.3%              48.1%
Energy*                                                                    44.6%              27.6%
Trade and exports                                                          23.0%              17.8%
Job creation/employment                                                    20.3%              26.6%
Rural development                                                          18.9%              16.4%
Health                                                                     14.9%               7.9%
Anti-corruption*                                                           10.8%              23.8%
Water and sanitation*                                                      10.8%               4.2%
Transport                                                                  9.5%               15.9%
Equality of opportunity*                                                   8.1%                1.4%
Domestic private sector development                                        8.1%                6.5%
Foreign direct investment                                                  6.8%                9.8%
Regulatory framework                                                       6.8%                6.5%
Global/regional integration                                                4.1%                7.5%
Information and communications technology                                  4.1%                7.0%
Public sector governance/reform                                            4.1%                8.9%
Financial markets                                                          2.7%                6.5%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                           1.4%               7.0%
sector
Social protection                                                          1.4%               1.9%
Food security*                                                             1.4%               9.8%
Gender equity                                                              0.0%               4.7%
Climate change                                                             0.0%               0.0%
Disaster management                                                        0.0%               0.0%
Urban development                                                          0.0%               0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                     0.0%               0.0%
Environmental sustainability                                               0.0%               0.9%
Law and justice                                                            0.0%               0.0%
Crime and violence                                                         0.0%               0.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                              155
The World Bank Group                                         Uganda




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Uganda, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
Percentage of Respondents
(Responses Combined)                                                  Education Sector         All Others
Poverty reduction*                                                         52.7%                 32.6%
Education*                                                                 52.7%                 35.8%
Energy*                                                                    44.6%                 20.5%
Agricultural development                                                   23.0%                 25.6%
Health                                                                     18.9%                 25.1%
Anti-corruption                                                            18.9%                 14.9%
Transport                                                                  10.8%                 17.2%
Foreign direct investment                                                  9.5%                   4.2%
Public sector governance/reform                                            8.1%                  12.6%
Rural development*                                                         8.1%                  18.6%
Gender equity                                                              6.8%                   8.4%
Job creation/employment*                                                   6.8%                  16.7%
Global/regional integration                                                5.4%                   1.9%
Domestic private sector development                                        5.4%                   1.9%
Trade and exports                                                          5.4%                  13.0%
Regulatory framework                                                       4.1%                  10.7%
Climate change                                                             2.7%                   5.1%
Urban development                                                          2.7%                   6.5%
Economic growth                                                            2.7%                   5.1%
Social protection                                                          1.4%                   0.0%
Financial markets                                                          1.4%                   5.1%
Equality of opportunity                                                    1.4%                   3.3%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                           1.4%                   4.7%
sector
Crime and violence                                                         0.0%                   3.3%
Water and sanitation                                                       0.0%                   1.4%
Environmental sustainability                                               0.0%                   0.0%
Food security                                                              0.0%                   1.9%
Law and justice                                                            0.0%                   0.5%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                     0.0%                   0.0%
Information and communications technology                                  0.0%                   2.8%
Disaster management                                                        0.0%                   0.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                              156
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Uganda? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                             Education Sector          All Others
                                                                              N Mean SD          N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                              68    8.18   1.72   191     8.40   2.17
Information and communications technology                                    64    6.83   2.13   169     7.28   2.45
Transport                                                                    63    8.24   1.30   183     8.36   1.68
Crime and violence                                                           66    5.59   2.18   180     5.68   2.14
Law and justice                                                              68    6.97   2.01   193     7.49   2.05
Urban development                                                            64    7.78   1.88   180     7.76   2.04
Environmental sustainability                                                 67    7.72   1.94   190     7.84   2.01
Regulatory framework                                                         61    6.16   2.33   174     6.82   2.45
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       58    7.66   2.03   164     6.95   2.47
Poverty reduction*                                                           68    8.79   1.36   192     8.10   2.16
Gender equity*                                                               66    5.86   2.64   182     6.57   2.34
Domestic private sector development                                          64    6.30   2.26   171     6.88   2.41
Foreign direct investment                                                    66    7.82   1.74   181     8.18   1.78
Water and sanitation                                                         66    7.70   1.65   188     7.77   1.93
Trade and exports                                                            67    6.99   2.43   183     7.42   2.57
Economic growth                                                              69    8.59   1.39   192     8.42   1.60
Energy*                                                                      67    7.78   1.82   178     8.52   1.42
Disaster management                                                          68    7.18   1.90   191     7.18   1.97
Public sector governance/reform                                              68    8.00   1.65   184     7.99   1.99
Job creation/employment                                                      66    8.24   1.51   194     7.97   1.99
Financial markets                                                            66    6.92   2.46   180     7.02   2.57
Equality of opportunity                                                      66    6.17   2.28   172     6.47   2.41
Health                                                                       66    7.98   1.95   188     7.95   2.06
Rural development                                                            68    7.74   1.69   192     7.96   1.72
Global/regional integration                                                  63    6.89   1.89   184     6.77   2.09
Food security                                                                66    7.79   1.64   172     7.51   1.89
Education                                                                    67    8.16   1.95   187     8.24   1.82
Social protection                                                            65    6.34   2.63   171     6.47   2.30
Climate change                                                               64    6.80   2.13   186     7.05   2.12
Agricultural development                                                     70    8.17   1.78   189     8.49   1.84
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector            68    8.01   1.87   184     8.29   1.67
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                     157
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Uganda? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                             Education Sector          All Others
                                                                              N Mean SD          N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption                                                              62    4.74   2.10   151     5.34   2.65
Information and communications technology                                    61    5.36   2.30   144     5.84   2.25
Transport*                                                                   62    7.05   1.83   159     7.65   1.63
Crime and violence                                                           59    4.49   2.14   119     4.29   2.11
Law and justice                                                              56    5.23   1.82   134     5.58   1.94
Urban development                                                            61    6.62   2.08   156     6.54   2.06
Environmental sustainability                                                 58    6.78   1.95   138     6.28   2.35
Regulatory framework*                                                        58    6.38   2.12   129     7.31   2.08
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       59    6.20   2.00   141     6.33   2.45
Poverty reduction*                                                           61    5.66   2.70   168     6.88   2.37
Gender equity                                                                62    5.27   2.03   139     5.55   2.10
Domestic private sector development                                          57    5.60   1.91   145     5.48   1.95
Foreign direct investment                                                    61    6.97   1.96   154     7.01   2.13
Water and sanitation                                                         62    7.19   1.75   159     6.65   2.26
Trade and exports                                                            58    6.81   1.78   141     6.25   2.00
Economic growth                                                              59    8.12   1.38   152     7.74   1.85
Energy                                                                       62    7.61   1.36   145     7.43   1.73
Disaster management                                                          55    6.00   2.20   117     5.44   2.25
Public sector governance/reform                                              62    6.34   2.13   158     6.34   2.53
Job creation/employment                                                      64    5.50   2.43   162     5.50   2.63
Financial markets                                                            55    6.27   2.04   128     5.97   2.22
Equality of opportunity                                                      58    5.22   1.86   126     5.13   2.00
Health                                                                       63    7.03   1.83   179     6.88   2.07
Rural development                                                            59    6.07   1.76   151     5.97   2.12
Global/regional integration                                                  53    6.32   1.09   123     6.22   1.81
Food security                                                                62    6.52   2.09   157     6.06   2.30
Education                                                                    64    7.25   1.68   174     7.37   1.76
Social protection*                                                           60    6.32   2.16   131     5.43   2.33
Climate change*                                                              61    6.52   1.96   144     5.41   2.26
Agricultural development                                                     63    6.33   1.68   168     6.21   2.17
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector            57    5.32   1.94   142     5.65   2.18
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                     158
The World Bank Group                                      Uganda




Public Sector vs. Others
Information and Communications Technology N=40                    All Others N=277

A. General Issues Facing Uganda

Listed below are a number of development priorities in Uganda. Please identify which of the following you consider the most
important development priorities in Uganda. (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                        Information and
Percentage of Respondents                                               Communications
(Responses Combined)                                                   Technology Sector                 All Others
Anti-corruption*                                                             51.4%                         31.3%
Poverty reduction*                                                           45.7%                         22.4%
Job creation/employment                                                      28.6%                         20.6%
Economic growth                                                              28.6%                         32.7%
Health                                                                       25.7%                         23.2%
Education                                                                    25.7%                         33.8%
Transport                                                                    20.0%                         10.7%
Energy                                                                       20.0%                         23.5%
Water and sanitation                                                         14.3%                          9.9%
Agricultural development                                                     11.4%                         14.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                             11.4%                         10.3%
sector
Rural development                                                             5.7%                          7.7%
Public sector governance/reform                                               5.7%                         14.0%
Food security                                                                 2.9%                          2.9%
Information and communications technology                                     2.9%                          6.6%
Social protection                                                             0.0%                          5.9%
Global/regional integration                                                   0.0%                          0.0%
Gender equity                                                                 0.0%                          5.1%
Domestic private sector development                                           0.0%                          1.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                     0.0%                          7.0%
Financial markets                                                             0.0%                          2.2%
Urban development                                                             0.0%                          2.2%
Environmental sustainability                                                  0.0%                          0.7%
Equality of opportunity                                                       0.0%                          2.6%
Climate change                                                                0.0%                          0.0%
Trade and exports                                                             0.0%                          7.4%
Crime and violence                                                            0.0%                          1.5%
Law and justice                                                               0.0%                          0.7%
Regulatory framework                                                          0.0%                          0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                        0.0%                          0.0%
Disaster management                                                           0.0%                          0.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                           159
The World Bank Group                                     Uganda




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas. Which THREE areas of development listed
below do you believe would contribute most to reducing poverty in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                       Information and
Percentage of Respondents                                              Communications
(Responses Combined)                                                  Technology Sector               All Others
Health*                                                                     42.1%                       20.2%
Education                                                                   31.6%                       29.2%
Anti-corruption                                                             31.6%                       25.3%
Rural development                                                           28.9%                       28.2%
Agricultural development                                                    28.9%                       37.9%
Economic growth                                                             26.3%                       20.6%
Transport                                                                   26.3%                       15.2%
Equality of opportunity*                                                    18.4%                        6.1%
Job creation/employment                                                     18.4%                       28.2%
Water and sanitation*                                                       13.2%                        2.2%
Environmental sustainability*                                               13.2%                        4.0%
Energy                                                                       7.9%                       12.6%
Trade and exports                                                            7.9%                        9.0%
Gender equity                                                                5.3%                       10.1%
Climate change                                                               0.0%                        0.7%
Global/regional integration                                                  0.0%                        0.4%
Urban development                                                            0.0%                        4.3%
Regulatory framework                                                         0.0%                        0.0%
Social protection                                                            0.0%                        1.4%
Law and justice                                                              0.0%                        1.4%
Crime and violence                                                           0.0%                        0.0%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                       0.0%                        2.5%
Information and communications technology                                    0.0%                        4.0%
Domestic private sector development                                          0.0%                        9.0%
Foreign direct investment                                                    0.0%                        2.5%
Public sector governance/reform*                                             0.0%                       10.8%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                             0.0%                        6.1%
sector
Disaster management                                                          0.0%                        1.4%
Financial markets                                                            0.0%                        2.9%
Food security                                                                0.0%                        2.5%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                          160
The World Bank Group                                    Uganda




A. General Issues Facing Uganda (continued)

Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors. Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to
generating economic growth in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                      Information and
Percentage of Respondents                                             Communications
(Responses Combined)                                                 Technology Sector              All Others
Job creation/employment*                                                   38.5%                      20.9%
Education                                                                  35.9%                      32.5%
Energy                                                                     35.9%                      34.7%
Agricultural development*                                                  30.8%                      49.1%
Food security*                                                             30.8%                       6.1%
Anti-corruption                                                            23.1%                      18.1%
Gender equity*                                                             20.5%                       1.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                  17.9%                       8.7%
Trade and exports                                                          15.4%                      20.6%
Transport                                                                  12.8%                      16.2%
Information and communications technology                                  10.3%                       5.1%
Health                                                                     7.7%                        9.0%
Global/regional integration                                                7.7%                        5.8%
Public sector governance/reform                                            5.1%                       10.1%
Water and sanitation                                                       2.6%                        5.8%
Environmental sustainability                                               2.6%                        0.4%
Equality of opportunity                                                    0.0%                        3.2%
Social protection                                                          0.0%                        1.8%
Climate change                                                             0.0%                        0.0%
Disaster management                                                        0.0%                        0.0%
Rural development*                                                         0.0%                       18.1%
Urban development                                                          0.0%                        0.0%
Regulatory framework                                                       0.0%                        8.7%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                     0.0%                        0.0%
Domestic private sector development                                        0.0%                        8.7%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                           0.0%                        5.8%
sector
Law and justice                                                            0.0%                        0.0%
Crime and violence                                                         0.0%                        0.0%
Financial markets                                                          0.0%                        7.2%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                         161
The World Bank Group                                      Uganda




B. Overall Attitudes toward the World Bank Group
When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results in Uganda, in which
sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its resources (financial and knowledge services)
in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
                                                                       Information and
Percentage of Respondents                                              Communications
(Responses Combined)                                                  Technology Sector                 All Others
Education*                                                                    62.5%                       35.7%
Poverty reduction*                                                            52.5%                       36.1%
Rural development                                                             25.0%                       14.4%
Health                                                                        25.0%                       22.7%
Gender equity*                                                                20.0%                        5.4%
Energy                                                                        20.0%                       26.7%
Urban development*                                                            20.0%                        2.9%
Trade and exports                                                             15.0%                        9.7%
Transport                                                                     15.0%                       19.1%
Anti-corruption                                                               10.0%                       17.0%
Job creation/employment                                                       7.5%                        14.1%
Foreign direct investment                                                     7.5%                         4.7%
Agricultural development                                                      5.0%                        30.0%
Regulatory framework                                                          2.5%                        10.8%
Information and communications technology                                     2.5%                         1.8%
Financial markets                                                             2.5%                         4.0%
Global/regional integration                                                   2.5%                         2.5%
Water and sanitation                                                          2.5%                         0.7%
Climate change                                                                2.5%                         4.3%
Social protection                                                             0.0%                         0.4%
Public sector governance/reform*                                              0.0%                        13.7%
Crime and violence                                                            0.0%                         2.5%
Domestic private sector development                                           0.0%                         2.9%
Environmental sustainability                                                  0.0%                         0.0%
Equality of opportunity                                                       0.0%                         2.9%
Food security                                                                 0.0%                         1.4%
Economic growth                                                               0.0%                         5.4%
Law and justice                                                               0.0%                         0.4%
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                        0.0%                         0.0%
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas
                                                                              0.0%                         5.4%
sector
Disaster management                                                           0.0%                         0.0%
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                            162
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results

In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following areas of
development in Uganda? (1-Not important at all, 10-Very important)
                                                                              Information and
                                                                              Communications
                                                                             Technology Sector         All Others
                                                                               N Mean SD         N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption*                                                              32   7.53   2.62   255     8.45   1.92
Information and communications technology*                                    27   6.19   2.60   233     7.35   2.28
Transport*                                                                    29   7.66   2.11   245     8.53   1.48
Crime and violence                                                            31   5.65   1.40   233     5.69   2.23
Law and justice*                                                              32   6.09   1.79   257     7.54   2.12
Urban development*                                                            29   6.76   2.34   243     7.93   1.92
Environmental sustainability                                                  32   7.25   2.19   253     7.85   1.93
Regulatory framework                                                          32   6.53   2.23   230     6.80   2.41
Communicable/non-communicable diseases*                                       28   6.21   2.23   221     7.44   2.35
Poverty reduction*                                                            32   7.28   2.39   256     8.48   1.88
Gender equity                                                                 30   6.67   1.92   245     6.54   2.49
Domestic private sector development                                           32   6.81   2.01   230     6.81   2.38
Foreign direct investment                                                     32   8.13   1.48   243     8.06   1.81
Water and sanitation*                                                         32   7.19   1.67   249     7.91   1.88
Trade and exports                                                             32   7.13   2.09   245     7.33   2.54
Economic growth                                                               32   8.00   1.61   257     8.54   1.54
Energy                                                                        25   8.56   1.16   247     8.43   1.60
Disaster management                                                           32   6.72   1.89   255     7.29   2.09
Public sector governance/reform*                                              32   7.09   1.79   247     8.24   1.84
Job creation/employment*                                                      32   6.94   1.65   256     8.16   1.84
Financial markets                                                             31   6.68   2.27   242     7.10   2.51
Equality of opportunity                                                       28   6.21   1.29   238     6.57   2.50
Health                                                                        31   7.94   1.34   251     8.08   2.07
Rural development                                                             32   7.81   1.67   256     7.98   1.71
Global/regional integration*                                                  32   6.22   1.98   243     6.98   1.99
Food security                                                                 28   7.50   1.29   238     7.69   1.85
Education                                                                     32   7.94   1.56   250     8.36   1.87
Social protection                                                             31   6.74   1.83   232     6.53   2.43
Climate change                                                                32   6.44   1.50   245     7.09   2.28
Agricultural development*                                                     32   7.84   1.71   253     8.52   1.83
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector             32   7.53   1.37   247     8.23   2.00
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                     163
The World Bank Group                                                Uganda




C. World Bank Group’s Effectiveness and Results (continued)

How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank is in terms of the work it does in the following areas of
development in Uganda? (1-Not effective at all, 10-Very effective)
                                                                              Information and
                                                                              Communications
                                                                             Technology Sector         All Others
                                                                               N Mean SD         N       Mean SD
Anti-corruption*                                                              30   7.17   2.60   200     4.86   2.30
Information and communications technology*                                    28   6.50   1.67   194     5.58   2.24
Transport                                                                     30   8.00   1.46   213     7.44   1.74
Crime and violence                                                            15   3.93   1.39   179     4.42   2.07
Law and justice                                                               25   5.12   1.86   182     5.47   1.88
Urban development                                                             30   5.93   2.35   202     6.55   2.00
Environmental sustainability                                                  19   6.58   2.36   197     6.41   2.17
Regulatory framework                                                          26   7.65   2.43   177     6.86   2.05
Communicable/non-communicable diseases                                        25   5.88   2.15   188     6.37   2.31
Poverty reduction                                                             30   6.93   2.27   220     6.45   2.46
Gender equity                                                                 28   6.04   1.77   193     5.51   2.08
Domestic private sector development                                           23   4.87   1.29   200     5.61   1.92
Foreign direct investment                                                     28   7.14   1.98   207     6.92   2.04
Water and sanitation                                                          31   6.55   2.25   207     6.79   2.06
Trade and exports                                                             29   6.41   2.15   191     6.35   1.86
Economic growth                                                               27   7.37   2.40   204     7.78   1.65
Energy*                                                                       28   6.79   1.85   199     7.56   1.57
Disaster management                                                           22   5.50   2.30   170     5.55   2.30
Public sector governance/reform                                               30   5.87   2.32   210     6.39   2.36
Job creation/employment                                                       28   6.14   2.34   219     5.54   2.57
Financial markets                                                             22   5.59   1.33   179     6.08   2.16
Equality of opportunity                                                       25   5.40   1.76   176     5.24   1.96
Health                                                                        30   6.70   1.69   235     6.96   2.02
Rural development                                                             30   6.23   2.39   203     5.94   1.93
Global/regional integration                                                   25   6.08   1.94   167     6.23   1.51
Food security                                                                 29   5.90   2.18   208     6.15   2.21
Education                                                                     30   7.13   1.48   231     7.34   1.74
Social protection                                                             24   5.33   1.81   188     5.76   2.27
Climate change*                                                               25   4.60   1.47   201     5.90   2.20
Agricultural development                                                      30   6.27   1.96   224     6.29   2.06
Sustainable and transparent development of the oil and gas sector             26   5.85   1.38   194     5.42   2.26
*Significantly different between sectors




                                                                     164
The World Bank Group                                                                                           Uganda                                                                            Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix G: Indicator Questions as a Function of Exposure to the WBG
                                                          H3. Currently, do you
                                                       professionally collaborate/    H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
                                                          work with the WBG?                 Observer          Use WBG reports/data   Engage in WBG activities       Collaborate         Use WBG website

Indicator Question                                       No Mean       Yes Mean      No Mean       Yes Mean    No Mean     Yes Mean   No Mean       Yes Mean     No Mean    Yes Mean   No Mean    Yes Mean
Overall, please rate your impression of the World
                                                           6.02          6.42         6.40              5.85    6.17         6.08       6.12           6.29       6.16         6.10     6.05        6.41
Bank Group's effectiveness in Uganda.
To what extent do you believe the World Bank
Group's staff is well prepared to help Uganda solve        6.52          7.11         6.84              6.71    6.79         6.74       6.72           7.19       6.91         6.41     6.78        6.75
its most complicated development challenges?
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
                                                           6.11          6.07         6.21              6.06    6.28         5.79       6.10           6.45       6.04         6.41     6.12        6.21
relevant role in development in Uganda
The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
                                                           5.88          6.07         5.99              5.93    6.08         5.71       5.96           6.00       5.82         6.35     5.99        5.88
consider the development priorities for Uganda
Responsiveness                                             5.80          5.42         5.36              5.83    5.71         5.29       5.65           5.04       5.56         5.61     5.60        5.49
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
                                                           5.43          5.11         5.00              5.46    5.30         5.00       5.24           5.00       5.30         4.99     5.18        5.30
products and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                           5.54          4.30         4.39              5.52    5.20         4.34       4.96           4.78       5.12         4.39     4.90        5.06
circumstances)
Being inclusive                                            5.92          5.96         5.86              5.90    5.71         6.25       5.93           5.48       6.10         5.24     5.76        6.28
Openness (sharing data and other information)              6.14          5.89         6.04              5.91    6.10         5.68       6.01           5.70       5.89         6.20     5.95        6.07
Staff accessibility                                        5.34          5.02         5.17              5.20    5.38         4.75       5.21           4.96       5.12         5.35     5.14        5.33
Straightforwardness and honesty                            6.23          5.76         5.77              6.20    6.21         5.45       6.00           5.70       5.95         6.02     5.94        6.06
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                           5.62          5.72         5.54              5.75    5.75         5.41       5.62           5.83       5.48         6.13     5.72        5.36
Government
Collaboration with the Government                          7.65          8.37         8.25              7.55    7.85         8.10       7.87           8.38       7.97         7.79     7.78        8.40
Collaboration with other donors                            7.35          8.01         7.85              7.31    7.40         8.00       7.49           8.48       7.79         7.07     7.46        8.04
The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
                                                           6.00          5.05         5.23              5.96    5.85         4.91       5.58           5.48       5.78         5.01     5.44        5.95
the ground
To what extent does the World Bank Group's work
                                                           6.01          5.75         5.71              6.02    5.97         5.62       5.84           6.00       5.85         5.88     5.81        6.03
help to achieve development results in Uganda?
The World Bank Group's financial instruments meet
                                                           5.68          6.50         6.37              5.57    5.75         6.51       5.90           6.63       6.08         5.69     5.86        6.36
the needs of Uganda
The World Bank Group meets Uganda's needs for
                                                           5.91          5.69         5.96              5.81    6.16         5.25       5.82           6.40       5.90         5.82     5.81        6.10
knowledge services
Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific development
                                                           5.24          5.23         5.09              5.43    5.42         4.89       5.14           6.19       5.29         5.15     5.33        5.02
challenges and country circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the WBG's knowledge work and activities            6.15          6.11         6.03              6.21    6.37         5.57       6.01           6.93       6.04         6.34     6.14        6.05
make to development results in your country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of
the World Bank Group's knowledge work and                  7.50          7.93         7.98              7.49    7.80         7.64       7.70           8.10       7.74         7.77     7.69        7.92
activities?
Where country systems are adequate, the World
                                                           6.81          7.49         7.21              7.01    7.06         7.28       7.04           7.83       7.33         6.55     6.93        7.72
Bank Group makes appropriate use of them
Yellow highlight indicates significant difference between Yes and No mean.
                                                                                                                 165
The World Bank Group                                                                                              Uganda                                                                             Country Opinion Survey 2014

Appendix H: Indicator Questions as a Function of Stakeholder Group
                                                                      Private Sector/
                                                  Employee of a      Financial Sector/
                                                    Ministry           Private Bank      Private Foundation         NGO                CBO                Media          Faith-Based Group        Academia               Other
                                                  N    Mean   SD     N    Mean     SD     N    Mean    SD     N     Mean   SD     N    Mean   SD     N    Mean    SD      N    Mean   SD     N     Mean      SD     N    Mean    SD
Overall, please rate your impression of the
                                                  69   6.09   2.21   19    6.11   1.20    16    6.75   2.18   66    5.83   1.86   12   6.67   2.46   39   7.51    2.54    21   4.52   2.46   19     3.16     1.57   17   6.76    1.52
World Bank Group's effectiveness in Uganda.*
To what extent do you believe the WBG's staff
is well prepared to help Uganda solve its most    69   6.38   2.01   24    6.33   1.58    13    7.00   1.63   62    6.23   2.17   12   7.00   1.81   47   8.49    2.00    21   5.38   1.56   20     6.60     1.85   18   6.78    1.70
complicated development challenges?*
Overall the World Bank Group currently plays
                                                  70   6.01   2.39   15    7.33   2.26    16    5.81   2.66   70    6.07   2.22   12   4.92   3.26   46   5.30    3.97    21   6.67   1.74   19     5.32     2.98   18   7.22    2.32
a relevant role in development in Uganda
The WBG’s work is aligned with what I
consider the development priorities for           67   6.48   1.59   11    6.00   2.05    11    5.64   2.06   65    5.97   2.11   12   4.33   2.06   43   5.28    2.96    21   6.43   1.81   19     3.84     3.02   18   6.61    2.45
Uganda*
Responsiveness*                                   56   5.77   1.64    8    6.63   1.19    13    6.23   3.03   67    5.78   2.02   7    3.29   2.14   38   4.61    3.05    12   6.58   1.88   6      4.17     2.48   12   6.92    2.15
Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
                                                  68   4.94   1.49   10    5.50   1.72    16    5.69   2.65   66    5.76   1.86   7    5.00   3.74   39   4.54    2.60    21   5.43   1.96   9      4.11     1.97   18   5.72    1.53
products and services)
Flexibility (in terms of changing country
                                                  60   4.17   2.57   13    6.23   3.17    10    6.90   2.85   65    5.55   2.42   3    1.00   0.00   41   4.51    3.07    20   5.40   2.19   18     3.50     1.43   15   6.13    1.73
circumstances)*
Being inclusive*                                  66   5.23   1.86   10    6.10   1.91    13    6.54   1.94   66    6.24   2.07   7    4.86   4.81   41   6.80    3.01    21   4.76   2.77   13     4.38     2.60   15   6.27    1.34
Openness (sharing data and other
                                                  68   6.53   2.37   11    7.64   2.34    16    5.44   2.78   71    6.03   2.17   7    3.29   2.14   41   5.41    3.28    17   3.82   2.33   15     3.80     3.17   17   8.35    1.46
information)*
Staff accessibility*                              66   6.35   1.76   11    5.82   1.54    14    3.71   3.05   68    4.81   1.86   7    1.00   0.00   41   5.22    2.93    20   4.60   2.98   16     1.44     0.81   18   6.28    2.54
Straightforwardness and honesty*                  65   6.42   1.74   11    6.73   1.85    13    6.77   2.59   70    6.19   2.08   7    5.00   3.74   41   5.49    3.07    17   3.53   2.10   11     3.45     2.25   16   7.44    1.83
Collaboration with groups outside of the
                                                  53   6.11   1.48   11    5.36   1.91    11    6.18   3.22   67    5.39   2.51   7    5.00   3.74   37   5.11    2.74    21   6.57   1.86   10     4.20     2.53   16   6.25    1.48
Government
Collaboration with the Government*                64   7.81   1.64   11    8.09   1.92    10    8.50   2.42   66    7.64   1.60   7    8.86   1.07   42   8.64    1.69    17   6.82   1.19   19     5.89     2.71   18   8.61    1.85
Collaboration with other donors*                  61   6.64   1.78   11    7.55   2.46    13    7.23   2.39   68    7.81   1.41   7    10.00 0.00    34   8.85    1.73    21   7.10   1.41   10     6.90     3.35   16   7.75    2.18
The speed in which it gets things
                                                  67   4.70   2.55   14    6.86   2.35    16    4.50   2.13   68    6.72   1.67   7    5.00   3.74   41   5.29    3.28    21   5.57   2.14   13     3.38     2.53   17   5.76    1.64
accomplished on the ground*
To what extent does the WBG's work help to
                                                  68   5.87   2.12   12    6.25   1.82    16    6.19   2.26   72    6.42   1.97   12   5.00   2.76   45   4.82    3.56    21   5.86   1.68   16     5.38     1.03   18   6.67    1.78
achieve development results in Uganda?*
The World Bank Group's financial instruments
                                                  68   5.94   1.94   12    5.67   1.61    16    5.63   1.78   72    5.88   1.90   7    10.00 0.00    41   6.93    3.46    21   5.19   2.14   20     3.35     2.13   18   5.83    1.54
meet the needs of Uganda*
The World Bank Group meets Uganda's needs
                                                  59   6.24   2.64   12    6.00   2.05    16    5.31   3.09   71    5.73   2.01   7    2.14   1.07   42   6.33    3.64    21   5.33   2.15   15     3.47     1.64   18   6.11    2.27
for knowledge services*
Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific
development challenges and country                66   5.14   1.80   11    4.82   2.23    13    4.92   1.61   71    5.07   2.38   7    5.00   3.74   41   5.78    3.66    21   4.57   2.11   15     5.53     2.45   18   5.72    2.14
circumstances
Overall, how significant a contribution do you
believe the WBG's knowledge work and
                                                  66   6.24   2.01   12    6.25   1.29    13    6.46   2.26   71    6.11   2.01   12   5.67   3.60   44   6.23    3.39    21   5.38   1.28   20     4.95     1.47   18   6.56    1.92
activities make to development results in your
country?
Overall, how would you rate the technical
quality of the WBG's knowledge work and           66   8.26   1.37   17    7.59   1.91    13    8.31   1.97   69    6.83   1.61   12   6.25   2.26   43   8.95    1.66    21   5.71   1.90   14     7.36     2.56   18   8.44    1.15
activities?*
Where country systems are adequate, the
                                                  68   6.85   1.94   13    6.92   1.80    13    6.77   2.05   67    6.40   2.10   7    8.14   3.19   39   8.92    1.71    11   6.91   2.21   5      5.80     0.45   7    6.43    1.51
WBG makes appropriate use of them*
*Significantly different between stakeholder groups

                                                                                                                   166
The World Bank Group                                Uganda                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



Appendix I: Uganda FY 2014 Questionnaire




                            World Bank Group Country Survey FY14 – Uganda


The World Bank Group is interested in gauging the views of clients and partners who are either involved in
development in Uganda or who observe activities related to social and economic development. The following
survey will give the World Bank Group’s team that works in Uganda, greater insight into how the Bank’s work is
perceived. This is one tool the World Bank Group uses to assess the views of its stakeholders, and to develop
more effective strategies that support development in Uganda.

A local independent firm has been hired to oversee the logistics of this survey. This ensures anonymity and
confidentiality. We hope you’ll be candid.

Finally, the survey relates to the World Bank Group’s work. The World Bank Group consists of IBRD, IDA, IFC,
MIGA, and ICSID. When responding to the survey, please consider the area of the World Bank Group with which
you are most familiar.

To complete the survey, please circle/check the response that most accurately reflects your opinion.
If you prefer not to answer a question, please leave it blank. If you feel that you do not have an
adequate amount of information on a subject, please check “Don’t know?.


PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES FACING UGANDA

 A1. In general would you say that Uganda is headed in ... ?
 1    The right direction
 2    The wrong direction
 3    Not sure




                                                     167
The World Bank Group                                        Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES

 A2. Listed below are a number of development priorities in Uganda.
 Please identify which of the following you consider the most important development priorities in
 Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
  1                                                           17     Education
       assistance)
  2    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)       18     Poverty reduction
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  3    effectiveness, public financial management, public     19     Energy
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
  4    Global/regional integration                            20     Food security
  5    Gender equity                                          21     Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
  6    Domestic private sector development                    22     Agricultural development
  7    Foreign direct investment                              23     Trade and exports
  8    Water and sanitation                                   24     Crime and violence
  9    Anti corruption                                        25     Economic growth
 10    Job creation/employment                                26     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 11    Rural development                                      27     Regulatory framework
 12    Financial markets                                      28     Communicable/non-communicable diseases
                                                                     Sustainable and transparent development of the oil
 13    Urban development                                      29     and gas sector (particularly related to management
                                                                     of revenues)
 14    Environmental sustainability                           30     Disaster management
 15    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
                                                              31     Information and communications technology
 16    Health




                                                             168
The World Bank Group                                       Uganda                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A3. Poverty reduction is a broad term that encompasses work in many different areas.
 Which THREE areas of development listed below do you believe would contribute most to reducing
 poverty in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
  1    Water and sanitation                               16    Anti corruption
  2    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)             17    Domestic private sector development
  3    Economic growth                                    18    Foreign direct investment
  4    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)      19    Education
  5    Global/regional integration                        20    Energy
                                                                Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
  6    Gender equity                                      21    effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                expenditure, fiscal system reform)
                                                                Sustainable and transparent development of the oil
  7    Rural development                                  22    and gas sector (particularly related to management
                                                                of revenues)
  8    Urban development                                  23    Environmental sustainability
  9    Regulatory framework                               24    Disaster management
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 10                                                       25    Health
       social assistance)
 11    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)            26    Agricultural development

 12    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)   27    Job creation/employment
 13    Crime and violence                                 28    Financial markets
 14    Communicable/non-communicable diseases             29    Trade and exports
 15    Information and communications technology          30    Food security




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                               169
The World Bank Group                                             Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION A: GENERAL ISSUES
 A4. Economic growth can be driven by a number of factors.
 Which THREE areas below do you believe would contribute most to generating economic growth in
 Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
 1    Energy                                                16     Communicable/non-communicable diseases
 2    Gender equity                                         17     Trade and exports
                                                                   Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 3    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                18     effectiveness, public financial management, public
                                                                   expenditure, fiscal system reform)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted
 4                                                          19     Domestic private sector development
      social assistance)
 5    Global/regional integration                           20     Job creation/employment
 6    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)         21     Agricultural development
 7    Anti corruption                                       22     Food security
 8    Disaster management                                   23     Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)
                                                                   Sustainable and transparent development of the oil
 9    Rural development                                     24     and gas sector (particularly related to management
                                                                   of revenues)
 10   Foreign direct investment                             25     Environmental sustainability
 11   Urban development                                     26     Health
 12   Water and sanitation                                  27     Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 13   Education                                             28     Crime and violence
 14   Information and communications technology
                                                            29     Financial markets
 15   Regulatory framework


 A5. When thinking about the idea of “shared prosperity? in your country, which of the following
 TWO best illustrate how this would be achieved in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Better employment opportunities for young people
 2    Better employment opportunities for women
 3    Greater access to micro-finance for the poor
 4    Greater voice and participation for citizens to help ensure greater accountability
 5    Greater access to health and nutrition for citizens
 6    Greater access to social services for citizens across Uganda
 7    Better entrepreneurial opportunities (i.e., to start small and medium sized businesses)
 8    A growing middle class
 9    Better opportunity for the poor who live in rural areas
 10   Better opportunity for the poor who live in urban areas
 11   Consistent economic growth
 12   More reliable social safety net
 13   Greater equity of fiscal policy
 14   Education and training that better ensure job opportunity
 15   Better quality public services
 16   Other (please specify):_____________________________________




                                                                  170
The World Bank Group                                        Uganda                                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B1. How familiar are you with the work of the World Bank Group in Uganda?
          1                 2               3       4       5             6        7        8            9              10
 Not familiar at all                                                                                             Extremely familiar



 B2. Overall, please rate your impression of the World Bank Group’s effectiveness in Uganda.
          1             2           3           4   5       6             7        8        9           10              
                                                                                                         Very
 Not effective at all                                                                                               Don't know
                                                                                                     effective


 B3. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s staff is well prepared (e.g., skills and
 knowledge) to help Uganda solve its most complicated development challenges?
          1             2       3       4       5   6   7            8        9                 10                      
                                                                                       To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                Don't know
                                                                                                    degree


 B4. When thinking about how the World Bank Group can have the most impact on development results
 in Uganda, in which sectoral areas do you believe the World Bank Group should focus most of its
 resources (financial and knowledge services) in Uganda? (Choose no more than THREE)
      Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 1                                                              17       Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)
      assistance)
      Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 2    effectiveness, public financial management, public        18       Health
      expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)          19       Education
 4    Poverty reduction                                         20       Food security
 5    Global/regional integration                               21       Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)
 6    Gender equity                                             22       Agricultural development
 7    Crime and violence                                        23       Trade and exports
 8    Domestic private sector development                       24       Economic growth
 9    Rural development                                         25       Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)
 10   Foreign direct investment                                 26       Regulatory framework
 11   Water and sanitation                                      27       Communicable/non-communicable diseases
                                                                         Sustainable and transparent development of the oil
 12   Energy                                                    28       and gas sector (particularly related to management
                                                                         of revenues)
 13   Job creation/employment                                   29       Anti corruption
 14   Financial markets                                         30       Information and communications technology
 15   Urban development
                                                                31       Disaster management
 16   Environmental sustainability




                                                                171
The World Bank Group                                             Uganda                                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP

 B5. When thinking about the World Bank Group’s role, which activity do you believe is of greatest
 VALUE and which activity is of second greatest value in Uganda?
                                                                                Greatest Value              Second Greatest Value
                                                                             (Choose only ONE) (Choose only ONE)
 1     Convening/Facilitating                                                                                         
 2     Data                                                                                                           
 3     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                                                               
 4     Financial resources                                                                                            
       Capacity development (e.g., institutional development,
 5                                                                                                                    
       training for staff at state institutions, scholarships, etc.)
 6     Technical assistance                                                                                           
 7     Mobilizing third party financial resources                                                                     
 8     Donor coordination                                                                                             
       Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 9                                                                                                                    
       knowledge sharing)
 10    Other (please specify): ________________________                                                               


 How effectively do the World Bank Group’s activities below support Uganda’s efforts to achieve
 development results?
                                                                       Not effective                                       Very    Don't
                                                                       at all                                          effective   know
  B6     Convening/Facilitating                                          1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B7     Data                                                            1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B8     Policy advice, studies, analyses                                1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
  B9     Financial resources                                             1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B10     Technical assistance                                            1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B11     Mobilizing third party financial resources                      1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
 B12     Donor coordination                                              1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         Linkage to non-Bank expertise (i.e., South-South
 B13                                                                     1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         knowledge sharing)


 The World Bank Group can provide capacity building support in a number of ways in Uganda. To which
 degree would Uganda benefit, if capacity building were to support...?
                                                                       To no                                        To a very
                                                                                                                                   Don't
                                                                       degree                                      significant
                                                                                                                                   know
                                                                       at all                                         degree
         Groups outside of government (e.g., civil society,
 B14     media) to help them more effectively engage and                 1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         participate in development efforts
         The public sector, related to implementation of
 B15                                                                     1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         specific development projects on the ground
         The public sector, related to changing institutions
 B16                                                                     1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         (organizations or sociopolitical conditions)
         The private sector, related to institutional and
 B17                                                                     1      2      3   4    5   6   7     8    9        10      
         policy change




                                                                   172
The World Bank Group                                           Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the capacity building work it does in
 each of the following areas in Uganda? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas
 listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                   Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                   at all                                       effective   know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B18                                                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B19                                                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B20                                                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)


 When thinking about how to improve capacity building in Uganda to help ensure better development
 results, looking forward, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 aspects of capacity building? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in any of the areas listed below,
 please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                   Not important                                Very        Don't
                                                                   at all                                   important       know
         Project implementation (or other organizational
 B21                                                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         strengthening)
         Citizen engagement (incorporating citizens' voices
 B22                                                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         into development)
         Policy design (for clarity and better incentives to
 B23                                                                  1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
         achieve development goals)


 B24. Which of the following do you identify as the World Bank Group’s greatest WEAKNESSES in its
 work in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Staff too inaccessible
 2     Not exploring alternative policy options
 3     Not adequately sensitive to political/social realities in Uganda
 4     Not enough public disclosure of its work
 5     Arrogant in its approach
 6     Not aligned with country priorities
 7     The credibility of its knowledge/data
 8     World Bank Group’s processes too complex
 9     Not willing to honestly criticize policies and reform efforts in the country
 10    Too influenced by developed countries
 11    Imposing technocratic solutions without regard to political realities
 12    World Bank Group’s processes too slow
 13    Too bureaucratic in its operational policies and procedures
 14    Not aligned with other donors’ work
 15    Not collaborating enough with non-state actors
 16    Not client focused
 17    Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 18    Don’t know




                                                                173
The World Bank Group                                          Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 B25. Which World Bank Group’s instruments do you believe are the MOST effective in reducing poverty
 in Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Capacity development (e.g., institutional development, training for staff at state institutions, scholarships, etc.)
 2     Policy based lending / budget support to the Government
 3     Knowledge products/services (analytical work, studies, surveys, etc.)
 4     Investment lending (financing specific projects)
 5     Technical assistance (advice, best practice, international experience, etc.)
 6     Trust Fund management
 7     Other (please specify): __________________________________________________
 8     Don’t know


 B26. In addition to the regular relations with the national government as its main interlocutor, which
 TWO of the following groups should the World Bank Group collaborate with more in your country to
 ensure better development results there? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     Academia/think tanks/research institutes
 2     Donor community
 3     Media
 4     NGOs
 5     Local Government
 6     Private sector
 7     Parliament
 8     Community Based Organizations (CBOs)
 9     Beneficiaries
 10    Foundations
 11    Faith based organizations
 12    Other (please specify): __________________________
 13    Don’t know


 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group’s work in
 Uganda?
                                                                   Strongly                                    Strongly   Don't
                                                                   disagree                                       agree   know
         Overall the World Bank Group currently plays a
 B27                                                                  1   2    3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         relevant role in development in Uganda
         The World Bank Group’s work is aligned with what I
 B28                                                                  1   2    3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         consider the development priorities for Uganda
         The World Bank Group supports programs and
 B29                                                                  1   2    3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         strategies that are realistic for Uganda
         The World Bank Group treats clients and
 B30                                                                  1   2    3      4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         stakeholders in Uganda with respect




                                                                174
The World Bank Group                                          Uganda                                       Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION B: OVERALL ATTITUDES TOWARD THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent is the World Bank Group an effective development partner in Uganda in terms of each
 of the following?
                                                                   To no                                     To a very
                                                                                                                          Don't
                                                                   degree at                                significant
                                                                                                                          know
                                                                   all                                         degree
 B31     Responsiveness                                               1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Flexibility (in terms of the World Bank Group’s
 B32                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         products and services)
         Flexibility (in terms of changing country
 B33                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         circumstances)
 B34     Being inclusive                                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B35     Openness (sharing data and other information)                1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B36     Staff accessibility                                          1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B37     Straightforwardness and honesty                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Ease of access to the people at the World Bank
 B38     Group who are making decisions important to my               1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         work
         Collaboration with groups outside of the
 B39                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         Government (e.g., NGOs, academia, private sector)
 B40     Collaboration with the Government                            1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       

 B41     Collaboration with other donors                              1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         The speed in which it gets things accomplished on
 B42                                                                  1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       
         the ground
 B43     Being a long-term partner                                    1   2      3   4   5   6   7     8    9     10       



 B44. To be a more effective development partner in Uganda, do you believe that the World Bank Group
 should have… ? (Select only ONE response)
                                       The current level of local
     More local presence                                                     Less local presence       Don't know
                                           presence is adequate


 B45. When World Bank Group assisted reform efforts fail or are slow to take place, which of the
 following would you attribute this to? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1     The World Bank Group does not do adequate follow through/follow-up
 2     There is not an adequate level of citizen/civil society participation
 3     The World Bank Group is not sensitive enough to political/social realities on the ground
 4     Lack of/inadequate levels of capacity in Government
 5     High levels of corruption in the country
 6     Poor donor coordination
 7     The World Bank Group works too slowly
 8     The Government works inefficiently
 9     Political pressures and obstacles
 10    Reforms are not well thought out in light of country challenges
 11    Other (please specify): ________________________________________




                                                                175
The World Bank Group                                        Uganda                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C1. In your opinion, how IMPORTANT is it for the World Bank Group to be involved in the following
 areas of development in Uganda?
                                                                Not important                            Very     Don't
                                                                at all                               important    know
  1    Anti corruption                                             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  2    Information and communications technology                   1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)            1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  4    Crime and violence                                          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  6    Urban development                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  7    Environmental sustainability                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  8    Regulatory framework                                        1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 10    Poverty reduction                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 11    Gender equity                                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 12    Domestic private sector development                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 13    Foreign direct investment                                   1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 14    Water and sanitation                                        1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 15    Trade and exports                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 16    Economic growth                                             1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 17    Energy                                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 18    Disaster management                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 19    effectiveness, public financial management, public          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 20    Job creation/employment                                     1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 21    Financial markets                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 22    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 23    Health                                                      1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 24    Rural development                                           1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 25    Global/regional integration                                 1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 26    Food security                                               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 27    Education                                                   1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 28                                                                1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       assistance)
 29    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)               1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
 30    Agricultural development                                    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       Sustainable and transparent development of the oil
 31    and gas sector (particularly related to management          1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9     10       
       of revenues)




                                                             176
The World Bank Group                                        Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C2. How EFFECTIVE do you believe the World Bank Group is in terms of the work it does in the following
 areas of development in Uganda? (If you have NO exposure to/experience in working in any of the
 sectors listed below, please respond “Don’t know?)
                                                                Not effective                                    Very    Don't
                                                                at all                                       effective   know
  1    Anti corruption                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  2    Information and communications technology                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  3    Transport (e.g., roads, bridges, transportation)            1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  4    Crime and violence                                          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  5    Law and justice (e.g., judicial system)                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  6    Urban development                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  7    Environmental sustainability                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  8    Regulatory framework                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
  9    Communicable/non-communicable diseases                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 10    Poverty reduction                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 11    Gender equity                                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 12    Domestic private sector development                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 13    Foreign direct investment                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 14    Water and sanitation                                        1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 15    Trade and exports                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 16    Economic growth                                             1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 17    Energy                                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 18    Disaster management                                         1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Public sector governance/ reform (i.e., government
 19    effectiveness, public financial management, public          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       expenditure, fiscal system reform)
 20    Job creation/employment                                     1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 21    Financial markets                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 22    Equality of opportunity (i.e., equity)                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 23    Health                                                      1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 24    Rural development                                           1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 25    Global/regional integration                                 1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 26    Food security                                               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 27    Education                                                   1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Social protection (e.g., pensions, targeted social
 28                                                                1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       assistance)
 29    Climate change (e.g., mitigation, adaptation)               1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
 30    Agricultural development                                    1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       Sustainable and transparent development of the oil
 31    and gas sector (particularly related to management          1   2        3   4   5   6   7   8    9        10      
       of revenues)




                                                             177
The World Bank Group                                               Uganda                                                  Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION C: WORLD BANK GROUP’S EFFECTIVENESS AND RESULTS
 C3. Where are the World Bank Group’s decisions made primarily that support the program in
 Uganda? (Select only ONE response)
  1    At the Headquarters (in Washington D.C.)
  2    In the country
  3    Don’t know


 C4. To what extent does the World Bank Group’s work help to achieve development results in
 Uganda?
         1             2       3       4       5       6           7         8       9                   10                      
 To no degree at                                                                                          To a very
                                                                                                                            Don't know
 all                                                                                             significant degree



 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about the World Bank Group in Uganda?
                                                               Strongly                                                    Strongly    Don't
                                                               disagree                                                       agree    know
       The World Bank Group’s financial instruments
       (i.e., investment lending, Development Policy
 C5                                                            1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       Loan, Trust Funds, Program 4 Result, etc.)
       meet the needs of Uganda
       The World Bank Group meets Uganda’s needs
 C6    for knowledge services (e.g., research,                 1        2        3   4       5       6    7        8   9       10       
       analysis, data, technical assistance)


 C7. To what extent do you believe the World Bank Group’s internal evaluation mechanisms hold the
 institution accountable for achieving results in Uganda?
             1             2       3       4       5       6           7         8       9                    10                      
                                                                                                   To a very significant
 To no degree at all                                                                                                           Don't know
                                                                                                                degree




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                                       178
The World Bank Group                                              Uganda                                                Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION D: THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S KNOWLEDGE WORK AND ACTIVITIES (i.e., ANALYSIS,
STUDIES, RESEARCH, DATA, REPORTS, CONFERENCES)
 D1. How frequently do you consult World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities in the work
 you do?
 1     Weekly
 2     Monthly
 3     A few times a year
 4     Rarely
 5     Never


 In Uganda, to what extent do you believe that the World Bank Group’s knowledge work and activities:
                                                             To no                                                       To a very
                                                                                                                                      Don't
                                                             degree at                                                  significant
                                                                                                                                      know
                                                             all                                                           degree
  D2     Are timely                                           1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Include appropriate level of stakeholder
  D3                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         involvement during preparation
         Are relevant to Uganda’s development
  D4                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         priorities
  D5     Lead to practical solutions                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are accessible (well written and easy to
  D6                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         understand)
         Are source of relevant information on global
  D7                                                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         good practices
  D8     Enhance your knowledge and/or skills                 1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

  D9     Are adequately disseminated                          1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        

 D10     Are translated enough into local language            1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         Are adaptable to Uganda’s specific
 D11     development challenges and country                   1           2       3   4       5     6     7     8       9     10        
         circumstances


 D12. Overall, how significant a contribution do you believe the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities make to development results in your country?
           1                  2   3   4      5       6            7           8       9                  10                        
 Not significant at all                                                                              Very significant       Don't know



 D13. Overall, how would you rate the technical quality of the World Bank Group's knowledge work
 and activities?
         1                2       3    4         5       6            7           8       9               10                       
 Very low                                                                                         Very high technical
                                                                                                                            Don't know
 technical quality                                                                                            quality




                                                                      179
The World Bank Group                                         Uganda                           Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION E: WORKING WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP
 To what extent does each of the following aspects of the World Bank Group’s technical assistance/
 advisory work contribute to solving Uganda’s development challenges?
                                                         To no                                  To a very
                                                                                                              Don't
                                                         degree at                             significant
                                                                                                              know
                                                         all                                      degree
         Conceptualization (understanding and
  E1                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         framing the problem)
         Design (appraising and planning the
  E2                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         solutions)
         Implementation (Executing, carrying out,
  E3     monitoring and making appropriate               1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         adjustments)
  E4     Evaluation (assessing the impact and results)   1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      



 To what extent do you agree/disagree with the following statements?
                                                         Strongly                                  Strongly   Don't
                                                         disagree                                     agree   know
         The World Bank Group disburses funds
  E5                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         promptly
         The World Bank Group effectively monitors
  E6     and evaluates the projects and programs it      1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         supports
         The World Bank Group’s approvals and
  E7                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         reviews are done in a timely fashion
         The World Bank Group’s “Safeguard Policy?
  E8                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         requirements are reasonable
         The World Bank Group’s conditions on its
  E9                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         lending are reasonable
         The World Bank Group takes decisions quickly
 E10                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         in Uganda
         Working with the World Bank Group
 E11                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         increases Uganda’s institutional capacity
         The World Bank Group ensures consistency
 E12                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         and continuity through staff changes
         Where country systems (e.g., procurement,
         financial management, etc.) are adequate,
 E13                                                     1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         the World Bank Group makes appropriate use
         of them
         The World Bank Group provides effective
 E14     implementation support (i.e., supervision of    1       2    3   4   5   6   7   8    9       10      
         projects)


 E15. Which of the following best describes the way the World Bank Group operates in Uganda?
 (Select only one response)
 1     The World Bank Group takes too much risk in Uganda
 2     The World Bank Group does not take enough risk in Uganda
 3     The World Bank Group’s approach to risk is appropriate
 4     Don’t know
 5     Prefer not to answer



                                                              180
The World Bank Group                                         Uganda                                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION F: THE FUTURE ROLE OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP IN UGANDA
 F1. Which of the following SHOULD the World Bank Group do to make itself of greater value in
 Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Provide more adequate data/knowledge/statistics/figures on Uganda’s economy
 2    Collaborate more effectively with Government clients (e.g., national, state, local)
 3    Offer more innovative financial products
 4    Improve the competitiveness of its financing compared to markets (e.g., cost, timeliness, other terms)
 5    Reach out more to groups outside of Government
 6    Improve the quality of its experts as related to Uganda’s specific challenges
 7    Offer more innovative knowledge services
 8    Ensure greater selectivity in its work
 9    Increase the level of capacity development in the country
 10   Reduce the complexity of obtaining World Bank Group financing
 11   Work faster
 12   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________

 F2. When considering the combination of services that the World Bank Group offers in Uganda, and
 taking into account its limited level of resources, which ONE of the following do you believe the World
 Bank Group should offer more of in Uganda? (Select only ONE response)
 1    Financial services
 2    Knowledge products
 3    Convening services
 4    None of the above
 5    The combination is appropriate for Uganda
 6    Don’t know

 F3. Please identify two areas related to sustainable development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda,
 where greater support from the World Bank Group would be most valuable. (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1    Support in mitigation of macro-economic risks
 2    Support efforts to ensure participation of civil society and citizens
 3    Technical aspects related to the sector
 4    Support in monitoring of operations
 5    Advisory role in contract negotiations
 6    Support in management of foreign exchange and revenues
      Support in governance, anti-corruption, access to information and transparency related to overall management
 7
      of oil and gas resources
 8    Support in improving quality of public expenditures
 9    Other (please specify): ______________________________________________
 10   Don’t know

 F4. Would you like to see more, less, or just about the same level of the World Bank Group involvement
 in the sustainable development of the oil and gas sector in Uganda? (Select only ONE response)
       More               Just about the same             Less                  None at all      Don't know




                                                               181
The World Bank Group                                        Uganda                                     Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING
 G1. How do you get most of your information about economic and social development issues in
 Uganda? (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Local newspapers
 2    International newspapers
 3    Local radio
 4    International radio
 5    Local television
 6    International television
 7    Periodicals
 8    Internet
 9    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 10   Blogs
 11   Mobile phones
 12   Instant messaging
 13   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


 G2. How would you prefer to receive information from the World Bank Group?                    (Choose no more
 than TWO)
 1    Blogs
 2    Direct contact with World Bank Group (i.e., face to face meetings/discussions)
 3    e-Newsletters
 4    Instant messaging
 5    World Bank Group’s seminars/workshops/conferences
 6    World Bank Group’s publications and other written materials
 7    Mobile phones
 8    Social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr)
 9    World Bank Group’s website
 10   Other (please specify): ______________________________________________


       Are you aware of the World Bank Group’s Access to Information Policy under which the
 G3                                                                                                     Yes         No
       Bank will now disclose any information in its possession that is not on a list of exceptions?
       Have you requested information from the World Bank Group on its activities in the past
 G4                                                                                                     Yes         No
       year? (If YES please go to Question G5; if NO please go to G6)
 G5    Were you able to obtain this information?                                                        Yes         No
 G6    Do you have access to the Internet?                                                              Yes         No
 G7    Do you use/have you used the World Bank Group website?                                           Yes         No




                                                                182
The World Bank Group                                        Uganda                                      Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION G: COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION SHARING

 G8. Which do you primarily use? (Select only ONE response)
 1     The World Bank Group’s country website (www.worldbank.org/uganda)
 2     The World Bank Group’s main website (www.worldbank.org)


 G9. Which Internet connection do you use primarily when visiting a World Bank Group website?
 1     High speed
 2     Dial-up


 Please rate how much you agree with the following statements.
                                                                     Strongly                              Strongly   Don't
                                                                     disagree                                 agree   know
         I use/consult World Bank Group’s data more often than
 G10                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         I did a few years ago
         I find the World Bank Group’s websites easy to
 G11     navigate. (Only answer if you have used a World Bank        1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Group website)
         I find the information on the World Bank Group’s
 G12     websites useful. (Only answer if you have used a World      1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         Bank Group website)
         The World Bank Group’s social media channels (e.g.,
 G13     Facebook, Twitter, Youtube, Flickr) are valuable sources    1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         of information about the institution
         When I need information from the World Bank Group I
 G14     know how to find it (e.g., whom to call, where to reach     1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         them, etc.)
         The World Bank Group is responsive to my information
 G15                                                                 1     2    3   4   5   6   7   8      9    10      
         requests and inquiries




PLEASE NOTE: IN SOME CASES THE SURVEY WILL ASK FOR A SPECIFIC NUMBER OF
RESPONSES. PLEASE DO NOT CHOOSE ANY MORE THAN REQUESTED. IF MORE
RESPONSES ARE CHOSEN, DATA CANNOT BE INCLUDED IN ANALYSIS.




                                                             183
The World Bank Group                                           Uganda                               Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H1. Which of the following best describes your current position?             (Select only ONE response)
 1    Office of the President, Prime Minister
 2    Office of Minister
 3    Office of Parliamentarian
 4    Employee of a Ministry, Ministerial Department or Implementation Agency
 5    Consultant/Contractor working on World Bank Group supported Project/Program
 6    Project Management Unit (PMU) overseeing implementation of project
 7    Local Government Office or Staff
 8    Bilateral Agency
 9    Multilateral Agency
 10   Private Sector Organization
 11   Private Foundation
 12   Financial Sector/Private Bank
 13   NGO
 14   Community Based Organization
 15   Media (Press, Radio, TV, Web, etc.)
 16   Independent Government Institution (i.e., Regulatory Agency, Central Bank/oversight institution)
 17   Trade Union
 18   Faith-Based Group
 19   Academia/Research Institute/Think Tank
 20   Judiciary Branch
 21   Cultural Leader (e.g., traditional leader, hereditary leader)
 22   Political Party
 23   Other (please specify): ________________________


 H2. Please identify the primary specialization of your work. (Select only ONE response)
                                                                Natural resource management / environmental
 1    Agriculture/ rural development / food security      11
                                                                sustainability
                                                                Private sector development / foreign direct
 2    Climate change / disaster management                12
                                                                investment
                                                                Public sector governance / public financial
 3    Education                                           13
                                                                management / anti corruption
 4    Energy                                              14    Social protection
 5    Financial markets / banking                         15    Transport
 6    Gender equity / equality of opportunity             16    Urban development
      Health / communicable/non-communicable
 7                                                        17    Water and sanitation
      diseases
 8    Information and communications technology           18    Generalist
 9    Job creation/employment
                                                          19    Other (please specify): _________________________
 10   Law and justice / regulatory framework




                                                                184
The World Bank Group                                         Uganda                   Country Opinion Survey 2014



SECTION H: BACKGROUND INFORMATION

 H3. Currently, do you professionally collaborate/work with the World Bank Group in your country?
 1    Yes
 2    No


 H4. Which of the following agencies of the World Bank Group do you work with in Uganda?
 (Select all that apply)
 1    The World Bank (IBRD/IDA) 
 2    The International Finance Corporation (IFC) 
 3    The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
 4    None


 H5. Which of the following describes most of your exposure to the World Bank Group in Uganda?
 (Choose no more than TWO)
 1    Observer (i.e., follow in media, discuss in informal conversations, etc.)
 2    Use World Bank Group reports/data
 3    Engage in World Bank Group related/sponsored events/activities
 4    Collaborate as part of my professional duties
 5    Use World Bank Group website for information, data, research, etc.


 H6. Which best represents your geographic location?
 1    Kampala City
 2    Central Uganda
 3    Eastern Uganda
 4    Northern Uganda
 5    Western Uganda




                                Thank you for completing the survey!




                                                               185
