                                                    96161


          LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
          NAM THEUN 2 MULTIPURPOSE PROJECT




        TWENTY THIRD REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
        ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL PANEL OF EXPERTS




                                        DAVID McDOWELL
29 December 2014                        LEE M. TALBOT
     


                                CONTENTS



LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS                                              1
1. INTRODUCTION                                                      4

        1.1 The Panel’s Mandate                                      5

        1.2 Panel Activities                                         6

        1.3 Acknowledgments and Appreciation                         6


2. THE NAKAI PLATEAU: THE FIVE LIVELIHOOD PILLARS                    8

        2.1 Fisheries                                                10

        2.2 Forestry                                                 12

        2.3 Agriculture                                              15

        2.4 Livestock                                                19

        2.5   Off-farm Pillar                                        22


3. NATURAL GROWTH HOUSEHOLDS                                         24


4. FUNDING, PLANNING AND SOCIAL ISSUES                               26

        4.1 GoL Funding                                              26

        4.2 Monitoring                                               26

        4.3 District, Hamlet and Village Organisation and Planning   28

        4.4 Education                                                29

        4.5 Health Services, the Community Living Well Program       30
            and the planned Safety Net

        4.6 Gender Issues                                            30




                                    i
     


5. XE BANG FAI DOWNSTREAM PROGRAM                                      33

          5.1 The 67 Downstream Villages receiving Cash Compensation   33

          5.2 XBF Downstream Program: Gnommalath and two other         34
              Irrigation Projects


6. WATERSHED MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION                                 37
   AUTHORITY (WMPA)




Cover photo: Fishing for the family table near Nam Nian/Sop Ma.




                                      ii
     


                           LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS

The POE recommends:
          1/23 That consideration be given to opening the part of the now-
    protected area of the reservoir adjacent to village lands but north of the
    Thalang bridge to resettler fishing, bearing in mind the need to protect the
    areas that are biologically important for fish reproduction, fairness to the
    adjacent resettler villages, the needs of adequate patrolling and the requirement
    to modify the relevant decrees.

          2/23 That the registration and provision of clear identification on all
    boats on the reservoir be completed without delay, so that illegal activities can
    be more easily identified.

           3/23 That GoL convene at an early date a high-level meeting with
    NTPC and the IFIs in order to endeavor to re-engage these partners in the
    urgent task of resuscitating the forestry pillar, the objective being to decide
    collectively what needs to be done now to accomplish this and by whom.

           4/23 That GoL instruct its responsible agencies and formally request its
    NT2 partners to take responsibility for supporting agreed aspects of the rescue
    effort, including the undertaking of an early inventory of the remaining forest
    resource and the provision of additional expertise and advice in the required
    areas to the VFDC.

          5/23 That a logging plan for 2015, the selection and engagement of a
    reputable contractor and arrangements for monitoring of the VFDC be drafted
    by VFDC, preferably with international technical assistance, for submission to
    its Board by February/March 2015.

          6/23 That steps be taken by the VFDC Board, in consultation with
    stakeholders and the village shareholders, to ensure that the CA’s call for
    “forest management by villagers, for villagers” becomes a reality.

           7/23 That the GoL revisit the question of a reduction in the excessive
    levels of tax royalties and fees paid by VFDC. The POE supports the proposals
    in this regard advanced by the IFI Management Mission in November 2014.

          8/23 That, along with recommendations 15/23 and 16/23 below, the
    targets and timelines for the resettler agriculture program highlighted in the
    text be considered by LOM stakeholders and drafters of the proposed Road
    Map for inclusion in their respective texts.

           9/23 That the NTPC undertake to ensure that a minimum of one
    irrigation system per hamlet, preferably managed by suitably trained second
    generation resettlers, be in running order and productive by the end of the
    coming dry season.

                                             1
     



          10/23 That NRO and DAFO place more emphasis on assisting and
    training master farmers in each hamlet.

          11/23 That DAFO take steps to upgrade as a matter of urgency the
    overall quality and experience of its Village Extension Worker system in all
    hamlets.

          12/23 That the livestock vaccination program on the Plateau continue to
    be expanded.

          13/23 That NRO, DAFO and the VDCs, draw on the consultant’s report
    to begin developing a program to achieve higher productivity from the livestock
    sector, including training in enhancing soil fertility and plant nutrition and
    vigorous expansion of pasture development, to achieve a greater, sustainable
    economic benefit to the resettlers from the livestock pillar.

         14/23 That NRO, DAFO and the VDCs plan and initiate a
    complementary program for small livestock.

           15/23 That an intensified program aimed at and designed largely for the
    natural growth generation of resettlers, with special emphasis on those who
    have formed new families, be initiated to take up the opportunities offered by
    the idle irrigation systems set up by the NTPC.

           16/23 That the NTPC Vocational Training Program initiated in 2013
    under the Off-Farm Pillar accordingly be expanded across the board and
    include natural growth resettlers willing to be trained as irrigation farmers or
    as initiators of small business enterprises.

          17/23 That the GoL reassess the risks involved in not meeting its funding
    responsibilities under the Concession Agreement, while continuing to pursue its
    discussions with the World Bank on accessing NT2 revenues to deal with
    especially critical NT2 issues and on benefit sharing under the Hydropower and
    Mining Technical Assistance Project.

           18/23 That the NRO monitoring team provide data on the livelihoods
    and on the involvement in local government of natural growth households in
    village and hamlet affairs no later than 1 April 2015.

           19/23 That the recommendations of the gender specialist be further
    actioned as a matter of importance in the period before the RIP concludes and
    that follow-up measures be extended well into the post-RIP era.

          20/23 That further endeavors be undertaken by the District authorities
    to ensure that the representation of women on resettler village institutions
    especially the VDCs and, where appropriate, on District-level bodies be further


                                            2
     


    raised within the next year or two and the level of training of women taking
    part in such institutions be extended as required.

           21/23 That Lao women be recruited, or trained where necessary, to take
    over the role of monitoring and supervising the gender strategy’s
    implementation as soon as possible and certainly once the RIP is terminated.
    An agreement on a relevant reporting line will be called for. One solution would
    be to fund the CLWP to carry out this function.

         22/23 That NTPC make available to the POE the data on the 25 cash
    compensated villages covered in the 2014 Socio-Economic Survey.

           23/23 That GoL assess the new Gnommalath irrigation project’s impacts
    on compensation rights, livelihoods and incomes of the affected villages in the
    light of national legislation on investment projects. Relevant legislation may
    include PM’s Decree 192 on Compensation and Resettlement for Project
    Affected People and the more recent Ministerial Instructions on Project
    Impacts (No.8030/MONRE) and on Initial Environmental Examination of
    Investment Projects (No. 8029/MONRE). Arrangements made in the case of the
    NT2 Project Lands undertakings in respect of compensation and livelihood
    development would be a basis for comparison also.

           24/23 That the critically important work of the WMPA Task Force and
    its Secretariat be completed as soon as possible, and that its recommendations
    be put into effect urgently.

          25/23 That in the interim, priority for the use of the reduced funds
    available to the WMPA be given to the law enforcement activities.

          26/23 That since the necessary restructuring of WMPA will require new
    or redefined staff positions these should be advertized or announced and
    applications assessed by an independent group with international
    representation.

          27/23 That without delay an Interim Director to replace the present
    three Directors be appointed to oversee the implementation of the
    recommendations of the high level task force when they become available.

         28/23 That the present interim quarterly program/ budget process be
    changed to an annual interim one, but with funds released on a quarterly basis.




                                           3
     


1. INTRODUCTION

       This is Report 23 of the International Panel of Environmental and Social
Experts (POE or the Panel) for the Nam Theun 2 (NT2) Multipurpose Project in the
Lao People's Democratic Republic. On this mission the members of the Panel were
D.K. McDowell (consultant, Otaki, New Zealand),) and L.M. Talbot, (Professor,
George Mason University, Virginia, USA). The third member of the Panel, T.
Scudder (Professor Emeritus, California Institute of Technology, USA) was not
available to participate in this mission. He contributed substantially to the drafting of
most sections of this report.

       The mission was initially seen as primarily a monitoring and fact-finding one, with
two main foci. The first was the resettlement process, assessing progress on the Nakai
Plateau in establishing new livelihoods and in handing over to the Government of Laos
(GoL) responsibility for execution and completion of resettlement. The requirements of the
impressive and comprehensive Concession Agreement (CA) covering the extension or
closure of the Resettlement Implementation Period (RIP) will be assessed during a further
POE visit in 2015.

        The second main focus was the status of the Watershed Management and Protection
Authority (WMPA). The performance of the WMPA has always been problematical, most
particularly in terms of its responsibilities for conservation of the globally important
biodiversity of the Nakai-Nam Theun National Protected Area (NPA). Two recent external
reviews of the WMPA (a Fiduciary review and an Organizational one), along with POE
reports, especially Report #22, have documented that the performance of the WMPA has
been so lacking that a comprehensive restructuring is required. To accomplish this
objective GOL has established a high level task force under the supervision of a Deputy
Prime Minister, backed by a Secretariat of senior officials and an academic.

        On arrival in Vientiane the POE found that a good deal of new thinking about the
way forward on the project had occurred among stakeholders. This was particularly
marked in the case of NTPC. A new CEO had restructured the management team and the
way it works. A new level of flexibility and creativity has emerged, holding the promise of
a fresh approach on the programmatic side. The new team has begun drawing together a
Road Map to guide the further evolution of the project’s five livelihood pillars and to help
create a consensus among stakeholders on how to round out successfully the resettlement
process. More flexibility on timelines and the prospect of additional resources add up to an
appreciation that fostering development, adopting new livelihood systems and achieving
the CA goal of sustainability of livelihoods cannot be achieved in a few months or in some
sectors years.

        The POE welcomes this new initiative. It amounts to a recognition of the realities
on the ground. Along with the collaborative work on drawing up an evolving List of
Measures needed before the Resettlement Implementation Period (RIP) can be brought to a
close – an exercise which was updated during this mission – the new thinking has helped
produce an important shift in opinion across the stakeholding group. For the unlikelihood
of being able to illustrate the sustainability of NT2 livelihoods in the immediate future has
become apparent over the past year or two to nearly all stakeholders. In addition to the


                                            4
     


POE the other two major monitors of the project – the LTA, which is the Lenders’ own
monitoring agency and the IFIs including the World Bank and the Asian Development
Bank – have made this clear in their most recent reports.

        Even more significantly, the NTPC itself has begun planning for program funding
and technical assistance designed to set out certain as yet unspecified livelihood and other
targets and timelines, reportedly in an endeavor to achieve many of the CA’s objectives by
2018 or so.

        Further examination of options is called for before decisions are made, not least on
timing. There is room for discussion, for example, on the bases for an extended RIP,
including the priorities set out in the Road Map under preparation, and on continuing if
perhaps non-binding commitments subsequent to the expiry of an extended RIP. It would,
however, be less than honest for the POE not to make clear at this point that the Panel
doubts that proposals to conditionally end the RIP at the end of 2015 on the basis, for
example, of non-binding undertakings to continue some social and environmental
programs to 2018 or so would meet the provisions of the CA or indeed that such a proposal
would not lessen the resettlers’ entitlements under the CA.

       In the interim, the POE looks forward to reviewing the Road Map and trusts that it
will mark a substantial step toward attaining livelihood sustainability in particular.

        Set out in the second section of the report below is the POE’s assessment of the
resettlement program on the Nakai Plateau focussing on the five pillars which underlie
sustainable livelihoods for the resettlers and bringing forward new recommendations on
using the talents and skills of the new generation of resettlers, followed by a review of
funding and social issues, a section on the Xe Bang Fai (XBF) Downstream Program and a
final one on the WMPA. An updated version of the List of Measures (LOM) has yet to be
endorsed by all stakeholders and is thus not annexed.


1.1 The Panel’s Mandate

        The Panel derives its mandate from the Concession Agreement. This is a 1,352
page legal document which assigns the POE a contractual responsibility to provide
independent review of, and guidance on, the treatment of environmental and social issues
associated with the Project, along with some executive functions, and towards the
conclusion of the Implementation Period, to review and report on whether the Resettlement
Objectives and the Resettlement Provisions “have been achieved and maintained for a
reasonable period of time”. The POE remains a standing body for the period of the
concession. The POE submits its findings to the GOL Minister of Energy and Mines and to
Deputy Prime Minister Somsavat Lengsavad, addresses recommendations to the GOL,
Nam Theun 2 Power Company (NTPC) and the International Financial Institutions (IFIs),
and is required to “act independently of the parties and in a manner which…is in
accordance with the World Bank Safeguard Policies and the ADB Safeguard Policies and
best protects both the environment and the interests of those affected by the Project
Impacts.”



                                           5
     


1.2 Panel Activities

         David McDowell arrived in Vientiane on 9 October, 2014, and Lee Talbot
arrived the following day. Over the weekend informal meetings were held with
various individuals involved with the project to obtain further background
information. On October 13, 14 and 15 meetings and briefings were held with the
Minister of Energy and Mines, Soulivong Daravong, the Vice Minister of Natural
Resources and Environment (MONRE), Mme. Bounkham Vorachit, the Department
of Energy Business (DEB) of the Ministry of Energy and Mines, the Nam Theun
Power Company (NTPC), the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
October 15 and the previous afternoon were spent in meetings at the NTPC discussing
the List of Measures (LOM) with representatives of GoL, the International Financial
Institutions (IFIs), NTPC and WMPA.

       On October 16 the team drove to Lak Sao, met the Khamkeut Office of the WMPA,
and then proceeded to Oudomsouk and the NTPC Wooden Guest House. The following
four days were spent on the Nakai Plateau. Meetings and consultations were held with the
Nakai Resettlement Office (NRO), the District Governor, Resettlement Management Unit
(RMU), the Reservoir Management Secretariat (RMS), the Village Forestry Development
Company Ltd (VFDC, formerly the Village Forestry Association), WMPA, and the NTPC
Fisheries Research Unit. The team also held discussions with the Reservoir Fishery
Association, Village Development Committees and Village Fishing Groups in the villages
of Phon Pan Pek/Nong Boua, Ban Done, Nakai Tai/ Nakai Neua, Nam Nian/Sop Ma, and
Sophene/ Thalang.

       On October 21 the team went first to the NTPC residence headquarters below
the power plant for a wrap up briefing on the resettlement; then examined the
Gnommalath irrigation project that is under construction using gate 3 on the
downstream channel; held discussions with the people of two Xe Bang Fai villages,
Nakoknai and Kuase; and spent the night at Thakhek. On the following morning the
team met with Governor Khambay of Khammouane Province, then drove to
Vientiane for a meeting with Deputy Prime Minister Somsavat Lengsavad. The
following morning the team met with Deputy Prime Minister Asang Laoly and later
met with members of the Secretariat of the GoL Task Force for the WMPA.

       The usual wrap-up meeting to present POE preliminary views and findings to
stakeholders and others was held on Friday, October 24th. Lee Talbot departed Laos
on October 27th and David McDowell left on October 30th.


1.3 Acknowledgements – Appreciation

        The POE expresses its appreciation to Patrick Dye of NTPC for organizing the very
full, worthwhile and productive program for the POE. The Panel is particularly grateful to
Deputy Prime Minister Somsavat Lengsavad and Deputy Prime Minister Asang Laoly for
productive meetings, and to Minister of Energy and Mines, Soulivong Daravong, for his
insights and advice. We are grateful to Khammouane Governor Khambay Damlath for his
time and advice, and likewise to Nakai District Governor Bouma Soutsadavone. The Panel

                                         6
     


is grateful for the information and advice from the many individuals we met, including
NTPC CEO Frederic Hofmann, NTPC E& S Director Xavier Bouan, NRO Manager
Vilhayak Somsoulivong, World Bank Country Director Sally Burningham and NT2
Manager Ingo Wiederhofer, ADB Country Director Sandra Nicoll and ADB consultant
Francois Obein, RMU Manager Sivixay Soukkarath and Deputy Manager Mme. Keoula
Souliyadeth, WMPA Director Phouthone Sophathilath, interim manager of VFDC
Khamsing Boualaphant, Director General of DEB Xaypaseuth Phomsoupha, and many
others in the DEB and other GOL units and the World Bank. Sivixay Soukkarath
accompanied the Panel throughout the visit and provided essential assistance, as did Ms.
Paphavanh Singharath of DEB, and the NRO’s Phairath Phrongthong arranged the
meetings with Village Development Committees. As always, the Panel is extremely
grateful for the warmth and willing help and advice it has received from all the Lao,
notably in a range of villages, and others it has had the pleasure and privilege of meeting.




                                           7
     


2. THE NAKAI PLATEAU: THE FIVE LIVELIHOOD PILLARS


Introduction

       The Nam Theun 2 project has a remarkable founding document. The
Concession Agreement (CA) remains as prescient as it was when first drafted over a
decade ago. Some elements have been overtaken by events but the underlying
concepts and principles remain valid. Project managers - and the POE - depart from
them at their peril.

        A primary CA principle is to build into all aspects of the project a high level
of sustainability. The CA drafters did not want to see the people of this unique
experiment strive for and often attain improved life styles and incomes and then have
these lapse through a lack of foresight and planning. Sustainability in this project is
not about a few years of high consumption based on two or three years of big fish
catches in the initial years after the reservoir was filled or on illegal harvesting of
wildlife and high value hardwoods like rosewood. The fish catches dropped, as was
predicted, to a relatively stable but lower level and the more accessible rosewood was
harvested while prices were high. There has been no dividend paid from the villagers’
forestry program for over two years. Planting on the village areas originally allotted
for cultivation is in decline, additional lands allocated to resettlers including the new
generation have largely been devoted to extensive and unsustainable swidden rice
growing and there is insufficient forage available at this time to sustain greatly
expanded herds of livestock. Potentially lucrative service industries like tourism are
developing but at a slow pace. As one monitoring agency reported in late 2014, most
resettlers they interviewed claimed to have insufficient rice to feed their families and
lacked steady income that would ensure food security for resettler households.

         So where lies sustainability we asked members of the Village Development
Committee of a large southern resettlement village? As always they turned first to rice
production. They have no rain-fed padi - it was submerged under the rising waters of
the reservoir. They and adjacent villages with extra allocated land have resorted to the
tried and long proven technique of slashing and burning the vegetation on these lands
- including on this occasion, regrettably, some substantial and commercially valuable
trees - and planting rain-fed rice among the ashes. It works, for a time. The rice
grows, not as intensively as in padi, but the harvest seemed adequate to meet
immediate needs. The experienced older men thought, however, that after two
harvests the land would have to go into fallow for 5-6 years. So how long would it
take for the expanding swidden areas to reach the limits of their potentially arable
land on the edge of the escarpment? They thought about five years - which will be
before today’s fields are adequately fallowed. After that they would have to look at
alternatives. In the meantime, they grumbled, the District authorities were clamping
down on slash-and-burn as a wasteful use of the remaining available land.




                                            8
     




          Slash and burn underway in early 2014 near southern escarpment.


         We recount this conversation simply as an illustration of the necessity for
planning ahead if a semblance of sustainability is to be achieved. The project
managers and the Nakai District authorities are not unaware of this. The POE has
been working constructively with them and the IFIs (World Bank and Asian
Development Bank) over the past year and more in drawing up a List of Measures
(LOM) which are among those which should be implemented if the CA’s objectives
are to be attained and sustainability eventually achieved. As noted above, the latest
version of the LOM has not yet been endorsed by all stakeholders so it is not attached
to this report. The Road Map being drafted by NTPC - referred to in the report
introduction - is awaited with great interest.

        There is a final introductory point which should be made. The first generation
of resettlers has been asked to absorb fundamental changes in attitude, livelihood
practices and daily behavior. That always takes time. It may be that the major
adaptations to come will only be achieved by the promising second generation of
villagers with the better educational opportunities the project has brought them, the
experience of living in the new partially urbanized villages and their ready acceptance
of the new technologies symbolized by the electric light, the motorbike and the cell
phone - 80% of resettled households are said to own at least one cell phone.

        To date the quality of daily advice resettlers in general have received on
pioneering new livelihoods, including moving on for example from swidden
cultivation to intensive and sedentary agriculture utilizing pump and pipe irrigation to
produce dry season crops, has been limited by the inexperience of DAFO’s volunteer
extension workers as well as the capacities of the first generation of resettlers. It could
be especially important to single out for development purposes the several hundred
resettlers who have now formed new families in some of which the POE has found
that one spouse is a better educated and more experienced outsider who could play a
useful role in resettlement hamlet development.


                                            9
     


        The paragraphs below, to be read alongside earlier POE Reports, examine the
present state of the five livelihood pillars as the POE perceives them. They include
where appropriate new indicators and targets which may prove helpful for the drafters
of the Road Map.




                Swidden crop area after harvest near southern escarpment.


2.1 Fisheries
        The fisheries pillar is currently the most successful and most important of the
livelihood pillars for the resettler villages. It provides the highest consistent income
as well as being a significant food source. The foundation for fisheries yield is the
stock or biomass of the target fish. Experience throughout the world is that when a
new reservoir is created, the fish stock increases rapidly in response to the abundant
organic material that has been inundated. After one or more years the surplus food
material has been consumed or dispersed, and the fish stocks then drop to the level of
the carrying capacity of the reservoir. Other things being equal, they remain relatively
stable at that level, recognizing, however, that there will be significant fluctuations in
the stock caused by variations in factors such as the weather.
        Fish catches in the Nakai Reservoir have followed that classic pattern. After
extremely high yields shortly after the dam was closed, the catch more or less
stabilized at a much lower level. The NTPC Fishery Research Unit reports that the
catch, and presumably the fish stock on which it is based, has remained relatively
level with a slightly decreasing trend but with occasional increases from about June
2009 to September 2014, the last period for which they had data available. However,
during this mission it was reported to the POE by both villagers and the Village
Fishery Association (VFA) that the catch levels were decreasing. This discrepancy
could be due to different approaches to estimating fish catch. If overfishing was a
problem it would be indicated by reduced size of the individual fish in the catch, but


                                           10
     


the Fishery Research Unit reported that the size of fish caught has not decreased so
overfishing would not appear to be a problem.
         The success of the fishers is affected by many factors, consequently analysis is
very complex. One factor that most villager fishers emphasized was competition from
outsiders illegally fishing in the reservoir. We would note that there are two types of
illegal fishing. One is by the villagers themselves, some fishing in protected areas
(areas reserved for reproduction of the reservoir fish) and some selling their catch to
outside traders, thus avoiding the seven percent tax on catches that otherwise would
go to the Reservoir Fisheries Agency (RFA). The other type of illegal fishing is by
outsiders. As part of the total resettlement process most of the fish in the reservoir are
reserved for the benefit of the resettlers. The POE’s concern is that the apparently
very substantial illegal fishing steals resources from the resettlers, undermining the
sustainability of this important livelihood pillar.
        What is needed is more effective law enforcement on the reservoir,
particularly in terms of patrolling by boat to apprehend and deter illegal activities.
For years now there has been friction reported between the RFA and the WMPA.
This problem stemmed from the WMPA’s responsibility and authority over the
protected areas of the reservoir adjacent to the lands for which WMPA has
responsibility, and their perceived failure to adequately patrol these areas or to
cooperate with the resettlers. This is particularly the case with the section of the
reservoir north of the Thalang bridge, between the bridge and the dam, most of which
lies in Khamkeut District and which is where most of the illegal fishing and
marketing reportedly takes place but where the WMPA does not allow villager
patrolling or fishing. Some co-patrols with the WMPA and the RFA have been
undertaken in the past several months and this is a welcome development. However,
everyone consulted by the POE cited problems with the WMPA including failure to
cooperate and interference with villagers’ patrolling, and the overwhelming opinion is
that cooperation with the WMPA is not working.
       Several options for improvement in reservoir law enforcement and
management have been suggested. These include but may not be limited to the
following, most of which are not mutually exclusive:

        •   Transfer all responsibility and authority for patrolling on the reservoir waters
            from the WMPA to the RFA. This would require providing some expert
            assistance to the RFA along with adequate budgetary sources;
        •   Establish much more effective cooperation and patrolling between the RFA
            and the WMPA;
        •   WMPA authorize, budget and equip its Khamkeut Office to patrol those
            reservoir waters that are in Khamkeut District;
        •   Open the now-protected area of the reservoir between the Thalang Bridge
            and the dam to RFA patrols;
        •   Open part of the now-protected area of the reservoir north of the Thalang
            bridge to resettler fishing, bearing in mind the need to protect the areas that
            are biologically important for fish reproduction, fairness to the adjacent
            resettler villages, the needs of adequate patrolling and the requirement to
            modify the existing decrees;



                                              11
     


        •    Complete the registration and provision of clear identification on all boats on
             the reservoir, so that illegal activities can be more easily identified.

        Decisions on most of the options should await the results of the WMPA Task
Force that determines the role and responsibilities of the WMPA. However,
regardless of the options chosen there is an urgent need to give the resettler fishers a
feeling of ownership of the fish resource and recognition of their self-interested
responsibility to watch for and report or apprehend those conducting illegal activities
that undermine their fishery livelihood.

            The POE recommends:

               •   1/23 That consideration be given to opening the part of the now-
                   protected area of the reservoir adjacent to village lands but north
                   of the Thalang bridge to resettler fishing, bearing in mind the need
                   to protect the areas that are biologically important for fish
                   reproduction, fairness to the adjacent resettler villages, the needs
                   of adequate patrolling and the requirement to modify the relevant
                   decrees.

               •   2/23 That the registration and provision of clear identification on
                   all boats on the reservoir be completed without delay, so that
                   illegal activities can be more easily identified.


2.2 Forestry
        No objective observer would contend that holding the NT2 forestry pillar
upright is a sustainable exercise at this moment. The situation of a sector which was
to have produced up to a third of the villagers’ income is parlous. Unless rapid and
effective steps are taken to right the situation it will deteriorate further.

        As the POE emphasized in its oral debriefing at the end of this mission,
progress in getting the pillar upright and beginning to strengthen it in the years ahead
will be one of the major considerations central to the outcome of the POE’s
assessment of whether the RIP has progressed to a point where it may be brought to
closure. The situation should be addressed at the highest levels in the GoL, the IFIs
and the NTPC as a matter of urgency and decisive steps taken to start the process of
correcting the weakness of a sector which is very shaky.

        In the absence of substantive decisions and actions and full participation by all
stakeholders in the process of rehabilitating the sector within the next few months the
outlook is bleak. The opportunity is there: if leadership is taken by the GoL at
Ministerial level and the World Bank, the NTPC has undertaken to help underpin
them. That chance of forward movement must be seized or reputational damage will
result for all major parties. There are encouraging signs that the World Bank is facing
up to the challenge. The GoL needs to follow suit.

            To summarize, there have been no dividends paid to resettlers since April


                                              12
     


2012, the inventorizing, protection and management of the forest resource have been
minimal, the harvesting and utilization of the timber have been deficient to a level
which has produced serious waste, the marketing has been inadequate and the
endeavors to meet market demands seriously flawed, and there has been little success
in the few attempts to begin the process - so important to achieve sustainability in the
medium to long term - of fostering regeneration and forestation of degraded or cleared
forest land.

        The size of the forest estate has, furthermore, been reduced by encroachments,
the latest being the conversion of some of the land to “additional agricultural land”
which has been distributed to resettlers and often burned off for swidden cultivation
without the considerable timber resources being harvested beforehand. When logs
were removed ahead of the firing they were seldom processed but abandoned in log
yards or ponds. One assessment is that shifting cultivation took around 700 ha of
community forests in 2013, which would amount to about 4-5% of the VFDC forests.

        The condition of the sector is not yet terminal. There have been preliminary if
only partial assessments of the remaining forest resource which suggest that if the
planning and forest management flaws were to be remedied and the required advice
and expertise supplied the sector could become revenue-earning and self-sustaining in
due course. Those are substantial prerequisites. The Interim Manager needs help. He
does not claim to have expertise in all the required fields. He inherited a damaged
enterprise and has done reasonably well in re-establishing working relationships with
key agencies and people including the village shareholders, has got the sawmill
operating again which at least provides about 50 jobs for villagers, has now succeeded
in recovering over 90% of the money owed the Company by the former contractor
and has been transparent in communicating what he is doing.

       It has to be said that the GoL agencies which have been key players in the
NT2 village forestry experiment - for that is what it is - cannot escape a degree of
responsibility for the failure of the enterprise thus far to meet its objectives.

        Neither have the IFIs always fully pulled their weight in providing expertise
and advice in this sector. There are now positive signs that the World Bank for one is
taking a new and active interest with a team reported to be in Laos looking at what is
needed for a survey of forest resources and to lift the forest management performance
of the VFDC. That is encouraging.

         For its part NTPC deserves credit for carrying out its initial CA
responsibilities in terms of providing advice, equipment and operating finance but it
found developing a forest management and development plan, to cite one example,
difficult in the Lao context and it was not able to put one in place. Similarly, the role
of identifying the forest resource was not satisfactorily completed. These key gaps
remain. NTPC’s inputs were in part limited by cost in the CA and once the funds
provided were apparently exceeded the Company largely disengaged from the sector.
It is worth noting in this regard that the NTPC functions of helping develop a Forest
Management Plan and a Sustainable Forestry Plan are listed in the CA as lasting until
RIP completion date. The withdrawal of NTPC has proved to be counter-productive
in that the elements of continuity, competent oversight and planning were lost as the
enterprise ran downhill.

                                           13
     



        In the view of the POE the GoL would be well advised to make a serious
endeavor to fully re-engage the IFIs and the NTPC in resuscitating the forest pillar.
The consequences of not doing so are likely to be fatal for the VFDC and damaging
for the incomes of the resettlers. Convening by Government of a high-level meeting,
in concert with the World Bank, to decide what now needs to be done, by whom and
with what funds is a priority. Follow up requests from the Government to the IFIs and
NTPC to take responsibility for working with the VFDC on specific aspects of the
rescue operation will then be called for.

        So what is to be done? The POE 22 report set out a series of steps to be taken:

        •   release and distribute to resettlers tax funds, as authorised by the DPM
        •   reclaim replanting fees (since no replanting had, or has, occurred)
        •   undertake a forest inventory as a matter of urgency
        •   ensure that the CA’s call for “forest management by villagers, for villagers”
            be given a practical and sustainable form
        •   put together an updated strategy, with forest protection and management,
            marketing and reforestation included
        •   recover the full amount of the LFH arrears.

        Of these steps there has been progress on two aspects only - payment of the
larger part of LFH’s arrears and a satellite survey undertaken which has now to be
followed up by ground-based verification and the compiling of a full inventory of
remaining usable timber. Most of the POE’s steps listed above remain valid - but
unactioned. We would add to them three others. First, as already noted, there is a
requirement for the Interim Manager to acquire technical expertise and advice in the
areas of forest management, planning (of realistic extraction rates, of timber quotas
matched to sawmill capacity, of quality control), marketing and, in the interests of
sustainability of the resource in the longer term, regeneration and reforestation.

        Secondly, based on the findings of an inventory, drawing up an overall forest
management and associated operational plan (called for in the CA) is well overdue. It
will have to address inter alia such difficult questions as to whether to simply sell off
or even abandon the damaged logs lying around the resettlement area and aim for the
high end of the market by concentrating the sawmill’s capacity on producing high
quality pine cuts from the best trees for the very demanding but lucrative Japanese
market.

        Finally, hard decisions are going to have to be taken on how best to utilize the
slim cash resources of the VFDC, estimated optimistically by the Interim Manager at
around $200,000 by the end of 2014. A proportion will have to go to the resettlers as a
delayed dividend. But there are also the costs associated with operating the sawmill,
transporting and marketing the products, reforestation and so on. If no other agency
steps up VFDC may itself have to pay for the ground inventory, perhaps contracting a
reputable international firm for the purpose if the work is to be done effectively and
with despatch. Hopefully the World Bank will provide substantial assistance for these
tasks. The POE is of the view that while the long-suffering resettlers deserve a
dividend payment now it should be a limited one, taking into account the resources -
which can not easily be found elsewhere - which will be involved in truly getting the

                                             14
     


VFDC back on its feet.

        The POE recommends:

           •   3/23 That GoL convene at an early date a high-level meeting with
               NTPC and the IFIs in order to underline the crisis which the
               Nakai forestry sector faces and to endeavor to re-engage these
               partners in the urgent task of resuscitating the forestry pillar, the
               objective being to decide collectively what needs to be done now to
               accomplish this and by whom.

           •   4/23 That GoL instruct its responsible agencies and formally
               request its NT2 partners to take responsibility for supporting
               agreed aspects of the rescue effort, including the undertaking of an
               early inventory of the remaining forest resource and the provision
               of additional expertise and advice in the required areas to the
               VFDC.

           •   5/23 That a logging plan for 2015, the selection and engagement of
               a reputable contractor and arrangements for monitoring of the
               VFDC be drafted by VFDC, preferably with international
               technical assistance, for submission to its Board by
               February/March 2015.

           •   6/23 That steps be taken by the VFDC Board, in consultation with
               stakeholders and the village shareholders, to ensure that the CA’s
               call for “forest management by villagers, for villagers” becomes a
               reality.

           •   7/23 That the GoL revisit the question of a reduction in the
               excessive levels of tax royalties and fees paid by VFDC. The POE
               supports the proposals in this regard advanced by the IFI
               Management Mission in November 2014.

While consistency would suggest that targets and timelines be set for the above
actions this does not seem appropriate at this point. The reality is that the forest
pillar requires immediate attention by all stakeholders if it is not to be one of the
factors holding up indefinitely the closing of the RIP.


2.3 Agriculture
        In spite of considerable investment of time and energy by DAFO and the NRO
agriculture remains a disappointing sector. The POE ’s view is that the low utilization
of the 0.66 and 0.22 ha plots, the household garden areas and the irrigation systems
and gully dams by the resettlers nowhere near justifies the work and resources put
into them. The reasons are various: the soils are seldom fertile in the resettlement
area, the plots cannot always be protected from human and animal raiders, the

                                          15
     


pumped irrigation and intensive farming practices systems are a wholly new
technology on the Plateau and many resettlers are preoccupied with more
remunerative and usually less labor-intensive pursuits like fishing and timber
poaching. As one report observed with refreshing honesty, the resettlers spend a lot of
time on the water and in the forest.

        Many of the statistics make for discouraging reading. In spite of a range of
options being offered resettlers, the use of the largest allocation of land to them (an
0.66 ha plot per household) is declining, not growing. As the latest QSEM survey
comments, this is a long term trend now. Agro-forestry, pasture development and
industrial crop cultivation (e.g. cassava) were offered but only agro-forestry has been
taken up with any enthusiasm or significant results. Progress on developing agro-
pastoral-forestry is very limited - a consultant’s report has just come to hand. (See
comments below).

          To be frank, the POE feels that the time is well overdue for setting specific
production targets and timelines for each element of the lagging resettlement
agriculture program. The POE has been reluctant to take the lead in such an exercise
- it is a role which should be undertaken by those on the spot - but is prepared to
suggest some targets and timelines for consideration by the stakeholders in their
periodic updating of the LOM and by the authors of the Road Map.

        For example, agro-forestry is the bright spot on the agricultural front. The area
devoted to it now totals 509 ha if planting on additional agricultural land is included.
This is clearly a growth area and plans are afoot to expand the sector accordingly. At
this point around one third of households are receiving seeds for planting, a
proportion which should be expanded as rapidly as possible. In the POE’s view the
target might be set at doubling the area under planting by the end of the 2015
wet season and recruiting another third of resettlers into the program in the
process. A medium term target for agro-forestry planting might be set at half the
total 0.66 ha area by the end of 2016.

       Likewise, an intensified program aimed and designed largely for the natural
growth generation of resettlers, with special emphasis on those who have formed new
families, should be initiated to take up the opportunities offered by the idle irrigation
systems set up by the NTPC. Only 31 are currently being used. At least another 50
systems are apparently repairable. To the extent feasible one or more of the systems
should be made available in each hamlet (and certainly one in each village for
demonstration purposes), they should be repaired, associated 0.22 ha plots
reassigned to handpicked members of the new generation of resettler families to
develop in the 2014/2015 dry season, VEWs mobilized by DAFO, along with the
Water User Association program and NRO, to foster irrigation development
and provide technical assistance and basic equipment to prepare the land and
plant appropriate crops with seeds provided by NTPC. The objective would be
to have a minimum of 16 (one for each hamlet) of these systems up and
producing by the end of the coming dry season.

        Of course fishing and forest products of varied provenance and legality have
been the drivers of the livelihood incomes for the past few years but these two sectors
are not without limits. As DPM Somsavat Lengsavad said to the POE, more effort

                                           16
     


must be put into utilizing the 0.66 ha plots and the agriculture sector as a whole.

        The POE suspects, particularly if irrigation use is stepped up through the
involvement of the natural growth generation, that in the long term intensively
cultivated land may prove to be as fruitful and sustainable a source of income for the
resettlers as fishing or the products of the forest.




                 Enterprising rural entrepreneur making a good living
               from her irrigated 0.66ha. plot in Bouama. There are too
                  few such resettlers using their plots productively.




                          Seedling and vegetable plantings on
                     the same woman’s plot as in the photo above.


        Is a substantial intensification and acceleration of the use of the big plots


                                            17
     


realistic? We believe so if a majority of households follows the example set by a
relatively small number of resettlers. We spent time with a hardworking woman,
employing two or three others, on the outskirts of Bouama. Two thirds of her fully
developed 0.66 ha plot, accessing irrigation water from a nearby system, was planted
in vigorously growing pineapple plants. Under three long seedling and plant shelters
she was also producing scores of vegetables and hundreds of plant seedlings for sale.
Each cabbage or chilli plant was in its own carefully dug round hole, filled with
ground up soil fertilized with homemade organic matter derived from rice husks, a
vegetable oil additive and decayed vegetable materials and watered on a daily basis.
She makes a good living from her labors and enterprise. Replicated fifty times over -
with a variety of products to head off over-production for the limited local
market - this operation would make the resettlement agricultural sector look
much more healthy. There is the beginnings of a farmer-to-farmer exercise being set
up and already this woman is showing others how she manages. More of such
exercises must be undertaken, with the Village Extension Workers mobilized to foster
them. Farmer-to-farmer programs are working well in the XBF Downstream area.

        There is a requirement also for setting targets and timelines regarding the
use of gully dams and the drawdown zones of the reservoir verges and inlets. A
reasonable target would be 15-20% of resettlers using these areas by the end of
2015.

        Good progress is being made in stepping up the percentage of resettlers
growing products for their own use in home gardens. A target of 90% of
resettlers having a producing garden by the end of 2015 is within reach.

        The POE recommends:

           •   8/23 That, along with recommendations 15/23 and 16/23 below,
               the targets and timelines for the resettler agriculture program
               highlighted in the text be considered by LOM stakeholders and
               drafters of the proposed Road Map for inclusion in their
               respective texts.

           •   9/23 That the NTPC undertake to ensure that a minimum of one
               irrigation system per hamlet, preferably managed by suitably
               trained second generation resettlers, be in running order and
               productive by the end of the coming dry season.

           •   10/23 That NRO and DAFO place more emphasis on assisting and
               training master farmers in each hamlet.

           •   11/23 That DAFO take steps to upgrade as a matter of urgency
               the overall quality and experience of its Village Extension Worker
               system in all hamlets.




                                         18
     




                  A promising rain-fed rice crop near Phon Pan Pek.

2.4 Livestock

        Livestock is a livelihood pillar that is assuming greater importance for the
resettlers. Livestock owned by the resettlers on the Nakai Plateau includes small stock
such as pigs, goats, ducks, and chickens, which are primarily the responsibility of
women, and large livestock including cattle and buffalo which are the responsibility
of men. Because of their potential contribution to the livelihood of the resettlers and
their importance as a source of cash for emergencies, the large livestock have been of
primary concern both to the resettlers and in the Livestock Pillar. Currently their
number has been increasing at close to ten percent p.a. which according to the LTA, is
close to the carrying capacity of the Nakai Plateau.




                           Cattle herder’s buffalo treasures.


                                          19
     


         The most knowledgeable document on resettler large animals is Bruce Cook’s
2014 report on Pasture and Livestock Development for NRO. In Cook’s opinion,
“…currently only limited areas have been developed by individual households and
villager groups, and then not very successfully… Current practice in relation to crop
and stock management are seen as unsustainable and will continue to result in land
degradation and weed invasion. Farmers will need to change their attitudes.” On the
other hand, seeking “cut and carry forage” in a closed system “is unsustainable by
virtue of the relatively large amounts of nutrient that are removed from the forage
system, particularly when the soils are depauperate in the first instance. Even if
farmers did return manure from the livestock shed, which in my experience they do
not, it would amount to only partial replacement.”




            A dramatic piece of advocacy for vaccination of all livestock.
        So as Cook noted in his earlier report: “There needs to be a clear incentive for
farmers to invest time, money and effort in moving from the currently unsustainable
system that can only result in widespread land degradation and entrenched poverty
among the people.” As for the likelihood of required changes necessary, Cook
concluded during his 2014 visit: “I have not seen anything during this mission to alter
this view.”
        In addition to Cook’s views on large livestock being an unsustainable
component of the livestock pillar, the POE has repeatedly emphasized the risk of
epidemic disease being introduced from the watershed and from Khamkeut and
Gnommalath Districts due to previous epidemics there and low vaccination rates.
Already on three occasions the POE has been in locations where haemorrhagic
septicemia or unidentified epidemic diseases have devastated buffalo herds. Early in
the POE’s existence, Nakai Plateau villagers in Old Sop Hia lost most of their buffalo
to haemorrhagic septicemia, while several years ago the POE travelled through
villages in the catchment’s Nam Pheo river basin where large numbers of both buffalo
and cattle had died. In February 2014, villagers told the POE that epidemic disease
devastated buffalo herds in the PIZ village of Pakatan in Khamkeut District.



                                          20
     


        In spite of higher levels of vaccination than in surrounding areas resettlers’
large livestock may well be more at risk because the large majority continue to graze
outside larger villages that are situated in what has become a semi-urban environment.
        The health status of large livestock appears nevertheless to be improving. In
the past the POE has emphasized the need for vaccinations, especially to protect these
animals from diseases such as foot and mouth disease and haemorrhagic septicemia,
which might be introduced from the watershed and Khamkeut District where the
diseases had been reported and rates of vaccination were low. An ongoing,
comprehensive vaccination program now is being carried out on the Nakai Plateau by
village veterinarians and village extension workers with support of NRO. The first of
two rounds in 2014 was completed by the end of July and good progress has been
reported, with 40 per cent of the cattle and 9 per cent of the buffalo vaccinated.
Although these figures are low relative to international standards, the cattle
vaccination rate is five per cent higher than the then national target. However, an
order issued by the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, to mark National
Vaccination Day for Livestock on November 11, 2014, has now set a target to
vaccinate more than 70 percent of all livestock raised by individual villagers outside
farms.
        Villagers are said to maintain large livestock, primarily buffalo, as “walking
savings banks” but not as income producers. However, it appears that there are the
significant beginnings of a shift to raise cattle for income. People in several villages
reported that they were making this shift. For example, in Ban Done we were told that
many villagers increasingly prefer cattle to buffalo. They felt that the cattle were
more disease resistant, but significantly, they reported that their cows could expect a
calf a year, which, after three years, could be sold for 2.5 to 2.8 million Kip. Buffalo
are less prolific producers. Another example is Nakai village where people were
shifting rapidly from buffalo to cattle and noting that the cattle provided “a stable
income.” These are two of the largest villages on the Plateau so the livestock
situation in them may be an indicator of trends in other villages also. Alone among
the resettler villages, Nong Boua Kham has been setting up livestock raising as a near
commercial operation since before NT2.
         Most of the buffalo and cattle owned by the resettlers feed on rather sparse
grasses and other vegetation, often in the degraded forest areas. They are adapted to
this rather rough diet and they show moderate productivity on it. However, if the
livestock are to be managed for maximum profit they require substantially more
nutritious fodder. To achieve higher rates of productivity they would require well
managed pasture development, improvement in livestock feeding practices and better
animal husbandry. Better pasture development will require application of fertilizers,
probable introduction of more nutritious feed species, and active management of the
livestock. Above all, it will require understanding by the villagers of the importance
of the livestock development activities. Throughout much of the world farmers are
reluctant to spend resources on pasture development for beef (as opposed to dairy)
cattle. Such expenditures are totally foreign to most resettlers, and achieving their
active cooperation and participation would require a significant educational effort.
         The consultant’s report on pasture and livestock development is now to hand.
It is a useful and realistic guide to the further development of the industry. He sets out
an ambitious four pillar program to attain sustainability based on provision of a


                                           21
     


productive and stable feed base, control of livestock and development of a
commercial approach to livestock production. As with a switch to intensive farming
on the 0.66 plots this will require a whole new approach, new technology and new
farming and husbandry practices. If the Nakai Plateau villagers are willing to embrace
the new techniques livestock production could become a profitable contributor to
village incomes. But the changes required will involve a shift in mind-set - perhaps
the greatest challenge - will take time to achieve and will require continued expertise
not least on the extension side. The POE suggests that the consultant’s
recommendations be initiated without delay, with a coordinated program of
training in achieving enhanced soil fertility and plant nutrition and well-
supported field work and husbandry improvements undertaken as part of a
sustained effort to lift livestock production to a higher income-earning level over
the years ahead.
        The POE recommends:

           •   12/23 That the livestock vaccination program on the Plateau
               continue to be expanded.

           •   13/23 That NRO, DAFO and the VDCs, draw on the consultant’s
               report to begin developing a program to achieve higher
               productivity from the livestock sector, including training in
               enhancing soil fertility and plant nutrition and vigorous expansion
               of pasture development, to achieve a greater, sustainable economic
               benefit to the resettlers from the livestock pillar.

           •   14/23 That NRO, DAFO and the VDCs plan and initiate a
               complementary program for small livestock.


2.5 Off-farm pillar
        In general there has been a limited increase in the number and relevance of
training activities in the off-farm sector. It is difficult to assess what the outcome of
the expansion of capacity building has been. Without income figures to hand it is not
possible to work out whether the pillar has met expectations in terms of contributing
to incomes by spawning new ventures and businesses, though we gather that a good
proportion of those attending vocational training courses go on to set up their own
businesses. There are simply not enough resettlers undertaking such courses.
        Cultural factors may be one determinant – and again there may be a role here
for encouraging the new generation to set up businesses, an activity less foreign to
them than to their parents. The POE encourages NRO, working with the District, to
sustain and significantly expand its effort in the crucial period which lies ahead. More
advice from the private sector on exploiting new opportunities may be called for -
there are few resettlers who have entrepreneurial experience or skills, so considerably
expanded vocational training opportunities for running small businesses, for example,
would appear timely. It is important for NRO to be in a position to widen the
scope of this work and to be able to stimulate and respond flexibly to emerging
training needs by having the capacity and resources to set up both ad hoc and
formal training courses as called for.

                                           22
     


        One sector activity which is gradually gearing up to expand is tourism on the
Plateau and in the watershed. The Laksao/Thalang road sealing has been held up and
will not be completed until next year. This provides a brief respite for advancing
planning on tourism. In a positive development a private sector firm which is already
involved in Khammouane Province (whose tourist numbers have doubled in two years
to 427,00 in 2013) convened a workshop of potential stakeholders in November 2014
to discuss what needs to be done to be ready for the expected influx of visitors once
the Laksao road is sealed. As elsewhere in Laos the main driver in tourism
development may prove to be the private sector. This initiative is welcomed by the
POE. The NTPC should be prepared to support follow up activities where this is
appropriate. WMPA should also be closely involved for this is a development
with potential benefits but also potential negative impacts for the watershed and
its flora and fauna, to say nothing of its human occupants.
         One need which was raised with the POE in talking to two VDCs was the
apparently still unfulfilled ambition in some resettlement villages for further training
in the art of weaving. Women VDC members see this as one way in which women
can build up their own income-raising capacity. Since “tailoring and weaving” are
specifically mentioned in the CA as an example of required skills training it would
seem a useful activity to foster where there are enthusiastic learners. There were some
initiatives taken early on in the project on this work as in Sop On and Nam Nian but
they have lapsed apparently without fully satisfying the demand.




                                          23
     


3. NATURAL GROWTH HOUSEHOLDS


          As noted in the Introduction to the Five Pillars section above, it is
increasingly important to single out for development purposes the several hundred
resettlers who have formed new families in some of which the POE has found that
one spouse is a better educated and more experienced outsider who could play a
useful role in resettlement hamlet development.

       The POE’s view is that new generation families, being better educated and
more technologically advanced, should be seen as an asset to the project not a burden.
Thus those who have formed new families should be more capable of developing dry
season cultivation utilizing the idle pump and pipe systems already installed on the
0.66 ha and 0.22 ha irrigated areas.


        The POE recommends:

           •    15/23 That an intensified program aimed at and designed largely
               for the natural growth generation of resettlers, with special
               emphasis on those who have formed new families, be initiated to
               take up the opportunities offered by the idle irrigation systems set
               up by the NTPC.




               A “natural growth” resettler building house for his family.

        Only 31 irrigation systems are currently being used. At least another 50
systems are apparently repairable. To the extent feasible one or more of the systems
should be made available in each hamlet, they should be repaired and associated 0.22
ha plots reassigned to handpicked members of the new generation of resettler families
to develop during the current dry season. VEWs should be mobilized by DAFO, along
with the Water User Association program and NRO, to foster irrigation development
and provide technical assistance and basic equipment to prepare the land and plant

                                          24
     


appropriate crops with seeds provided by NTPC no later than the fourth quarter of
2015. The objective would be to have a minimum of 16 (one for each hamlet) of these
systems up and planted by the end of 2015.

        The POE recommends:

          •   16/23 That the NTPC Vocational Training Program initiated in
              2013 under the Off-Farm Pillar accordingly be expanded across
              the board and include natural growth resettlers willing to be
              trained as irrigation farmers or the initiators of small business
              enterprises.




                                        25
     


4. FUNDING, PLANNING AND SOCIAL ISSUES
4.1 Funding


        Ministers in Vientiane told the POE that the Government coffers were largely
empty and hence it was proving difficult to meet the requirements of the CA in regard
to local funding of the handover from NTPC to GoL agencies. Across the country
teachers and public servants were not able to be paid in full and low priority programs
were being shelved. In response the POE suggested that there were significant risks in
this shortfall on the funding side. A recent World Bank report had downgraded the
project in terms of overall implementation progress and it was clear that this related
partly to GoL shortcomings on the financial side including financial reporting. Noting
that the deadline for providing funds to the GoL-approved RMU budget for
completing the work on the Downstream Program had expired and that no provision
had been made by GoL for the 2014/2015 RMU budget, the POE pointed out that the
sums involved were small while the reputational risks of not fulfilling such CA
requirements were high. It has also to be said that a failure to meet CA financial
obligations would raise difficult questions about sustainability and the timing of RIP
closure. Subsequent unconfirmed reports indicate that a contribution to the RMU
budget for 2013/2014 surfaced just after the end of that financial year.
The flexibility shown by the NTPC in its RMU funding is appreciated by the POE.
        There has been no public agreement to make NT2 revenues available to meet
emergency and other critical situations that may arise during the RIP process and
although some contributions from NT2 revenues had reportedly been made to items
like teacher training, rural health services and rural electrification there was no formal
report on this. While the POE was in Laos an audit by the State Audit Organization on
the use of project revenues was taking place in the project area.
        The POE recommends:

           •   17/23 That the GoL reassess the risks involved in not meeting its
               funding responsibilities under the Concession Agreement, while
               continuing to pursue its discussions with the World Bank on
               accessing NT2 revenues to deal with especially critical NT2 issues
               and on benefit sharing under the Hydropower and Mining
               Technical Assistance Project.


4.2 Monitoring
        The problems covered in POE Report 22 over reaching agreement on the
entitlements under the CA of “natural growth” resettlers and especially those who
have formed new families, remain unsolved. Further exchanges before and during the
POE’s visit have clarified some aspects of the disagreements and the POE has
suggested areas in which the new generation, who themselves suffered considerable
disruption to their lives through relocation, should be entitled to benefits – most
notably those, like land, equipment and training, which would foster sustainable
incomes.


                                           26
     




                          An inventive villager from Kuase
                 generates methane for the cooker from cow manure.

        With the approach of the time when the POE is required to undertake a
fundamental assessment of whether the objectives and provisions of the CA have
been met by the project, the POE has requested that in order to carry out its function
of assessing the attainment of Village Income Targets updated data analysis be
provided by March 2015. This has been agreed. The study will focus largely on real
income in cash and kind derived from the five pillars.
        As a general observation on the NTPC’s surveys and reports the POE notes
that there is a dearth of analyses of multi-year data included in these otherwise useful
but incomplete documents. For many years the POE has been requesting data on
natural growth households with NRO promises to provide such data unmet.


        Monitoring of a project is supposed to be a process that follows resettlers
through time. A major indicator of whether the NT2 project has met CA requirements
will be if those requirements are sustainable among natural growth households. The
data to assess that goal is not available. For example, what proportion of natural
growth households are members of Village Development Committees who will be
able to take over critical administrative and development planning duties when first
generation members retire?
       In assessing the sustainability of sectors and programs medium term trends
(and long term trends more so, when available) are vital indicators. More in-depth and
comprehensive analysis by the able NTPC monitoring team is called for, not least in
the months and years immediately ahead.
        The POE recommends:

           •   18/23 That the NRO monitoring team provide data on the
               livelihoods and on the involvement in local government of natural



                                           27
     


               growth households in village and hamlet affairs no later than 1
               April 2015.

It should be recorded that there is a view among the majority of stakeholders that both
independent and self-monitoring of developments in all zones of the project is and
will be an ongoing requirement for some time.


4.3 District, Hamlet and Village Organization and Planning
        The critical phase of beginning to hand over management of the project
programs to GoL agencies has begun well. The NTPC’s on-the-ground manager of
change, the NRO, has lent a physical element to the handover by moving its entire
staff across to the District offices in Oudomsouk. This cohabitation move is an
inspired one in the view of the POE. Those who have been running the programs up
to now are sitting within a few feet of their successors and are co-managing the
programs and constantly communicating advice and encouragement as well as
themselves learning from their DAFO colleagues.




             Village Development Committee briefs POE on their plans.
        At the village and hamlet level there has been, belatedly it must be said, a
transfer of responsibilities to a number of newly created institutions. Chief among
them are the Village Development Committees (VDCs). The POE talked with five
representative VDCs – those of Ban Done, Nong Boua/PPP, Nam Nian/Sop Ma,
Nakai Neua/Nakai Tai and Sophene/Thalang. All were conversant with the contents
of their Village Plans and talked knowledgeably about their priorities within the
Plans. At the activity selection and prioritizing level the participatory planning
process is comprehensive, the guidelines requiring cancellation of meetings where
there are less than 60% of villagers present. Some VDCs seem to be light on women
and minorities representation. Others are well balanced. Most other village and hamlet
level committees like the Village Fishery Groups appear to report to the VDC so it
has assumed a broad coordination as well as planning role.


                                          28
     


        The timelines of the VDCs seem to be somewhat limited – their Village Plans
are three year ones, though they have annual ones as well – so the POE raised
livelihood sustainability issues with them. As noted in the Introduction to this section
of the report there are concerns about what happens when the available land runs out.
This is more marked of course in the northern villages which have more limited land
available to them than the southern ones. But in summary the POE is pleased with the
considerable progress made in a few short years in the organization of village-level
planning and congratulates the District and NTPC agencies responsible for this –
along with the villagers themselves.


4.4 Education
        The LOM negotiators, encouraged by the POE, required in February 2014 that
every student graduating from primary school who wishes to continue his/her
education is able to find a place during 2014 and 2015 in a secondary school on the
Nakai Plateau. The response has in large measure been heartening. Additional
secondary class rooms have been built in three villages (Oudomsouk – with help from
the World Bank’s KDP - Ban Done and Nong Boua Kham) over the past seven
months and it is claimed that no secondary pupil has been denied a place.
        There remain one or two problems. In Nam Nian VDC women complained
that there were no teachers in the secondary school at present. It appears that there has
been a change of policy over school hours and this has exacerbated the situation. The
Lao Women’s Union representative said that this was an immediate crisis which
called for District attention. We undertook to record it in our report and passed on the
message to the District Governor. In Ban Done there is a need for another classroom
(beyond that already built) for 60 secondary students were occupying one classroom
and having to use primary class space.
         A looming problem at the primary level is the continuing low level of
enrolment of some ethnic groups. While the average primary age enrolment is 87%
the enrolment of Bor is 77% and of Vietics is 53%. This has been consistent over the
last three surveys. It can be expected that such figures will be reflected in due course
in income and poverty figures, an outcome which should be disturbing District
authorities at this point.
        While NTPC has handed over responsibility for most education activities in
resettlement villages to the GoL the Company but has taken a useful initiative in
focussing, along with village institutions, on adult education. This work is addressing
such relevant environmental issues as deforestation by slash-and-burn cultivation,
enhancing soil quality, sustainably managing reservoir resources, use of the
drawdown areas etc. NTPC has also been helping, when so requested, with carrying
out projects identified as key ones in the village plans. This is commendable – and
important in these early years of VDC operations, when planning has to be seen to be
followed by productive action on the ground.




                                           29
     


4.5 Health Services, the CLWP and the planned Safety Net
        The POE has said in past reports that the project Health Program is a model of
its kind, with sustainability assured by the comparatively low costs of maintaining the
excellent services provided. The program is now a GoL program, run in association
with an NGO from Luxembourg (Lao-Lux).
        The POE had an open discussion with a well-informed medical manager about
how sustainable the program would be now that the resources of the NTPC had
largely been withdrawn. He said, very honestly, that it depended on the inputs and
that there is likely to be a small drop in the level of services since an NGO seldom
had the resources that a large company had. The POE accepts that this is so and that a
minor drop in health standards would still place Nakai villages ahead of most other
rural villages in Laos. Nevertheless, the final goal is for GoL to maintain the
necessary standards once Lao-Lux assistance is no longer available. Meanwhile, the
level of inputs into the program should be monitored in the years ahead.
        Achieving, and where possible surpassing and then maintaining, the
Millennium Development Goals for rural village health and health services should be
a GoL objective. In the meantime the impressive indicators are still improving: for
example, stunting among under-fives has again been reduced (from 43% in 2008 to
34% in 2013), the under-fives mortality rate per thousand births has fallen from 120.5
to 37.4 over the same period - an outstanding achievement - and the use of
contraceptives has climbed to 57.2% which is already over the MDG target.
         The innovative Community Living Well Program has now been extended to
all 16 villages and hamlets and its activities expanded on a substantial scale. That is
most encouraging. While it is not possible in a short visit to measure the effectiveness
of such an extensive new program the POE is favorably impressed by the enthusiasm
of its leadership and the depth of participation in its activities. When asked for a
naming of the most worthwhile activity in recent months one leader observed that
preparing the villagers for the changes which will occur once the RIP is ended had
been valuable.
         A Social Safety Net Program is under preparation designed to look after the
welfare of the vulnerable households which are unlikely to be able to cope after the
RIP is closed. While the POE awaits the publication of the final form of this Net it is
of the view that relying essentially on the community and kinship system to underpin
the vulnerable program is unrealistic. Were the community and kinship systems
shouldering the burden already in these cases there would surely be no need for a
Safety Net. A more substantial input from District or Province is called for, including
in relation to newly formed families.


4.6 Gender issues
       Noting that there has been only limited professional assessment of the
implementation on the ground of the CA’s comprehensive gender policy provisions
during the RIP, the POE through the LOM process called earlier this year for a NTPC
appointed gender specialist to assess how well the gender strategy originally drawn up



                                          30
     


and specific gender plans had been adhered to. The person who drew up the original
gender strategy returned and undertook the assessment.
         Her report, which was chiefly oriented towards assessing CA compliance,
concludes that: “The GoL and NRO have met the gender obligations under the CA.
Most of the commitments have been fully met; some have been partially met.” She
gives credit to the project for fostering joint ownership of assets and joint
participation of women and men in all activities including as members and leaders in
key village-led institutions that govern access to natural resources such as fishing,
forestry, agriculture and livestock associations and says that there is a “palpable shift
in thinking at the village level” toward a more gender equal model in these areas. The
specialist also hails, quite rightly, the substantial advances achieved in the education
of girls and across the breadth of the health field in the case of both girls and women.
Adult literacy is lagging but the project and District are endeavoring to accelerate
activity in this sector.
        On the other hand the specialist observes that rote gathering of data in the
absence of analysis does not help address gender inequalities and, while giving credit
for the recognition of rights regardless of sex to land and other assets, notes that
resettler families commonly revert to customs of male land ownership (and, in the
POE’s experience, of house ownership) in the event of divorce or death.
        While not wishing to question the specialist’s view on the overall shift in
attitudes at the village level the POE draws attention to the opinion expressed in its
report # 22 that while there is undoubtedly a good level of participation by women at
the consultative level in VDP planning meetings, such representation is less apparent
as the process moves to the resource allocation and action phases. This remains true.
Among the five hamlet/village VDCs interviewed by the POE the highest level of
female members in the VDC was a third – but with no women at all from the Sop
Phene hamlet (consolidated with Thalang). The other VDCs averaged around 20% of
women members. Nam Nian had only three women in a total of 24. Furthermore,
there are no female naibans (“headmen”) in the resettlement villages. The specialist
suggests that women’s access to and control over productive resources such as fishing
and logging may have declined to a degree as such male-driven resources have
increased in value in recent years.
            The specialist’s recommendations are practical and make sense. They cover
            inter alia:

        •     deepening law dissemination on property and inheritance rights
        •     deepening support for women who have been trained in off-farm skills to
              facilitate business starts
        •     ensuring before project close that poor women are adequately supported in
              small livestock development as a buffer against poverty
        •     analyzing further school enrolment data and especially the low rate of girl
              enrolment in some villages and the high rates of boys’ dropouts
        •     working with the CLWP and GoL agencies to address the “silent” issue of
              family violence, related as it may be to year-round availability of alcohol and
              perhaps drugs
        •     since the number of the vulnerable may rise as available resources decline,
              the project recognizing the gender-specific dimensions of vulnerability and

                                               31
     


           work with GoL agencies to design appropriate mechanisms to buffer
           vulnerable households in the post-project era.
        The POE recommends:

             •   19/23 That the recommendations of the gender specialist be
                 further actioned as a matter of importance in the period before the
                 RIP concludes and that follow-up measures be extended well into
                 the post-RIP era with funding from a dedicated budget line.

             •   20/23 That further endeavors be undertaken by the District
                 authorities to ensure that the representation of women on resettler
                 village institutions especially the VDCs and, where appropriate, on
                 District-level bodies be further raised within the next year or two
                 and the level of training of women taking part in such institutions
                 be extended as required.

             •   21/23 That Lao women be recruited, or trained where necessary,
                 to take over the role of monitoring and supervising the gender
                 strategy’s implementation as soon as possible and certainly once
                 the RIP is terminated. An agreement on a relevant reporting line
                 will be called for. One solution would be to fund the CLWP to
                 carry out this function.




                                          32
     


5. XAI BANG FAI DOWNSTREAM


5.1 Introduction

        The POE congratulates GOL, NTPC and the IFIs for being the first large dam
stakeholders to attempt to ensure that, in the XBF case, livelihoods have been restored
in project affected downstream villages and households.

        The POE agrees, however, with the International Financial Institutions that the
Downstream LSMS survey does not confirm that livelihoods have been restored in all
of the Downstream Area villages. Moreover, in previous reports the POE has been
particularly concerned that livelihoods have not been restored in all of the 67 villages
that received only cash compensation, somewhat less than $100, for each household.
Certainly many households in those 67 villages have benefited from electricity and all
from improved roads. But to benefit from access to new markets including Thakhet,
households need produce and goods to sell which is why cash compensation alone
may not be sufficient for recovery purposes. Moreover in at least two, and possibly
three, of the six villages that the POE visited over a several year period, the village
economy has been adversely affected. For example, in Nakoknai, we were told on
this visit that the cash compensation was spent largely on the purchase of rice and that
tributary fishing only provided for household consumption, while in an upriver village
previously visited the backwater effect of the project had adversely affected the
village’s fishery.




                         POE talking with villagers of one of
                   the 67 “cash compensation” villages (Nakoknai)

        On the other hand, as the IFIs have also observed for the 67 villages, the
evidence provided so far does not suggest that the apparent decline in income can be
attributed to the cash compensation approach. Clearly further data analysis and quite
possibly further monitoring is needed.

                                          33
     


        The POE recommends:

           •   22/23 That NTPC make available to the POE the data on the 25
               cash compensated villages covered in the 2014 Socio-Economic
               Survey.


5.2 XBF Downstream: Gnommalath and two other irrigation projects
        The POE’s mandate requires it to monitor any activity within the project area
which may be impacted by, or have an impact on, NT2. As Governor Khambay
reminded us, it was the POE which shifted the project designers’ interest towards the
use of NT2’s turbined waters for irrigation purposes and insisted that outlets from the
Downstream Channel be built in by NTPC to enable gravity fed irrigation systems to
be set in place. We have been involved in this evolution of the project’s mandate from
the beginning.
        Use of the turbined waters is now about to begin. We accordingly visited the
Gnommalath Irrigation Project under construction by a Chinese company, Norinco
International Cooperation Ltd. We were briefed by a project advisor from the
Department of Irrigation of MAF. The project involves developing an ambitious
gravity fed irrigation system downstream from the NT2 regulating pond, utilizing the
third of five gates on the Downstream Channel. The GoL’s objective is to ensure food
security in Gnommalath and Mahaxai Districts and beyond and expand commercial
production.
        On completion the project is intended to supply water to 2,700 ha of rice fields
in ten villages plus providing irrigation facilities for cash crop plantations and
livestock operations. A pilot project using 1,300 of the above hectares of newly
irrigated fields – currently under forest and shrub cover - is to be developed for
intensive rice production using advanced technology. The total design flow was 6.1
cubic metres per second but the DOI says it will be more like 7.3m3. The contract
price for the construction is US$31m. It was claimed that rice production will reach 5-
6 tonnes per ha (another informant said up to 10 tonnes but that figure may cover a
two crops per year regime). The target date for construction completion is March
2015.
        In addition, an area variously estimated at 700-900 ha is being developed by
the Phonesack Group, apparently for undertaking agricultural and livestock activities
but also for developing recreational facilities, possibly including a resort and/or a golf
course. A further two projects, with water probably drawn from gates 1 and 2 in one
case and gates 4 and 5 in the other, are planned for 2017 and 2018.
        The POE asked about impacts on villagers. Our point was that while NT2 has
brought increased dry season water, channels and outlets which add up to a major
development opportunity for GoL, a large-scale project like this could adversely
affect the living standards of NT2 villages through loss of access to arable land and
NTFPs, for example. We were told that a total number of 917 families from nine of
the ten villages will be impacted. In two villages a fifth of the farmers already have
lost agricultural lands to construction activities. The total loss is 81 ha. There is
reported to be no compensation paid for this land. The farmers do not have land


                                           34
     


ownership certificates, only land use ones. Villagers will pay Norinco in kind (rice)
for maintenance and water use costs.




             Secondary canal on new irrigation project near Gnommalath.


        Making a comparison with how the NT2 Project Lands exercise nearby was
handled we asked one senior official about the non-compensation for the 81 ha,
whether livelihood assistance to restore incomes would be provided and why the
construction costs (US$10,000 per ha or US$6,000 per household) were so high. He
admitted that the costs were high and would be higher for the following two projects
but said that the company involved would set up a laboratory for testing products and
would establish a seed production centre to supply improved seeds to the farmers. He
thought that there would be an endeavor to replicate on livelihoods what had been
done in the case of NT2. Contract farming would also be undertaken.
        The POE’s preliminary view is that, seen through the lens of how the nearby
NT2 Project Lands exercise was handled, the new irrigation project will sell the
villagers short. Setting aside the high costs – which are offset to a degree but by no
means entirely by soft loans provided by the EXIM Bank of China – the non-
compensation for sequestered land sets an unfortunate precedent and may be in
conflict with national legislation. The plans for livelihood assistance to the villagers
appear rudimentary only at this point.
        The POE suggests that the GoL have a look at how the new project measures
up to the NT2 Project Lands exercise and, as a first step, reviews the plans for


                                           35
     


livelihood assistance to impacted villagers before the POE’s next visit in 2015.
        The POE recommends:

           •   23/23 That GoL assess the new Gnommalath irrigation project’s
               impacts on compensation rights , livelihoods and incomes of the
               affected villages in the light of national legislation on investment
               projects. Relevant legislation may include PM’s Decree 192 on
               Compensation and Resettlement for Project Affected People and
               the more recent Ministerial Instructions on Project Impacts
               (No.8030/MONRE) and on Initial Environmental Examination of
               Investment Projects (No. 8029/MONRE). Arrangements made in
               the case of the NT2 Project Lands undertakings in respect of
               compensation and livelihood development would be a basis for
               comparison also.




                                          36
     


6. WATERSHED MANAGEMENT AND PROTECTION AUTHORITY
(WMPA)

        From its first report in 1997 the POE has emphasized that effective
conservation and management of the watershed area, the Nakai-Nam Theun National
Protected Area (NNT-NPA), is crucial to the success of the Nam Theun 2 Project as a
whole. This was both because of the globally significant biological diversity and
cultural diversity of the area, and because its conservation was a key to the World
Bank and others supporting the project. For the World Bank, the conservation of the
watershed both served as an offset for the forests lost under the reservoir, as well as
an important stand-alone conservation objective.
       The Watershed Management and Protection Authority (WMPA) was created
in 2001. To accomplish its mission the NTPC made the remarkable commitment of
payments of US$ one million a year, adjusted to inflation, throughout the twenty five
year concession period. This made the WMPA one of the most securely funded
protected area organizations in the developing world.
        Consequently the WMPA was launched with great enthusiasm. Unfortunately
the enthusiasm was short-lived. As increasingly emphasized in POE reports, from
near the start the WMPA did not succeed in its missions. The situation finally
became so serious that late last year the World Bank funded two reviews, one of the
WMPA’s fiduciary performance and the other of its management and organization.
Because of the WMPA’s continued failures, one of the four options for future action
presented by the management review was to dissolve the organization. In our
extensive consultations in Vientiane, Thakhek, the Nakai Plateau and the watershed,
we have found that there is a widespread lack of confidence and trust in the WMPA
and its senior managers. So while the POE does not support dissolving the WMPA,
we recognize and emphasized in our most recent report (#22, of February 2014) that
what is needed is a complete restructuring of the organization. In other words, what is
needed is a completely new WMPA with new senior managerial staff.
        The GOL takes the situation very seriously and has accepted the
recommendations of the POE and the WB-funded management review to establish a
high level Task Force to review essentially everything about the WMPA, including its
purpose, to complete its reviews and deliberations by early 2015 and the POE awaits
the results with the greatest interest. In the interim the WMPA is to operate at a
reduced level, except that the important law enforcement efforts must be continued.
The POE notes with concern that 38 per cent of the proposed WMPA budget for the
current quarter is for administration, a significant portion of which is for salaries and
expenses of the senior managers. We also have been informed that the law
enforcement activities have been put on hold. This action exacerbates the problems
of WMPA conservation performance. The POE emphasizes that in the face of
reduced funding, priority must go to the law enforcement activities, not managers’
salaries and expenses.

        Given the high percentage of the present budget assigned to administration
and the need for a new WMPA with a new senior staff, it would be desirable without
delay to replace the present senior managers (Secretariat Director and Deputy


                                           37
     


Directors) with an interim director. The interim director could then oversee the
implementation of the recommendations of the high level task force when they
become available. The quarterly budget approach has proved very difficult to
implement. It would appear to be better to develop an annual budget starting in the
second quarter of 2015 but with the funds released on a quarterly basis.


        The POE has emphasized to the GOL officials involved that restructuring the
WMPA is urgent, and that results are needed as soon as possible. In our collective
experience with restructuring organizations, the longer the process takes the more
difficult it is to implement and the less sure is the outcome.
        The POE recommends:

           •   24/23 That the critically important work of the WMPA Task
               Force and its Secretariat be completed as soon as possible, and
               that its recommendations be put into effect urgently.

           •   25/23 That in the interim, priority in the use of the reduced funds
               available to the WMPA be given to the law enforcement activities.

           •   26/23 That since the necessary restructuring of WMPA will
               require new or redefined staff positions these should be advertised
               or announced and applications assessed and selections made by an
               independent group with international representation.

           •   27/23 That without delay an Interim Director to replace the
               present three Directors be appointed to oversee the
               implementation of the recommendations of the high level task
               force when they become available.

           •   28/23 That the present interim quarterly program/ budget process
               be changed to an annual interim one, but with funds released on a
               quarterly basis.




                                         38
