                                                                                        96316




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM
DEVELOPMENT MODULE


JAMAICA
CONSUMER PROTECTION AND FINANCIAL LITERACY
TECHNICAL NOTE
APRIL 2015
This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a World Bank Financial Sector Assessment
Program mission in Jamaica during April-May 2014 led by Alfonso Garcia Mora, and overseen
by Finance & Markets Global Practice, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital Markets
Department, IMF. The note contains technical analysis and detailed information underpinning the
FSAP assessment’s findings and recommendations. Further information on the FSAP program
can be found at www.worldbank.org/fsap.



                         THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                         FINANCE & MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
Table of Contents
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 3
Findings........................................................................................................................................... 3
Issues ............................................................................................................................................... 9
Recommendations ......................................................................................................................... 11


Annexes
Annex 1. Existing Structure for Prudential and Consumer Protection Supervision ..................... 14
Annex 2. Current & Revised Legislation affecting Financial Consumer Protection .................... 17
Annex 3. Comparison to World Bank Good Practices on Financial Consumer Protection ......... 18
Annex 4. National Program of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy .............................. 43




                                                                           2
INTRODUCTION
This Technical Note is based on a mission conducted from April 24 to May 9, 2014 to Kingston
and other parts of Jamaica. The Note was prepared by Susan Rutledge, consultant and retired
World Bank Senior Specialist, as part of a Development Financial Sector Assessment Program
mission. The mission met with officials from the Ministry of Finance & Planning, Ministry of
Industry, Investment & Commerce, Bank of Jamaica, Financial Services Commission, Fair
Trading Commission, Consumer Affairs Commission, Jamaica Deposit Insurance Corporation,
Bankers Association, National Consumers League and representatives from members of the
financial and legal community of Jamaica. The mission also conducted a short mystery shopping
exercise with the assistance of a representative from the National Consumers League. Valuable
comments on the draft Note were provided by the Bank of Jamaica and the Financial Services
Commission.

The Technical Note consists of Findings, Issues and Recommendations and four annexes: Annex
1 Existing Structure for Prudential and Consumer Protection Supervision; Annex 2 Current &
Revised Legislation affecting Financial Consumer Protection; Annex 3 Comparison to World
Bank Good Practices on Financial Consumer Protection; and Annex 4 National Program of
Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy, Implementation Plan Components (for discussion).

The Key Recommendations present targeted measures that could be immediately implemented and
would have a positive (and measurable) impact on public confidence in formal financial
institutions. The focus of the Technical Note is on deposit-taking institutions although some
aspects of others parts of the financial sector have been included. Annex 4 provides an extensive
list of recommendations that would bring Jamaica in line with international practice on financial
consumer protection. All of the recommendations could be supported by technical assistance
programs.

FINDINGS
Building a platform for future economic development, the Government of Jamaica has
embarked upon a series of initiatives to strengthen the financial sector, including consumer
financial services. The objective is to expand the provision of financial services so that the
financial sector can act as an effective springboard for economic growth. To ensure that growth is
inclusive and thus sustained, as financial services are expanded, it will be necessary to strengthen
consumer protection in financial services and financial literacy. Providing high levels of protection
for users of financial services will benefit not only households but also the small and
microenterprises that constitute the primary engine of growth in Jamaica.
However, further work is needed: under the current legal and regulatory framework,
Jamaica meets international practice in only about one in five cases. As noted in Annex 3
comparing Jamaica’s legal and regulatory framework to international practice on financial
consumer protection, Jamaica fully or largely applies only about 20 percent of international

                                                 3
practices. Just over half (51 percent) of the practices are partially applied and the remaining 28
percent materially non-applied or not applied at all.1


The authorities have embarked upon some initiatives to strengthen the legal and regulatory
framework for both prudential supervision and consumer protection supervision of financial
services. Annex 1 provides a summary of the current structure for prudential and consumer
protection supervision. Annex 2 shows which legislation affecting financial consumer protection
is undergoing revision or has recently been revised. The most important new law is the Banking
Services Act, approved by Parliament in June 2014. The Act will consolidate prudential
supervision of deposit-taking institutions under the Bank of Jamaica. In addition, under Bank of
Jamaica regulations to be adopted, prudential supervision of credit unions will also be transferred
to the Bank of Jamaica.
Prudential regulation of non-bank credit institutions is also improving. Non-bank credit
providers, such as payday lenders and microfinance institutions, will be regulated by a new Micro
Credit Bill, which is being drafted by the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel under instructions
from the Ministry of Finance and Planning. The new legislation will remove usury limits for
regulated entities, leaving competition in the marketplace to set interest rates for borrowers. Any
consumer lender not registered under the new microcredit legislation will still be regulated by the
1938 Moneylending Act, which set usury limits for alternative lenders but permitted annual
exemptions with the approval of the Minister of Finance and Planning.2
The Banking Services Act provides a valuable first step in strengthening consumer
protection supervision of deposit-taking institutions through the establishment of an
enforceable code of conduct. The conduct code will be applicable to commercial and merchant
banks as well as building societies and will establish minimum standards of business conduct that
will strengthen consumer protection for users of banking services. Specifically, the code will
require that DTIs provide customers: (1) reasonable notice of fees and charges and terms and
conditions, (2) access to their account information at a reasonable cost, (3) interest rates expressed

1
  The Technical Note uses the World Bank’s Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection as its benchmark.
While the Good Practices are not part of the agreed set of core international financial sector standards, the Good
Practices have received extensive comment by regulators worldwide. See World Bank, Good Practices for
Financial Consumer Protection, June 2012 available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Good_Practices_for_Financial_CP.pdf .
Note that the five point scale used in the Technical Note is similar to the approach used for ROSCs, as described in
Guidance Note for Staff on Undertaking Targeted (Risk-Based) Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes
(ROSCs) in Financial Regulation and Supervision, International Monetary Fund, October 5, 2010. See
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2010/100510c.pdf. See also summary information on other country practices
included in Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy: Oversight Frameworks and Practices in
114 Economies, World Bank, 2014 available at
http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/~/media/GIAWB/FL/Documents/Publications/CPFL-Global-Survey-
114econ-Oversight-2014.pdf
2
  Exemptions were provided for lenders operating “in the public interest”, which was interpreted as any activity
facilitating economic growth. In 2013, about 25 entities were granted exemptions. No information is available on the
size of their businesses.

                                                         4
as effective annual rates calculated in a standard manner across the banking sector, (3) simple and
clear language in contracts, and (e) effective mechanisms to address complaints. In addition, the
central bank will (as part of its examination process) review compliance with the code and
incorporate any violations into its risk assessment of the banks and building societies. In addition,
under the Banking Services Act, the Bank of Jamaica will receive authority to issue directions for
any breaches of the code. A deposit-taking institution which fails to follow the directions will be
considered to have committed an offence and be subject to penalties.
Other reforms in the securities sector will improve protection for retail investors. The former
Unit Trusts Act has been replaced by an amended securities legislative framework, which includes
new Securities (Collective Investment Schemes) Regulations. At the same time, the current retail
repo model is being replaced with a trust arrangement where the underlying securities will be
transferred from the custody of the dealers to a master trust, under which individual investors’
claims to the securities will be identified. The reforms are expected to reduce the risky business
models of securities dealers in order to enhance investor protection (including that of retail
investors) and facilitate investment in other investment options available in the market.
Recent legislative changes in the anti-fraud framework will help protect both depositors and
retail investors. The 2013 Law Reform (Fraudulent Transactions Act) provides extensive
provisions to combat lottery scams. In addition, the 2013 amendments to the Securities Act
reinforced the authority of the Financial Services Commission to tackle pyramid schemes and other
forms of investment fraud.
The resulting supervisory framework for financial consumer protection will still have gaps,
thus creating loopholes that can be mined by financial firms. As indicated in Annex 1, the
supervision framework is fragmented, with limited consumer protection supervision of many types
of financial institutions. The 2001 Financial Services Commission Act clearly specifies investor
protection as part of the Commission’s core mandate. As a result, insurance, securities and private
pension services all have a consumer protection regulator and supervisor with a clear focus on
measures to strengthen consumer protection. However, for banks and building societies, the scope
of the Bank of Jamaica’s work on consumer protection is limited since the 1960 Bank of Jamaica
Act does not specifically refer to consumer protection as part of its statutory mandate. Instead, the
Bank relies on its mandate to maintain financial stability to cover its consumer protection role but
this is not as powerful as having consumer protection as part of the Bank’s statutory obligations.
Some types of financial institutions have virtually no consumer protection supervision. For
example, “friendly societies” (a form of mutual benefit organization) are supervised by the
Department of Co-operatives and Friendly Societies within the Ministry of Industry, Investment
and Commerce. While there are hundreds of friendly societies, fewer than 50 are involved in
consumer financial services. Of these, only one (TIP Friendly) is substantial. While membership
in TIP Friendly is limited to professional teachers, the society has 10,000 members and collects
premiums on behalf of insurance brokers. However its market conduct activities do not fall under
the supervision of the Financial Services Commission or any other financial supervisor. Similarly

                                                 5
retailers, which provide installment credit for the purchase of appliances and other major consumer
goods, are regulated by the 1974 Hire Purchase Act and come under no financial supervisory
agency. In addition, credit unions, payday lenders, and microfinance institutions have no clear
consumer protection supervisor. Also state lenders such as the National Housing Trust, which
provides half of all residential mortgages directly to consumers, falls under the oversight of the
Office of the Prime Minister and has no consumer protection supervisor. For such agencies, the
only consumer protection supervisors are the Fair Trading Commission (whose authority is limited
to issues of misleading advertising and tied selling) and the Consumer Affairs Commission (for
which financial services represent only a small portion of the Commission’s work and just one
percent of complaints received from consumers).
Another issue is that the work of government supervisors on financial consumer protection
lacks effective co-ordination. Bank of Jamaica is considering creating a special department within
the Financial Institutions Supervision Division. The new department would have responsibility for
monitoring (and enforcing) compliance with the code of conduct and addressing the issues raised
by consumer complaints. Such an approach would represent a helpful first step in strengthening
the capability of Bank of Jamaica to improve consumer protection of commercial banks, merchant
banks, and building societies. It would allow Bank of Jamaica staff, who examine financial
consumer protection, to focus on those issues and participate in international fora focused on
consumer protection supervision of financial institutions. However, the work of Bank of Jamaica
on bank consumer protection is currently conducted separately from that of the Financial Services
Commission on investor (and policy-holder) protection. In addition the other government agencies,
such as the Fair Trading Commission and the Consumer Affairs Commission, operate without
support or input from the Bank of Jamaica. Additional changes beyond what is envisioned by the
Banking Services Act will therefore be required if the financial consumer protection framework is
to be effective.
Consumer complaints provide useful insight about weaknesses in the consumer protection
framework. The Financial Services Commission is the most active of the regulators, receiving
over half of all complaints regarding financial services (as noted below in Table 1). However useful
insights are also available from other databases. For example, the database of the Consumer Affairs
Commission shows that the most common complaints about banking services concern: (1) fees for
use of automated teller machines, overdrafts, penalties and dormant accounts; (2) interest charges
on outstanding balances, credit cards and loan accounts; (3) payments posted to incorrect accounts
or in incorrect amounts; (3) ATMs not issuing cash and (4) stolen debit and credit cards and
unauthorized deductions. Some of the same consumer protection issues in banking services were
encountered during the mission’s mystery shopping exercise, described in Box 1.
Calculating their account balances appears to be a particular challenge for Jamaican
borrowers. According to the authorities, the single most common complaint is in the calculation
of account balances for bank loans. One source of confusion is the profusion of fees charged by
banks. The list of a bank’s fees and charges is typically accessible from the bank’s website or as a
posting on the wall. However a printed copy of the full list is not given to every new customer and
                                                 6
is only available upon request. Another source of complaints are prepayment fees that can reach
as high as 30 percent of the principal amount, even when the interest rate is variable and reset
every 24 months. However, the Jamaican consumer may often be subject to penalty fees that
substantially increase the amount of the original debt – but for which the consumer was unaware.
A 2012 financial literacy survey implemented by the Financial Services Commission (and
supported by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) found that only 68
percent of Jamaican consumers claim to generally make payments on time. This is one of the
lowest levels among the 14 countries in the International Network on Financial Education which
have conducted comparable surveys.3 Only 40 percent of Jamaicans “always” paid on time.
Jamaican consumers also complain about other types of financial services. Other common
consumer complaints submitted to the Financial Services Commission relate to: (1) calculation of
insurance coverage (if less than the full replacement value has been insured), (2) reduction in
pension payouts when a partial payout has already been commuted to cash, and (3) loss in value
for market investments where consumers may not realize that such investments have the potential
to both gain and lose value. Borrowers from microfinance lenders complain of high interest rates
of one percent per week (or an effective borrowing rate of 69 percent per year) and aggressive debt
collection practices. Credit card users also complain of high interest rates, with credit card
providers charging very high rates of interest on amounts payable. The complaints point to the
need for improved consumer disclosure – and better programs of financial education. In particular,
the service provider should be obliged to clearly explain the terms and conditions (including those
related to interest rate calculations) at the time the service is initially provided.




3
  By comparison, 64 percent of consumers in the British Virgin Islands (and 80 percent of those in the United
Kingdom) say that they “always” pay their bills on time. See Atkinson, A. and F. Messy, Measuring Financial
Literacy: Results of the OECD / International Network on Financial Education Pilot Study , OECD Working Papers
on Finance, Insurance and Private Pensions, No. 15, OECD Publishing, 2012 http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k9csfs90fr4-
en

                                                       7
Box 1: Mystery Shopping for Bank Services
The World Bank Mission conducted mystery shopping with the assistance of a representative from the
National Consumers League, the primary consumer association based in Kingston. Together the shoppers
visited one of the branches of one of the largest commercial banks and requested information regarding
opening a new account and applying for a home mortgage.
The shoppers were offered a “30 year fixed mortgage”, which referred to a 30 year mortgage whose term
was indeed fixed for 30 years but whose interest rate was fixed for only two years. At the end of 24
months, the rate would be adjusted based on “market conditions”. When pressed for a definition of
market conditions, the loan officer explained that market conditions would be based on the general level
of interest rates and changes in the foreign exchange markets. Contesting the rate would thus be almost
impossible for the average consumer whose understanding of the working of financial markets is generally
limited.
Fruitless also were attempts to review the wording of the standard contract (which would have defined
“market conditions”). The loan officer explained that the draft contract would be shared with the
customer only once the full documentation has been submitted and approved. Had the typical contract
terms been shared with the shoppers, they would have discovered that the interest rate is in fact set
based on the bank’s internal cost of funds, a calculation that is unavailable to the public – and unverifiable
by the average consumer.
Neither was understanding the bank’s fees and charges a simple task. Upon request, the officer printed
out the full schedule of fees and charges on a new account. The booklet ran 15 pages and included some
surprising fees. For example, the schedule indicated a fee of JD248 (US$2.25) for obtaining a copy of the
account statement. The same fee was applicable just for moving funds from one account to another in
the same bank -- even if the customer owns both accounts at the bank.


When they submit written complaints, Jamaican consumers write to five different
government agencies. As seen in Table 1, the Bank of Jamaica receives just one of eight of all
consumer complaints regarding financial services. Complaints are also received by the Financial
Services Commission (which in 2013 received over half of all complaints submitted to government
authorities concerning financial services), the Consumer Affairs Commission, the Fair Trading
Commission and the Ministry of Industry, Investment & Commerce.
Despite their complaints, Jamaican consumers tend not to shop around for better service.
The 2012 financial literacy survey conducted by the Financial Services Commission4 found that
just eight percent of Jamaican consumers “shopped around” for financial services, comparing the
offers of different financial service providers.5 One of the issues may be that consumers face a

4
  The survey used the financial literacy questionnaire prepared by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development and implemented by countries in the International Network on Financial Education.
5
  By comparison, 16 percent of consumers of financial services in the U.K. compared offers of different financial
services providers. See http://www.oecd-


                                                        8
dearth of choices. Just two banks – National Commercial Bank and Scotiabank Jamaica – together
hold three-quarters of all bank deposits (and 57 percent of deposits held by all deposit-taking
institutions). Alternatively it may be difficult for consumers to understand and compare available
options – and then be prepared to solve problems if they arise.


ISSUES
From the complaints, three key issues are evident. First, Jamaican consumers have difficulty
obtaining simple, clear and comparable information about financial services. Second, they have
difficulty resolving disputes with financial institutions. Third, financial literacy among consumers
is low.
Table 1: Estimated Consumer Complaints about Financial Services in 2013
 Bank of Jamaica                                         40
 Financial Services Commission                          145
 Consumer Affairs Commission                             45
 Fair Trading Commission                                 18
 Ministry of Industry, Investment & Commerce             20
 Total                                                  258
Source: Respective government agencies
First, consumer disclosure is inadequate to meet the needs of consumers of financial services.
One area of confusion is that no standard methodology has been established for calculating
effective interest rates, although the 2014 Banking Services Act now authorizes the Bank of
Jamaica to develop such methodology. The absence of a standardized methodology has meant that
consumers could not easily compute their account balance. As a result, consumers had no way of
verifying if they have been charged the correct amount of interest. Nor can Jamaican consumers
easily “shop around” for financial services if there is no standard calculation of interest rates. A
second area of confusion lies in the fact that the interest rate on a standard mortgage is typically
based on the bank’s cost of funds – and this information is not publicly available even to the
consumer who seeks it out. At the same time, there are only a few price surveys that would allow
consumers to compare offers from different financial service providers. Since 2010, the Bank of
Jamaica has published on its website an annual Study of Fees and Charges prepared for a
parliamentary commission. The study provides comparison on individual fees but is updated only
annually.6




ilibrary.org/docserver/download/5k9csfs90fr4.pdf?expires=1401609264&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=CD3C
112BF5A0B138D46A11DD39CF0384
6
  http://www.boj.org.jm/uploads/news/final_report_on_fees_and_charges_at_31_october_2013_(3).pdf

                                                  9
Second, existing out-of-court dispute resolution mechanisms across the financial sector are
ineffective. In any country, the first step is for the consumer to contact the financial institution and
request clarification or correction of the error. The difficulty arises when the consumer is not
satisfied with the response of the financial institution. For most financial services, the consumer’s
next step is the financial supervisory agency. While the Financial Services Commission has an
active role in receiving complaints and enforcing legislation, the role of the Bank of Jamaica has
been more limited. However in both cases, the agencies are looking for systemic issues. For the
individual consumer, the only remaining recourse is the court. However the difficulty is that the
court system of Jamaica is slow and cumbersome, with routine commercial cases taking six to
twelve months or longer for resolution. (According to the World Bank’s Doing Business
Indicators, the average time for resolution of a commercial case in the Jamaican courts is 540 days,
or 18 months).7 This is sufficient to deter all but the most determined of financial consumers. The
Consumer Affairs Commission has the legal authority to launch a lawsuit on behalf of financial
consumers – and receive damages related to its costs in prosecution of the case. However class-
action lawsuits for financial consumers are largely unknown in Jamaica (although the 2013
amendments to the Securities Act allow the Financial Services Commission to initiate class-action
lawsuits on behalf of defrauded investors). Many countries have adopted out-of-court resolution
mechanisms to support those financial consumers who are reluctant to access the court system.
However in Jamaica, such out-of-court mechanisms are still in their infancy. Both the Consumer
Affairs Commission (under the 2010 amendments to the Consumer Protection Act) and the
Financial Services Commission (under the 2013 amendments to the Financial Services
Commission Act) have the authority to establish special tribunals to resolve disputes on financial
services. However in both cases, the tribunals have only recently been put in place and more work
will be required to ensure that they are effective alternative dispute resolution mechanism for
consumer financial services.
Third, early initiatives on a National Financial Literacy Program have been helpful but they
were insufficient to have a measurable impact on consumer levels of financial literacy. Well-
educated financial consumers are best able to protect themselves from unfair treatment by financial
institutions. Several key government agencies (including the Financial Services Commission and
Jamaica Deposit Insurance Corporation (“JDIC”)) were active participants in the previous
Financial Literacy Program, which was launched with the release of the financial literacy survey
in 2012. In spite of the current environment of financial austerity for Jamaican government
institutions, the regulators have still placed a priority on financial education. The Financial
Services Commission has pursued a financial education program related to insurance, securities
and private pensions – and devoted an annual budget of about JD 30 million to the effort. The
program includes partnerships with the Bank of Jamaica, the JDIC and Credit Bureau as well as
partnerships with civil society groups such as Kiwanis to deliver financial literacy programs to
high schools. The Financial Services Commission is also active in international fora including


7
    http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/jamaica/enforcing-contracts/

                                                        10
International Forum on Investor Education and the international organizations for securities,
insurance and pension regulators. The JDIC has continued its financial education campaign of
about JD 12 million to ensure that depositors are aware of insurance on their personal deposits. In
addition, the Ministry of Education has announced its decision to include financial education as
part of the school curriculum for high schools. However the efforts would be far more effective if
they were coordinated as part of a government-wide national program led at the highest level of
government and broadly supported by industry associations and civil society. A national program
on financial literacy would also encourage citizen participation in reform of consumer financial
services.
What is needed now in Jamaica is a comprehensive national program of consumer protection
and financial literacy as part of a national strategy on financial inclusion. Rapid expansion in
financial services – combined with low levels of competition – raises the need for strong protection
of users of financial services. Provision of financial services to previously unserved (or
underserved) consumers will bring first-time consumers into formal financial services. Where the
financial consumer protection framework is weak (and particularly where competition is low),
first-time users of financial services are at the mercy of financial institutions. Furthermore the
growth-enhancing benefits of expanded financial inclusion may be lost or severely undermined, if
financial consumer protection is weak.8 In addition, improved consumer protection has the
potential to create a virtuous circle. Better consumer disclosure would encourage individuals to
shop for the best price and quality of service, thereby encouraging financial institutions to compete
for their business. At the same time, financial crises in Jamaica and worldwide have undermined
public confidence and trust in formal financial institutions. Strengthening consumer rights in
financial services will help rebuild that needed confidence and trust from the public.



RECOMMENDATIONS
High Level Measures
Develop a comprehensive national strategy on consumer protection and financial literacy.
The 2011 Financial Literacy Strategy prepared by the Financial Services Commission and
presented to the Office of the Prime Minister was a useful first step. What is needed now is a
comprehensive and collaborative strategy on consumer protection and financial literacy as part of
the national strategy on expanding financial inclusion. The new strategy should aim to bring
together all the key stakeholders into one national program.



8
  Consumer protection is needed because of the inherent imbalance of power, expertise and resources between
financial institutions and individuals. In specific terms, financial consumer protection aims to ensure that consumers:
(1) receive information to allow them to make informed decisions, (2) are not subject to unfair or deceptive practices
and (3) have access to recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes. Complementary financial literacy initiatives give
consumers the knowledge and skills to understand the risks and rewards of using financial services —and their legal
rights and obligations in using such services.

                                                          11
Establish a task force with high level political support to lead the strategy. The task force
should be a collaborative effort that includes not only the Financial Services Commission, Bank
of Jamaica and the JDIC, but also all the line ministries that touch on financial issues for
households (for example, Ministries of Finance & Planning, Industry, Investment & Commerce,
Education, Agriculture, National Security, and Defense). Participation by Consumer Affairs
Commission and Fair Trading Commission would be helpful. Also needed is active involvement
of the industry and consumer associations as well as leaders from the private sector and civil
society.
Create a secretariat to develop and report on implementation of the action plan. It would be
useful to appoint a dedicated secretariat to work out the detailed action plan, monitor its
implementation and disseminate the results to the public. The secretariat should prepare an annual
report on the status of the action plan, including recommendations on measures to further
strengthen the National Program. The annual report could be presented to the Office of the Prime
Minister or other high-level authorities. Monitoring and evaluation measures should be identified
in order to report on success in implementation and suggest further improvements. Such measures
could include a national baseline survey of consumer financial literacy levels by age, occupation,
geographic area etc. with the results (as well as raw data) made available for public review and
analysis.


Short-term Plan
Strengthen – and simplify – standard disclosure on common financial services. One approach
would be to develop a Key Facts Statement which highlights the key terms and conditions of the
financial service being provided to the consumer. The Key Facts Statement might be developed
by the Jamaica Bankers Association with the support of the Bank of Jamaica, other regulators and
supervisors and industry and consumer associations. In order to help (and encourage) consumers
to shop around for the best price and quality of service from financial institutions, a standard
methodology should be established for calculation of effective interest rates. In order to simplify
standard disclosure on home mortgages, the authorities should require that variable interest rates
for residential mortgages be priced off an objective (and independently verifiable) index, such as
the Bank of Jamaica (Interest) Rate. Alternatively lenders could be obliged to publish their base
rates used for calculating mortgages.
Publish timely price surveys of commonly used financial services to encourage comparison
shopping by consumers. In addition to surveys of fees and charges, such surveys might cover
effective borrowing rates through unsecured consumer loans and credit cards. This might include
the weekly or monthly publication of current interest rates (using a standard methodology for
calculation of effective interest rates. Such rate surveys could be conducted by any of: (a) financial
supervisory agencies, (b) consumer associations or possibly (c) an independent research



                                                 12
organization. The rates should be published in a newspaper with broad circulation in Jamaica and
listed on a public website on the internet.9
Create an independent statutory ombudsman to cover all consumer financial services. An
independent ombudsman for financial services would provide a “one stop shop” for individuals to
present complaints and inquiries about financial services.10 The ombudsman could be created by
statute or by financial industry associations. A financial ombudsman would not resolve the issue
of fragmentation in the consumer protection supervisory structure. However an ombudsman would
provide a center-point for complaints about all types of consumer financial services. From this
vantage point, a financial ombudsman would be able to see the issue up-close and in-depth – and
be able to make recommendations on measures to address the underlying weaknesses in the
financial consumer protection framework.11 Following international practice, the ombudsman
should have the authority to make decisions on relatively small cases (for example, up to JD 50,000
or USD 500 equivalent), where the decisions are binding on the financial institution but the
consumer retains the right to go to court. The ombudsman might also set up a toll-free hotline for
financial consumer complaints and inquiries. The ombudsman should also prepare an annual
report, including statistics on the number of cases covered, their resolution, and the key issues that
were raised during the course of review of the cases. The work of a financial ombudsman should
be complemented by a national program of financial education to ensure that consumers
understand their legal rights and obligations in using financial services.
Finance the ombudsman with a levy on the financial services sector. The office of the
ombudsman will need to be adequately resourced in order to be effective. In line with international
experience, such funding could come from industry (and institution-specific) levies, based on the
number of complaints that are received for each institution. In this way, financial institutions would
have a monetary incentive to resolve the issues prompting high levels of consumer complaints.12


9
  Pricing surveys released by the Financial Regulator of Ireland have proved to be useful ways of helping consumers
select the financial service providers that best meet their needs. The financial regulator of Peru found that in September
2002 to March 2003, interest rates on consumer credit card loans fell by 150 percentage points at a time when other
market rates remained stable. The Peruvian regulator attributed virtually all the decrease in consumer rates to an
increase in competition among financial service providers.
10
   Other structures are also possible, including establishing industry-based voluntary ombudsmen or strengthening
the consumer protection tribunals. However independent statutory ombudsmen have proven to be most effective in
strengthening dispute resolution systems.
11
   Attention should be paid to ensuring that the financial ombudsman collaborates closely with the financial
supervisory agencies, such as the Financial Services Commission. Consumer complaints provide an early warning
signal for supervisors to investigate cases of fraud or other consumer abuse – and financial supervisors need the detail
of the complaints to identify ways of fully examining business practices of supervised financial service providers.
12
    See David Thomas and Francis Frizon, Resolving disputes between consumers and financial businesses:
Fundamentals for a financial ombudsman: A practical guide based on experience in western Europe, World Bank,
2012 available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Financial_Ombudsmen_Vol1_Fundament
als.pdf


                                                           13
Establish a regular national survey of consumer finances. The survey would provide: (a)
information on consumer confidence in the financial sector and (b) additional insights on the ways
in which households access financial services.13 Once the data has been analyzed and a report
published, the raw data should be made available to researchers, including those in the universities.
Combining the consumer finance surveys with raw data on labor statistics, academic research
institutes and non-government organizations would been able to identify patterns in income levels
based on years of formal schooling, number of children, sizes of households and other sociological
data. Such research has been helpful in developing national government policies intended to target
low-income and highly vulnerable households and communities.14
Conduct an in-depth baseline survey of financial literacy. The 2012 survey provides a good
base but an updated financial literacy survey should be expanded to review popular understanding
of basic financial concepts such as savings and inflation. The survey could also review consumer
use of financial services. The survey could be combined with other consumer surveys, such as
those conducted to research popular awareness of deposit insurance coverage and money-
laundering regulations. The survey should be updated every few years to evaluate the effectiveness
of the national program on consumer protection and financial literacy (and financial inclusion) and
suggest mid-course corrections to improve the effectiveness of the national program.


Medium-term Plan
Develop further in-depth analysis on specific parts of the financial services sector and
prepare an additional action plan for implementation of the recommendations. The Technical
Note did not fully review issues related to securities, insurance and private pensions. Additional
assessment of financial consumer protection in these sectors is needed as is review of specific
topics, such as: (1) protection of consumers in the event of fraud when using electronic banking
and (2) protection of personal data. Further recommendations are also included as part of Annex
3, Comparison to World Bank Good Practices on Financial Consumer Protection. Annex 4 lists
the recommendations and assigns priorities to the measures.
Annex 1. Existing Structure for Prudential and Consumer Protection Supervision
 Type of Financial     Enabling           Prudential         Authorizing    Consumer         Authorizing       Number
 Institution           Legislation        Supervisor         Legislation    Protection       Legislation for   of
                                                             for            Supervisor       Consumer          Regulated
                                                             Supervisor                      Protection        Entities
                                                                                             Supervisor
 Commercial banks      Banking Act        BoJ                BoJ Act        None             Not applicable    6
 Merchant banks        Financial          BoJ                BoJ Act        None             Not applicable    2
                       Institutions Act



13
   For example in the U.S., the Federal Reserve Board works with the University of Michigan to conduct a tri-annual
survey of consumer finances. See http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/scf/scfindex.htm
14
   See http://responsiblefinance.worldbank.org/surveys/users-of-financial-services

                                                        14
 Building societies     Building          BoJ               BoJ Act         None          Not applicable     3
                        Societies Act
 Credit unions          Co-operative      MIIC              Cooperative     None          Not applicable     37
                        Societies Act                       Societies Act
 Friendly societies     Friendly          MIIC (Dept. of    Friendly        None          Not applicable     Fewer
                        Societies Act     Cooperatives      Societies Act                                    than 5015
                                          & Friendly
                                          Societies)
 Foreign exchange       BoJ Act           BoJ               BoJ Act         None          Not applicable     2
 traders/cambios
 Remittance             BoJ Act           BoJ               BoJ Act         None          Not applicable     8
 companies
 Money lenders16        Money Lending     None              Money           None          Not applicable
                        Act                                 Lending Act
                                                            (1938)
 National Housing       National          Office of         National        None          Not applicable     1
 Trust                  Housing Trust     Prime             Housing Trust
                        Act               Minister          Act
 Credit bureaus         Credit            BoJ               Credit          None          Not applicable     3
                        Reporting Act                       Reporting Act
 Insurance cos.         Insurance Act     FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            17
 Insurance agents       Insurance Act     FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            14
 Insurance brokers      Insurance Act     FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            25
 Investment dealers     Securities Act    FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            49
 Investment             Securities Act    FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            33
 advisers
 Individual dealers     Securities Act    FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            44
 Individual advisers    Securities Act    FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            2
 Unit trust mgt. cos.   CIS Regulations   FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            55
 Pension funds          PSFRS Act         FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            43617
 Pension                PSFRS Act         FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            28
 administrators
 Pension                PSFRS Act         FSC               FSC Act         FSC           FSC Act            27
 investment
 managers.


Acronyms
BoJ     Bank of Jamaica
CIS     Collective Investment Schemes
FSC     Financial Services Commission
MIIC    Ministry of Industry, Investment & Commerce,



15
   Refers only to those friendly societies that are engaged in consumer finance and provide active plans.
16
   Although there are no regulated money lenders, there are entities who have received exemptions from the
Moneylending Act which allow them to charge rates in excess of those stipulated in the Act.
17
   Included are terminating plans regulated by the FSC.

                                                       15
       Department of Cooperatives & Friendly Societies
MoFP Ministry of Finance & Planning
PSFRS Pensions (Superannuation Funds & Retirement Schemes)
As of May 9, 2014




                                                16
Annex 2. Current & Revised Legislation affecting Financial Consumer Protection


 Current Legislation                            Revised Legislation
 Banking Act                                    Banking Services Act18
 Financial Institutions Act                     Banking Services Act
 Building Societies Act & BOJ Building          Banking Services Act19
 Societies Regulations                          Amended Building Societies Act
 Co-operative Societies Act                     BoJ Credit Unions Regulations
                                                (complementing Co-operative Societies Act)
 Friendly Societies Act                         No changes
 Deposit Insurance Act                          No changes
 Money Lending Act                              Micro Credit Bill
 National Housing Trust Act                     No changes
 Credit Reporting Act                           No changes
 Insurance Act                                  No changes
 Pension (Superannuation and                    No changes
 Retirement Schemes) Act
 Securities Act                                 No changes
 Unit Trusts Act                                Collective Investment Schemes Regulations20


As of May 9, 2014




18
   Enacted June 2014.
19
   The Banking Services Act replaced the BOJ Building Societies Regulations. The Building Societies Act will also be
substantially amended.
20
   The Unit Trusts Act has been repealed.

                                                         17
Annex 3. Comparison to World Bank Good Practices on Financial Consumer Protection
Consumer protection in financial services is an emerging issue for the global financial
community concerned about financial inclusion. The Global Alliance for Financial Inclusion
has identified financial consumer protection as a key issue for expanding access to finance. Where
financial services are extended to previously unserved (or underserved) consumers – and financial
consumer protection is weak – consumers will be vulnerable to abusive market practices by
financial institutions.
Financial consumer protection is also an important issue for financial stability. The financial
crisis of 2007-08 highlighted weaknesses in financial consumer protection in industrialized and
middle income countries. In response to the crisis (and the increasing importance of financial
inclusion), the global financial community prepared principles, guidelines and good practices. The
work was led by the Group of Twenty (G-20) Countries, the Financial Stability Board, the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervisors, and the World Bank Group. The World Bank Good Practices were
developed to provide a detailed methodology for assessing a country’s framework compared to
global best practice on financial consumer protection. The Good Practices were released in June
2012 after a five year global consultation process.21
The Annex compares Jamaica’s financial consumer protection framework and business
practices to the World Bank’s Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection. The
assessment found that of the 39 Good Practices, Jamaica scored as applied or largely applied in 9
Practices, partially applied in 19, and materially non-applied or not applied in the remaining 11
Practices. The findings are summarized in Annex 3, which provides a brief description of
Jamaica’s legal and regulatory framework and common business practices (as of early May 2014)
and presents recommendations on strengthening measures. Annex 4 proposes high and medium
priorities for the measures.


 Consumer Protection Institutions

 Good Practice #1         The law provides clear consumer protection rules regarding financial products
                          and services. The necessary institutional arrangements are in place to ensure
                          thorough, objective, timely, and fair implementation (and enforcement) of the
                          rules.

 Description              Jamaica has a number of different supervisors of financial consumer
                          protection, including not only the Bank of Jamaica and the Financial Services
                          Commission but also the Fair Trading Commission and the Consumer Affairs



21
  The World Bank’s report, Good Practices for Financial Consumer Protection , include citations of the laws,
regulations and codes used to develop the Good Practices as well as a summary of the consultation process. See
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Good_Practices_for_Financial_CP.pdf

                                                       18
                   Commission. (See Annex 1 for a listing of the financial consumer protection
                   supervisors for all 21 different types of financial institutions in Jamaica).
                   The Banking Services Act gives the Bank of Jamaica some authority to
                   supervise consumer protection in services provided by commercial banks,
                   merchant banks and building societies. However this authority is limited at
                   best.
                   For securities, insurance and private pension entities supervised by the
                   Financial Services Commission, the related Act puts investor protection at the
                   core of the Commission’s mandate. However for other consumer financial
                   services – provided by money lenders, microfinance institutions and state
                   mortgage lenders – there are no effective institutional arrangements to ensure
                   adequate financial consumer protection. The Fair Competition Act authorizes
                   the Fair Trading Commission to investigate competitive practices. In addition,
                   the Consumer Protection Act authorizes the Consumer Affairs Commission to
                   review consumer rights in products and services, including financial services.
                   However the authority and effectiveness of both Commissions are limited.
                   By law, the Fair Trading Commission is restricted to issues of misleading
                   advertising and tied selling. While the Consumer Affairs Commission has the
                   power to review financial services, only 1% of complaints submitted to the
                   Commission relate to financial services.

Rating             Partially applied

Recommendation     It would be helpful if specific government authorities received the formal
                   mandate to supervise consumer protection in all types of financial services.

Good Practice #2   Codes of conduct for sector-specific financial institutions are developed by the
                   sector-specific association (in consultation with the financial supervisory
                   agency and consumer associations, if possible). Monitored by statutory
                   agencies or effective self-regulatory agencies, these codes are formally
                   adhered to by all sector-specific institutions. The codes may be augmented by
                   voluntary codes of conduct devised by individual financial institutions for their
                   own operations. The codes are widely publicized.

Description        For the banking sector alone, Jamaica has three different codes of conduct.
                   The Bankers Association drafted a voluntary code of conduct for banks, which
                   has been adopted by all the members of the Association. According to Bank of
                   Jamaica’s Survey of Fees and Charges submitted to Parliament in March 2014,
                   four of Jamaica’s commercial banks (including Scotiabank Jamaica, the second
                   largest) implemented the Bankers Association code while a fifth bank noted
                   that it is implementing procedures to implement the code. A sixth bank noted
                   that it was working with other members of the Association to develop a code
                   compatible with the code of the Consumer Affairs Commission (noted below).




                                              19
                          The largest bank, National Commercial Bank, indicated that it had not yet
                          implemented the code.2223
                          In addition, the Consumer Affairs Commission, working with the National
                          Consumers League, prepared a separate voluntary code of conduct. This latter
                          code has not been accepted by the Bankers Association, although some of the
                          code’s provisions (such as showing, on the teller screen, the cost of using an
                          automated teller machine) have been implemented by some of the banks.
                          The third code is a mandatory code of conduct, included as part of the Banking
                          Services Act. It is anticipated that the mandatory code will be enforced by the
                          Bank of Jamaica as part of its regular supervision and examination process of
                          banks (as well as building societies). Violation of the code will be subject to a
                          fine of J$ 2 million although separate regulations may prescribe higher
                          penalties that those established under the Act.
                          For financial institutions supervised by the Financial Services Commission,
                          there are protocols and guidelines but no formal codes of conduct developed
                          by the industry associations.
                          For other types of financial institutions, no codes of conduct are in place.

    Rating                Partially applied

    Recommendation        Consideration could be given to developing one common code of conduct to
                          cover all types of financial institutions that deal with consumers. Alternatively
                          each of the industry associations might develop their own codes specific to
                          their industries. In this case, care should be taken to ensure that all the
                          conduct codes for consumer financial services in Jamaica are consistent with
                          each other.

    Good Practice #3      Prudential supervision and consumer protection supervision may be placed in
                          separate agencies or lodged in a single institution. However regardless of the
                          institutional structure, the allocation of resources between prudential
                          supervision and consumer protection is adequate to enable the effective
                          implementation of consumer protection rules.

    Description           The Bank of Jamaica is considering an internal restructuring to handle its
                          expanded mandate under the Banking Services Act. Under that restructuring,
                          it is anticipated that a special consumer protection department would be
                          created as part of the Financial Institutions Supervisory Division.
                          For the Financial Services Commission, investor protection is part of the core
                          mandate of the agency. As a result, consumer protection is found in every
                          activity of the Commission.



22
  http://www.boj.org.jm/uploads/news/final_report_on_fees_and_charges_at_31_october_2013_(3).pdf
B
  By the end of January 2015, all commercial banks had signed the JBA’s voluntary code. (See Section F, pg. 11 of
Report to Parliament)

                                                        20
                             However for other financial services, there is largely no consumer protection
                             supervision, as noted above.

 Rating                      Partially applied

 Recommendation              Several options are available to ensure that all financial service providers are
                             supervised from a consumer protection perspective by a financial supervisory
                             agency. One option would be to expand the mandate of the Bank of Jamaica
                             to explicitly assume responsibility for consumer protection in deposit-taking
                             institutions, with all other financial service providers falling under the
                             supervision of the Financial Services Commission. Another approach would be
                             to create a special agency for consumer protection in financial services. There
                             are advantages and disadvantages to each approach. Some agencies prefer to
                             include consumer protection as part of prudential supervision since consumer
                             complaints provide a valuable early warning signal of possible systemic issues.
                             Other agencies note the inevitable conflicts between the mandates of financial
                             stability and consumer protection and prefer to have separate agencies deal
                             with each issue. It may be worthwhile for the authorities to conduct a study of
                             international experience in determine what would be the most efficient and
                             effective approach in Jamaica.24

 Good Practice #4            All legal entities that provide financial services to consumers are licensed (or
                             registered) and supervised with regard to their market conduct (i.e. their
                             business practices in relation to retail customers) by the appropriate financial
                             supervisory authority.

 Description                 Most legal entities that provide consumer financial services are registered
                             with, or licensed by, a government agency. However as indicated by Annex 1,
                             not all are supervised regarding their consumer protection by a financial
                             supervisory agency.
                             Banks and building societies are licensed by the Minister of Finance & Planning
                             and supervised by the Bank of Jamaica. Credit Unions are registered with the
                             Ministry of Industry, Investment & Commerce and will be supervised by the
                             Bank of Jamaica. However, the Bank of Jamaica’s consumer protection
                             supervision will be limited to inspection of compliance with a mandatory
                             conduct code.
                             Securities, insurance and private pensions funds are licensed and supervised
                             for consumer protection by the Financial Services Commission. In addition,
                             under Section 17C of the 2013 Amendments to the Securities Act, any
                             investment scheme (or investment club) with more than 20 participants must
                             be registered with the Financial Services Commission. This is very helpful. In
                             all economies, unregistered investment vehicles that solicit funds from the
                             public are a common form of pyramid schemes and other financial frauds.
                             However numerous forms of financial service institutions have no consumer
                             protection supervision from a financial supervisory agency. These include

24
     See also World Bank Global Survey on Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy (2014) referenced above.

                                                         21
                   friendly societies, payday and microfinance lenders and state lenders. For
                   these institutions, the only consumer protection supervision is from the Fair
                   Trading Commission and the Consumer Affairs Commission, neither of which is
                   a financial supervisory agency.
                   Friendly societies (which are a form of mutual benefit organization) are
                   registered with the Ministry of Industry, Investment & Commerce but come
                   under no financial consumer protection supervision.
                   Payday and microfinance lenders are registered with the Ministry of Finance &
                   Planning and also have no consumer protection supervision. In the past, even
                   the registration requirement has been easy to avoid since lenders can request
                   an annual exemption, which has generally been granted if their activity was
                   considered to be “in the public interest”, which was interpreted by the
                   Ministry as any activity that “facilitated economic growth”. The Micro Credit
                   Bill, which is being drafted, would eliminate the exemption from registration
                   but would still not apply any consumer protection supervision to payday and
                   microfinance lenders.
                   State lenders, such as the National Housing Trust, are registered with the
                   Office of the Prime Minister but also come under no consumer protection
                   supervision from a financial supervisory agency.
                   Separate from the formal banking system are informal savings schemes that
                   do not involve any legal entities. “Partner” (or “pardner”) schemes are
                   widespread in Jamaica and are generally created by groups of common
                   interest or work affiliations, such as taxi drivers and hair stylists. In such
                   arrangements, a respected member of the group (the “banker”) holds savings
                   on behalf of other group members and disburses the funds in accordance with
                   an agreed distribution schedule. The partner schemes are generally limited to
                   fewer than 50 participants and distributions are made over one to 24 months.
                   The partner schemes may or may not be documented by legal contracts.
                   However no interest (and no investment income) is paid. While there are cases
                   of partners that fail to disburse on time (or at all), abuses appear not to be
                   widespread. For many consumers, the schemes provide a low cost mechanism
                   for short-term savings and payouts.

Rating             Partially applied

Recommendation     Require that all legal entities that provide consumer financial services be
                   registered with one of the financial supervisory agencies.

Good Practice #5   The judicial system ensures that the ultimate resolution of any consumer
                   protection dispute regarding a financial product or service is affordable, timely
                   and delivered in a professional manner.

Description        The Jamaican court system is considered to be slow and cumbersome with
                   commercial cases typically taking six to 12 months to be resolved. According to
                   the World Bank’s Doing Business Indicators, commercial cases in Jamaica take


                                              22
                           an average of 540 calendar days to complete – from the moment the plaintiff
                           decides to file the lawsuit in court until payment 25
                           For consumers, one alternative to the court system lies with tribunals. Under
                           the 2010 revisions to the Consumer Protection Act, consumer protection
                           tribunals were extended to cover services, including financial services. The
                           body has the powers of a tribunal “of the first instance”. It is a quasi-legal body
                           which operates as a small-claims court to levy and collect fines. Consumer
                           protection tribunals have authority to issue orders and make decisions binding
                           on financial institutions and they may provide a useful form of recourse for
                           consumers. However as of May 2014, the Consumer Protection tribunals had
                           not yet started to cover disputes related to services. Furthermore tribunals are
                           rarely effective in resolving consumer disputes over financial services -- they
                           are generally seen by consumers as being biased in favor of the industry.

 Rating                    Not applied

 Recommendation            Another alternative would be to create an independent financial ombudsman.
                           Such a service would have the authority to make decision on small amounts,
                           such as up to Jamaican dollar equivalent of US$ 500. Such institutions would
                           be binding in the financial institution but allow the consumer to appeal to
                           court, if necessary.

 Good Practice #6          The media and consumer associations actively promote financial consumer
                           protection.

 Description               Several media outlets and the National Consumers League make substantial
                           efforts to highlight issues related to financial consumer protection. For
                           example, the Financial Services Commission provides a regular “FSC minute”
                           distributed via radio by the Jamaica Information Service. The FSC also hosts
                           seminars, workshops and outside broadcasts which are open to the public free
                           of charge and have been aired on the radio, and electronic media. In addition,
                           the daily Kingston newspaper, The Gleaner, covers financial news among other
                           topics of interest. In addition, the National Consumers League is active in
                           promoting consumer awareness of issues related to financial consumer
                           protection. However the program is fragmented and fails to provide a
                           measurable impact.

 Rating                    Partially applied

 Recommendation            It would be best if both consumer associations and the media were actively
                           engaged in promoting improved financial consumer protection. Programs
                           might include mystery shopping or a newspaper column on how to resolve
                           individual consumer complaints, as seen in numerous daily U.S. newspapers. A


25
  This includes both the days when actions take place and the waiting periods between actions. Three stages are
recorded: (1) completion of service of process (time to file and serve the case), (2) issuance of judgment (time for
the trial and obtaining the judgment) and (3) moment of payment (time for enforcement of the judgment). See
http://www.doingbusiness.org/methodology/enforcing-contracts

                                                         23
                      public relations strategy might include issuing press releases for studies on
                      price comparisons and including internet links to each study. Use of social
                      media, such as Facebook pages and Twitter accounts, may provide a useful
                      method of reaching young consumers. If a national program on financial
                      consumer protection and financial literacy were established, funds could be
                      set aside for programs for both consumer associations and media activities.

Disclosure and Sales Practices

Good Practice #7      Before a financial institution makes a recommendation to a consumer
                      regarding a specific financial product or service, it gathers sufficient
                      information from the customer to ensure that the product or service is likely to
                      meet the needs and capacity of that consumer.

Description           The Bank of Jamaica Standards of Sound Business Practices on Credit Risk
                      Management (2005) require that banks collect sufficient information to ensure
                      that they have determined the borrower’s capacity to repay, based on
                      historical financial trends and cash flow projections. In addition, regulations
                      under the Securities Act require that institutions licensed by the Financial
                      Services Commission establish suitability and fair dealing standards in
                      treatment of their customers.
                      However in practice, the information collected by a financial institution may
                      be focused more on ensuring that the customer is suitable for the institution
                      than ensuring that the service meets the needs of the customer. In the
                      mystery shopping exercise, the shoppers found that before opening an
                      account, the bank required references from two acceptable sources. When
                      pressed for the reasons for the references, the loan officer explained that the
                      bank wanted to ascertain that new customers would not be “lotto scammers.”
                      The loan officer asked no questions to determine if the type of mortgage being
                      offered would best meet the customer’s projected cash flows.
                      Indeed in a residential mortgage market characterized by low competition and
                      dominated by a state lender with subsidized lending rates, financial
                      institutions may have only a few types of services from which consumers may
                      choose. In such cases, checking for suitability may be just a matter of verifying
                      that the debt service payments are affordable for the customer, as is currently
                      done. In such cases, the key issue is then ensuring that the financial institution
                      complies with the “know your customer” rules.

Rating                Partially applied

Recommendation        As the financial markets in Jamaica become increasingly competitive, it would
                      be helpful if financial institutions were required to verify that the services
                      meet the customer’s needs.

Good Practice #8      For all financial products or services, consumers receive a short one or two
                      page summary statement (or electronic equivalent), presented in a legible font
                      and written in plain language, describing the key terms and conditions,


                                                 24
                 including recourse mechanisms, applicable to the financial product or service.
                 Summaries are based on industry-agreed standards for the minimum types of
                 information to be published for each type of financial product or service—and
                 allow easy comparison among financial service providers. Summaries are
                 distributed by financial institutions.

Description      The issue of clarity of contract appears to be important in Jamaica. Article 44
                 of the Consumer Protection Act requires that all contracts (and
                 advertisements) be: (1) conspicuous, (2) legible, (3) simple and (4) easy to
                 understand. In addition, Article 131 of the Banking Services Act authorizes the
                 Supervisor (i.e. the Bank of Jamaica) to issue codes of conduct requiring that
                 deposit taking institutions keep contract language simple and clear, and
                 ensure that key terms, such as rates, terms, fees and payment dates, are
                 clearly identified for the customer’s attention. Yet this may not be sufficient.
                 The draft conduct code of the Consumer Affairs Commission and National
                 League of Consumers proposed that loan contracts would unenforceable if the
                 language were unclear. However, the Banking Services Act clarifies that even if
                 the contract language is not sufficiently simple and clear, the contract is still
                 legally enforceable.
                 Financial contracts in all jurisdictions are typically complex and difficult to read
                 and special measures are needed to help consumers understand how best to
                 use financial services.
                 Preparation of Key Facts Statements would also facilitate the ability of
                 consumers to comparison shop. The reports currently prepared for
                 Parliamentary review are helpful but they do not provide timely information
                 that consumers can use in negotiating their personal financial services.

Rating           Partially applied

Recommendation   To implement the provisions of the Banking Services legislation, it would be
                 helpful if the Bank of Jamaica or the Bankers Association could develop a
                 standard format for a Key Facts Statement (similar to that used in the U.K.) for
                 residential mortgages, credit card loans, current accounts and other types of
                 commonly used consumer financial services. The Bank of Jamaica and
                 Financial Services Commission might work with the relevant industry
                 associations to prepare similar Key Facts Statements for other consumer
                 financial services. In addition the supervisors and industry associations might
                 work together to develop standard contracts (or at least standard clauses) for
                 commonly used financial services. Reader-friendly fact-sheets and plain
                 English descriptions of consumer financial services would also be helpful.
                 It would also be helpful if an interactive price comparison website could be
                 developed for commonly used financial services, such as credit cards or
                 unsecured personal loans.
                 Similar provisions should also be provided for other consumer financial
                 services, including insurance, securities and private pensions.

                                             25
 Good Practice #9         Before a consumer purchases a financial product or service, the financial
                          institution provides a written copy of the institution’s general terms and
                          conditions, as well as the specific terms and conditions that apply to the
                          product or service.

 Description              Article 8 of the Money Lending Act requires that all the contract terms be
                          provided to the borrower, including date of the loan, principal amount,
                          interest per annum.26 However the general terms and conditions for
                          borrowings may be difficult to obtain since in practice, it is difficult for
                          consumers to obtain copies of draft loan contracts prior to the signing date.
                          For securities, investor disclosure of terms and conditions is regulated under
                          Sections 26 and 38 of the Securities Act as well as Securities Regulations on
                          Conduct of Business, Takeover and Mergers and Repurchases. In addition,
                          Securities Regulations related to prudential norms and retail repurchases
                          regulate the market conduct of securities dealers, including issues related to
                          securities contracts.

 Rating                   Largely applied

 Recommendation           Financial institutions should be encouraged to place their standard contract
                          language on their websites and provide printouts for those consumers who
                          request copies of the standard contract. The financial supervisors could issue
                          best practice guidelines on this provision. Alternatively the consumer
                          organizations might conduct studies of the extent to which financial entities
                          provide such contract information to consumers.

 Good Practice #10        The law specifically prohibits the use of fraudulent sales practices, such as
                          misleading advertising, in the marketing of financial products and services.

 Description              Misleading advertising is specifically prohibited in the legislation of most of the
                          financial services sector. Article 41 of the Banking Act and Article 6 of the
                          Moneylending Act prohibit statements that are misleading, false or deceptive
                          as well as the dishonest concealment of material facts in the sale of financial
                          services. Article 146 of the Insurance Act specifically prohibits misleading
                          advertising as does Article 46 of the Securities Act. Also Governance
                          Regulation 27 for Pensions (Superannuation Funds and Retirement Schemes)
                          prohibits misleading advertising by sponsors of retirement schemes.
                          Additional minimum disclosure requirements are established under
                          regulations for pensions and securities. The Companies Act sets disclosure
                          requirements on prospectuses for stocks and securities of registered
                          companies.
                          In addition, some financial institutions include the requirement for truthful
                          advertising in their internal policy guidelines. One example is the money-
                          lender Grace Kennedy whose published Code of Ethics and Guidelines for

26
  In addition, the Bank of Jamaica’s Code of Conduct adopted by commercial banks in January 2015 includes
provisions on disclosure of terms and conditions of bank products and services.

                                                      26
                    Business Conduct requires that advertising be truthful and not misleading or
                    deceptive.
                    There are also general provisions prohibiting misleading advertising. Article 27
                    of the Fair Competition Act prohibits any public representation that is false or
                    misleading in a material respect.

Rating              Largely applied

Recommendation      None submitted.

Good Practice #11   Financial products or services with a long-term savings component—or those
                    subject to high-pressure sales practices—have a “cooling-off” period, during
                    which the consumer may cancel the contract without penalty. Nothing
                    prevents a financial institution from recovering any processing fees incurred.
                    However the cooling-off provisions should not apply to securities and
                    derivatives, where pricing on financial markets moves quickly.

Description         Consumer insurance contracts in Jamaica (and often elsewhere) include a
                    “free look” period of 14 days when a new insurance policy owner is able to
                    terminate the contract without penalties such as surrender charges. However
                    there are no cooling off periods for other financial services.
                    The Consumer Affairs Commission proposed a 72-hour cooling-off period for
                    all consumer banking contracts whereby the consumer could cancel a contract
                    without penalty, charge or interest being applied to the account. However the
                    cooling-off provision has been strongly opposed by the Bankers Association.
                    Cooling-off periods are particularly helpful for consumer financial products
                    and services that are subject to door-to-door sales, internet distribution and
                    other high pressure selling tactics. However tied selling practices are typically
                    found in markets with high levels of competition and numerous new entrants.

Rating              Materially non-applied

Recommendation      As the Jamaican financial market expands and new financial entities enter the
                    industry, consideration should be given to mandated cooling-off periods not
                    only for insurance but also for pensions (and other long-term savings schemes)
                    as well for any financial services sold through high-pressure tactics. It may also
                    be helpful to establish a specific cool-offing period applicable when
                    administrators/investment managers increase their fees or propose
                    amendments to the contract documents.

Good Practice #12   Whenever an individual borrower is obliged by a financial institution to
                    purchase a product or service as a pre-condition for receiving another product
                    or service, the borrower is free to choose the provider for the product or
                    service.

Description         Article 33 of Fair Competition Act prohibits tied selling of products. In addition,
                    the Bank of Jamaica promotes and facilitates comparison shopping through

                                                27
                         the publication on its website of comparative fees and charges for deposit-
                         taking institutions.
                         However financial services providers, that are part of financial conglomerates,
                         generally cross-sell related products and services from within the same
                         financial conglomerate. Indeed in middle-income countries, it is common
                         practice for financial conglomerates to price certain financial products and
                         services on a loss-leader basis in order to encourage customers to purchase
                         related high margin services from the conglomerate.

 Rating                  Largely applied

 Recommendation          The marketing practices of financial conglomerates should be monitored to
                         ensure that such practices are not being employed.

 Good Practice #13       In their advertising, financial institutions disclose that they are regulated and
                         the advertising materials identify the relevant regulatory or supervisory
                         agency.

 Description             Entities regulated by the Financial Services Commission are required to
                         prominently display their certificate of registration or their license. However
                         neither by common practice nor under the law do the other supervised
                         financial institutions clearly identify their supervisory agency. It may therefore
                         be difficult for individual consumers to know which financial supervisory
                         agency is responsible for their service providers. Indeed in the case of the Cash
                         Plus pyramid scheme from the early 2000s, the company argued in court that
                         it was subject to the supervision of neither the Bank of Jamaica nor the
                         Financial Services Commission.27

 Rating                  Materially not applied

 Recommendation          To assist consumers in navigating the financial supervisory structure, it may be
                         helpful to require that, in their advertising, financial institutions identify their
                         primary supervisory agency. Deposit-taking institutions that offer deposits
                         insured by the JDIC should be required to include the name of the Fund in
                         their advertising concerning deposits.

 Good Practice #14       Staff of financial institutions who deal directly with consumers receive
                         adequate training, suitable for the complexity of the products or services they
                         sell. In particular, financial intermediaries are qualified as appropriate for the
                         complexity of the financial product or service they sell.

 Description             Initially established in 1977 by the Bank of Jamaica and banking industry, the
                         Jamaica Institute of Financial Services provides training for staff of financial
                         institutions. The Institute is allied with the Manchester Business School in
                         providing masters level programs in business administration. In addition,

27
  Carvajal, Ana et al, Ponzi Schemes in the Caribbean, International Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/09/95,
April 2009


                                                      28
                    under the Bank of Jamaica’s Anti-Money Laundering/Counter-Terrorism Policy,
                    front-line staff of banks and building societies receive training on identifying
                    suspicious behavior. Individual banks also have their own training and
                    certification requirements. The licensing requirements for sales
                    representatives and other intermediaries for insurance, securities and
                    pensions require minimum levels of training and experience. See Section 70 of
                    the Insurance Act, Section 10 of the Securities Act, Insurance Regulations 111
                    – 121, Sections 7 – 9 of the Pensions (Superannuation Funds and Retirement
                    Schemes) Act, and Regulation 5 (2) of the Pensions (Superannuation Funds and
                    Retirement schemes) Regulations. However there are no specific requirements
                    from the Bank of Jamaica to ensure that retail staff of lending institutions are
                    appropriately qualified for the complexity of financial services that they sell.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      As the complexity of financial services in Jamaica expands, the Bank of Jamaica
                    may wish to consider what qualifications would be appropriate for staff of
                    financial institutions selling complex financial services. In cases where
                    intermediaries are individuals, particular attention should be placed on the
                    training and qualifications of the sales staff.

Customer Account Handling and Maintenance

Good Practice #15   Financial institutions prepare regular statements for each customer account
                    regarding key details of customer financial transactions as well as written (or
                    electronic) confirmations of the terms of each transaction. For investment
                    products, customers receive periodic statements of the value of the assets in
                    their account.

Description         For investment securities, monthly statements are required at the end of each
                    month in which some activity occurs and at the end of each quarter, where
                    there are no purchases or sales.
                    However in banking, it is not always easy to obtain account statements. Under
                    the voluntary conduct code of the Bankers Association, banks are to provide
                    customers with either regular account statements (monthly or quarterly) or a
                    means of accessing their account information in printed or electronic format.
                    Where statements are not provided, customers are given full access to
                    account histories up the legal retention requirement (currently seven years),
                    subject to any applicable charge. Also under the voluntary code, credit card
                    account statements should include: (1) the current interest rate; (2) rates
                    charged on outstanding balances, new borrowings and cash advances; (3)
                    minimum monthly payment and payment due date; and (4) details on
                    transactions occurring during the statement period.
                    However many of the commercial banks charge customers a fee for going in
                    person to the branch and checking the account balance. Some banks, such as
                    National Commercial Bank, allow electronic access to bank statements and
                    transaction confirmations at no charge to customers. However one difficulty is


                                               29
                    that the legislation does not protect the customer in the case of fraud in the
                    case of use of electronic access to accounts. The problems are self-evident.
                    One of the major complaints to the Consumer Affairs Commission relates to
                    stolen debit and credit cards and unauthorized deductions from bank accounts

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      All financial institutions should be required to provide a written monthly
                    statement of accounts free of charge to consumers.
                    When using electronic access, the law should require that financial institutions
                    absolve consumers of responsibility for losses (over a minimum amount such
                    as US$ 500 equivalent) in case of fraud.

Good Practice #16   As early as possible, customers are individually notified in writing (or by
                    electronic means) of changes in interest rates, fees, and charges or other key
                    terms and conditions of their financial products or services.

Description         Section 131 of the Banking Services Act authorizes the Supervisor to issue
                    codes of conduct requiring that deposit-taking institutions provide customers
                    with reasonable notice of fees and charges and terms and conditions. Similar
                    provisions apply to the securities, investment and private pensions sector but
                    no specific provisions apply to other financial services.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      All types of financial institutions should be obliged to notify customers, as
                    early as possible, of changes in terms and conditions of the financial services.

Good Practice #17   Financial institutions maintain up-to-date customer records and provide
                    customers with ready access to their records, either without charge or for a
                    reasonable fee.

Description         Financial institutions maintain up-to-date customer records but, as noted
                    above, often charge high fees for customers to obtain a copy or even just
                    check their balance. Section 131 of the Act authorizes the Supervisor to issue
                    codes of conduct requiring that banks and building societies allow customers’
                    access to their information at a reasonable cost. However no similar provisions
                    apply to other financial services.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      All financial service providers should be required to provide customers with a
                    printed statement of account balances free of charge.

Good Practice #18   Clearing and settlement of retail payments is based on clear statutory and
                    regulatory rules—or is subject to effective self-regulatory arrangements.

Description         Jamaica has a well-developed payment and settlement infrastructure on retail
                    payments, supervised by the Bank of Jamaica. The main components of the

                                               30
                         infrastructure are: (1) the Automated Clearing House (ACH) for retail payments
                         (owned and operated by a consortium of seven commercial banks) which clear
                         and settle J$ denominated checks as well as credit and debit transfers and (2)
                         the payment card switches, MultiLink (owned by four commercial banks and
                         two building societies) and QNet (owned by the Credit Union League).
                         However penetration of distribution channels for retail payments is limited.
                         The Banking Services Act creates banking agents to handle payment services.
                         In addition, the Bank of Jamaica is reviewing applications from 13 firms to
                         operate electronic retail payment services. Approval has been given for two
                         pilot projects of non-bank payment service providers using mobile technology.

 Rating                  Applied

 Recommendation          The Bank of Jamaica should consider measures to expand consumer choices
                         and increase competition in retail payments systems. As part of its oversight
                         function, the Bank could compile the fees and charges levied by banks and
                         other authorized entities for various payment services and products and
                         publish the fees and charges on the Bank of Jamaica’s website. This would
                         serve the aim of fostering transparency and would enable the consumers to
                         make educated choices and foster competition. As a first step, the charges
                         levied by banks for using automated teller machines could be prominently
                         displayed at the machines.
                         Consumer protection issues will also likely arise with the widespread
                         introduction of banking agents. In providing its final approval to the two
                         mobile wallet pilots, the Bank of Jamaica should ensure that authorized
                         entities adhere to interoperability, with prohibitions on exclusivity
                         arrangements for agents. Other suggestions on policy recommendations are
                         provided in Protecting Branchless Banking Consumers: Policy Objectives and
                         Regulatory Options (CGAP, 2010).28

 Good Practice #19       Financial institutions are prohibited from employing abusive collection or debt
                         recovery practices against their customers.

 Description             There is no law on debt collection practices, although banks that use debt
                         collection companies generally limit their activities to firms that are owned by
                         the bank – and obliged to follow the bank’s own policies and procedures on
                         customer relations. Few problems have been reported about debt collection
                         by agents of banks. However the microfinance sector has been criticized for its
                         highly aggressive debt collection practices.

 Rating                  Not applied

 Recommendation          It would be helpful to have a specific law on debt collection in order to
                         explicitly prohibit abusive collection practices.


28
 http://www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/CGAP-Focus-Note-Protecting-Branchless-Banking-Consumers-Policy-
Objectives-and-Regulatory-Options-Sep-2010.pdf

                                                    31
Privacy and Data Protection

Good Practice #20     For credit registries, the law specifies the extent and timeliness of the updating
                      of customer information, gives customers ready and free access to their credit
                      reports from credit registers (at least once a year), and provides procedures for
                      correcting mistakes in credit reports.

Description           Article 12 of the Credit Reporting Act specifies that adverse customer
                      information should be kept for no more than seven years. Article 15 gives
                      customers the right to have an annual free copy of their credit bureau data.
                      Article 16 sets out procedures for customers to correct their data with the
                      credit bureaus – and to complain first to the Bank of Jamaica, and then to the
                      Appeals Tribunal, whose Chairman is appointed by the Minister of Finance &
                      Planning. However the system of credit registries is very new to Jamaica and
                      the system for accessing the reports and correcting errors has not yet been
                      fully tested.

Rating                Largely applied

Recommendation        No recommendation

Good Practice #21     Financial institutions are required to protect the confidentiality and technical
                      security of customer data. The law states specific rules and procedures
                      concerning the release of customer records to any government authority.

Description           Section 133 of the Banking Services Act prohibits officers of banks and building
                      societies from giving, divulging or revealing any information regarding the
                      money or other relevant particulars of the institution’s customers.
                      The voluntary code of the Bankers Association goes further. It states that in
                      accordance with applicable law, each bank will treat customer information as
                      private and confidential (even if the customer is no longer a customer of such
                      bank). Each bank should also take all commercially reasonable steps to
                      safeguard against the disclosure to third parties of personal details of
                      customers (including names, addresses or other details about customer
                      accounts), except as required or permitted by law or the customers’ written
                      authorizations.
                      However one difficulty is that Jamaica currently has no law on protection of
                      personal data that would limit the sharing of personal data by financial
                      institutions, although work has started. The planned Data Protection Bill is
                      expected to safeguard the privacy of individuals in relation to personal data as
                      well as regulate the collection, regulation, processing, keeping, use and
                      disclosure of certain information in physical or electronic form. Under
                      preparation by the Ministry of Ministry of Science, Technology, Energy &
                      Mining, the legislation will set out the rights of the individual, with respect to
                      their personal data, including the right to confirm whether or not personal
                      information or data is being processed by an organization. It will also allow



                                                 32
                    consumers to take action to rectify incomplete, inaccurate or misleading
                    information and block, erase, or destroy unlawful or unnecessary information.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      It would be helpful if a Data Protection Bill were enacted. The Bill should
                    include specific rules and procedures concerning the release of customer
                    records to government authorities.

Good Practice #22   The law provides consumer rights regarding information sharing, including
                    access, rectification, blocking and erasing of errors, and outdated personal
                    information. The law also sets out basic rules of information sharing among
                    participants of the credit reporting system, including credit registers, reporting
                    institutions, and users of credit reports.

Description         Article 11 of the Credit Reporting Act restricts the sharing of customer data
                    and Article 13 requires that credit bureaus notify customers in the event of
                    unauthorized access, use, or disclosure of their data. Article 16 clarifies the
                    procedures for consumers to correct information in the credit bureau.
                    In addition, Article 133 of the Banking Services Act provides additional
                    instructions that no officer of any licensee, agent or any other person having
                    access to information on customers give, divulge or reveal any information
                    regarding the money or other relevant particulars of the account of that
                    customer.
                    Section 8(6) of the Credit Reporting Act requires the consumer’s permission
                    for inclusion of personal information and Section 2 indicates what is not
                    considered personal information. In addition, Section 11(3) requires the
                    consumer’s consent to access the consumer’s information from a credit
                    bureau.

Rating              Largely applied

Recommendation      Several measures could further strengthen consumer protection regarding the
                    operation of credit bureaus.
                        1) Develop a standard consumer consent clause for credit applications
                           from credit information providers;
                        2) Instruct credit bureaus to publish on their websites a summary of
                           consumers’ rights, including the dispute resolution mechanism;
                        3) Create a section on the Bank of Jamaica website with links to the
                           consumer complaint sections of the credit bureaus;
                        4) Allow consumers to access online their own reports (but ensure that
                           adequate authentication mechanisms are in place);
                        5) Keep records of consumers’ inquiries regarding their own data and
                           publish aggregate data regarding the numbers of inquiries; and




                                                33
                               6) Consider an awareness campaign to help consumers understand the
                                  benefits of building a good credit history and the implications of
                                  requesting several credit reports.

 Good Practice #23         Every financial institution informs each of its customers of its policies for the
                           use and sharing of the customer’s personal information.

 Description               Since the credit reporting system in Jamaica is still in early stages of
                           development, no formal rules have yet been established requiring that
                           financial institutions inform their customers about the use and sharing of
                           customer personal information.

 Rating                    Not applied

 Recommendation            Under the draft legislation on protection of private data being prepared, it
                           would be helpful if the law included provisions requiring that financial
                           institutions advise customers of their policies on use and sharing of customer
                           information, even within the same financial group.

 Good Practice #24         Credit bureaus are subject to oversight by the appropriate government (or non-
                           government) authority.

 Description               Under Article 4 of the 2010 Credit Reporting Act, credit bureaus are licensed
                           by the Minister of Finance & Planning and supervised by the Bank of Jamaica.
                           The two credit bureaus, CreditInfo Jamaica and CRIF, were licensed in 2012.29
                           There is no central credit registry.

 Rating                    Applied

 Recommendation            No recommendation

 Dispute Resolution Mechanisms

 Good Practice #25          Every financial institution has a designated contact point with clear
                            procedures for handling customer complaints, including complaints submitted
                            verbally. Financial institutions also maintain up-to-date records of all
                            complaints they receive and develop internal dispute resolution policies and
                            practices, including processing time deadlines, complaint response, and
                            customer access.

 Description                The voluntary conduct code of the Bankers Association requires timely
                            responses to customer complaints but does not require that contact points
                            be designated or that responses to complaints be provided within a specified
                            period.
                            Section 131 of the Banking Services Act authorizes the Bank of Jamaica to
                            issue codes of conduct requiring that banks and building societies establish

29
  A third entity “Credit information Systems” was licensed during 2014 and , during 2015, is expected to
commence credit reporting under the Credit Reporting Act.

                                                        34
                    effective mechanisms to address customer complaints, maintain records, and
                    provide reports on customer complaints and resolutions.
                    Major banks maintain customer service departments that receive complaints
                    and inquiries from consumers. National Commercial Bank, for example, has
                    150 staff who receive calls and written inquiries as part of the customer care
                    department. They also maintain records on the resolution of the submitted
                    complaints.
                    For pension products, Pensions (Superannuation Funds and Retirement
                    Schemes) Regulations 15 – 17 establish guidelines on consumer complaints.
                    Market conduct guidelines on handling customer complaints are also in place
                    for motor vehicle insurance claims and activities insurance companies and
                    insurance intermediaries. Securities (Conduct of Business) Regulations 12 –
                    13 require the preparation of transactional records and a Management
                    Discussion and Analysis Report that focuses on business operations, including
                    dispute resolution.
                    The complaint registers are also reviewed as part of the onsite examinations
                    of regulated entities.

Rating              Largely applied

Recommendation      It would be helpful if the financial supervisors could prepare regulations or
                    best practice guidelines so that all financial service providers provide a
                    designated contact point and comply with an established time-limit for
                    responses to consumer complaints.

Good Practice #26   Consumers have access to an affordable, efficient, respected, professionally
                    qualified and adequately resourced mechanism for dispute resolution, such as
                    an independent financial ombudsman or equivalent institution with effective
                    enforcement capacity. The institution acts impartially and independently from
                    the appointing authority, the industry, the institution with which the
                    complaint has been lodged, the consumer, and the consumer association.
                    Decisions by the financial ombudsman or equivalent institution are binding on
                    the financial institution.

Description         For the securities, insurance and pension sectors, the Financial Services
                    Commission is authorized to resolve consumer complaints through its powers
                    of investigation and enforcement. Under the Financial Services Commission
                    Act (section 8 and Third and Fourth schedules), the Commission has the
                    authority to institute civil proceedings to protect securities investors,
                    insurance policy-holders and pension beneficiaries. The respective legislation
                    also provides consumers the right to recourse through the Commission. See
                    for example, Pensions (Superannuation Funds and Retirement Schemes) Act
                    section 13 (2) (s) and Securities Act section 68 (1B) (c). These give the
                    Financial Services Commission the authority to institute civil proceedings to
                    protect consumers in the securities, insurance and pensions sectors. However
                    outside the securities, insurance and pensions sectors, no other government


                                              35
                           agency has the same level of authority to resolve consumer disputes. Note
                           that none of the consumer tribunals has taken on any financial services cases
                           to date.
                           Thus one of the weaknesses of the financial consumer protection framework
                           in Jamaica is the absence of an effective dispute resolution mechanism that is
                           independent of the regulatory agencies and the industry –and covers all the
                           different types of consumer financial services.

 Rating                    Not applied

 Recommendation            An independent financial ombudsman, established by statute, would
                           represent a major step forward for financial consumers in Jamaica. It would
                           be best if the decisions of the financial ombudsman were binding on the
                           financial institution although the consumer could still take the case to court,
                           if so desired. Worldwide the overwhelming number of customer disputes
                           with financial institutions are over relatively small amounts, under US$
                           equivalent of $500. It may make sense therefore to set the limit for the
                           binding authority of the ombudsman (or ombuds service) at an amount of
                           about J$50,000. Additional suggestions on preparation for an independent
                           financial ombudsman are provided in Annex 4.30

 Good Practice #27         Statistics of customer complaints, including those related to breaches of codes
                           of conduct, are periodically compiled and published by the ombudsman or
                           financial supervisory authority. The complaints are compiled by product type
                           to facilitate identification of patterns and opportunities for improvements of
                           service.

 Description               Article 22 of the Credit Reporting Act requires that Bank of Jamaica annually
                           compile statistics on complaints submit with regard to the credit bureaus.
                           However there are no other requirements for the financial supervisors to
                           publish complaint statistics. Article 131 of the Banking Services Act would
                           require the Bank of Jamaica to compile and publish statistics on customer
                           complaints for banks and building societies. However no similar provisions
                           are applicable for other types of financial institutions. Nevertheless the
                           Financial Services Commission publishes complaints statistics in its annual
                           report.

 Rating                    Materially not applied

 Recommendation            If a financial ombudsman were created, its terms of reference and scope of
                           work should include compilation and publication of complaints and inquiries



30
  See also recommendations on financial ombudsmen in David Thomas and Francis Frizon, Resolving disputes
between consumers and financial businesses: Fundamentals for a financial ombudsman : A practical guide based on
experience in western Europe, World Bank, 2012 available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/Resources/Financial_Ombudsmen_Vol1_Fundamentals
.pdf

                                                      36
                    across the financial services sector. This should include breakdown of
                    complaints by product type as well as recommendations for improvement.

Good Practice #28   Regulatory agencies are legally obliged to publish aggregate statistics and
                    analyses related to their activities regarding consumer protection—and
                    propose regulatory changes or financial education measures to avoid the
                    sources of systemic consumer complaints. Industry associations also play a
                    role in analyzing the complaint statistics and proposing measures to avoid
                    recurrence of systemic consumer complaints.

Description         Article 131 of the Banking Services Act requires that the Bank of Jamaica
                    publish complaint statistics for banks and building societies and the Financial
                    Services Commission and other agencies already compile and publish
                    aggregate complaint data (see Table 1). However there is no requirement for
                    publication of complaint statistics for other types of financial services – or for
                    the agencies to propose changes that would address recurring issues. The
                    industry associations do follow complaints but they also have no formal
                    process to propose measures to avoid recurring issues.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      It would be helpful if all financial supervisory agencies (plus the consumer and
                    competition agencies) were required to publish aggregate statistics on
                    financial consumer complaints. The industry associations should also
                    regularly review the published statistics and offer recommendations on
                    measures to avoid recurrence of repeated issues.

Guarantee and Compensation Schemes

Good Practice #29   The law provides that the regulator can take appropriate measures to protect
                    consumers in the event of financial distress of a financial institution.

Description         The JDIC was established in 1998 following the failure of a number of financial
                    institutions in 1994-95. Under Article 5 of the Deposit Insurance Act, the JDIC
                    may take a number of measures, including: (1) acting as a receiver, liquidator,
                    or judicial manager or appointing a person to act in this capacity; (2)
                    arranging for the restructuring by merger with or acquisition by another
                    financial institution; (3) making loans or advances with security; (4) borrowing
                    or raising funds; and (5) guaranteeing, indemnifying or becoming liable for
                    the payment of monies. The JDIC does not carry out its own inspections but
                    relies on those of the Bank of Jamaica.
                    Since the time of the financial restructuring of the late 1990s and the
                    Financial Sector Adjustment Company (FINSAC) program, 16 financial
                    institutions have merged or had their licenses withdrawn in response to
                    regulatory actions. However no bank or building society has become
                    insolvent. Thus the system has not yet been fully tested.

Rating              Largely applied


                                               37
Recommendation      No recommendation

Good Practice #30   Any law on financial insurance or a guarantee fund is clear on the insurer, the
                    classes of depositors who are insured, the extent of insurance coverage, the
                    contributor(s) to the fund, each event that will trigger a payout, and the
                    mechanisms to ensure timely payout to all insured persons.

Description         The law is clear on the structure and mechanisms for the payouts to
                    depositors in banks and building societies. Article 18 of the Deposit Insurance
                    Act authorizes the Fund to pay up to J$600,000 (or about US$5,400) for each
                    depositor In the case of insolvency of the bank or building society or if the
                    license has not been renewed by the Minister of Finance & Planning. Also
                    under Article 18, payment must be made to the depositor within three
                    months of the financial institution’s insolvency or withdrawal of license.
                    A December 2006 study of deposit profiles of insured institutions estimated
                    that J$600,000 would cover over 97.8% of the number of accounts and about
                    35.7% of value of funds in customer accounts.
                    With regard to credit unions, the Co-operative Credit Union League Limited
                    maintains a stabilization fund (although the details are not easily accessible to
                    the public). The League also has a role in the voluntary regulation of member
                    credit unions. In addition, it is the policy of the Co-operative Credit Union
                    League to provide technical assistance and other support to credit unions in
                    order to ensure that no credit union in Jamaica becomes insolvent. Once
                    credit unions come under the prudential supervision of the Bank of Jamaica,
                    the JDIC will also cover consumer deposits in credit unions.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      It would be helpful if the details of the stabilization fund of the Co-operative
                    Credit Union League could be made available online.

Good Practice #31   Depositors, life insurance policyholders, securities and derivatives account
                    holders, and pension fund members enjoy higher priority than other
                    unsecured creditors in the liquidation process of a relevant financial
                    institution.

Description         Under Article 31 of the Pensions (Superannuation Funds and Retirement
                    Schemes) Act, pension fund members have higher priority than unsecured
                    creditors in the event of liquidation of the pension fund or retirement
                    scheme. Similarly Articles 55 and 59 of the Insurance Act establishes priority
                    for insurance policy-holders (including life insurance). Articles 201-2 of the
                    Securities Act also provide some protection for investors in retail repos and
                    secured securities. However according to the 2008 Survey prepared by the
                    International Association of Deposit Insurers, at the time of liquidation of a
                    bank, depositors in Jamaican banks do not rank in priority above other
                    unsecured creditors. The December 2014 Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act
                    substantially strengthened the insolvency regime in Jamaica (particularly with

                                              38
                     regard to “retail repos”) but the regime would be improved by a special
                     mechanism for the winding-up of financial institutions.

Rating               Materially non-applied

Recommendation       The authorities may wish to consider conducting a review of international
                     experience in insolvency regimes related to resolution of different types of
                     financial institutions.

Financial Literacy & Consumer Empowerment

Good Practice #32    A broad-based program of financial education and information is developed
                     to increase the financial literacy of the population.

Description          Several authorities, notably the Financial Services Commission and the JDIC,
                     conduct financial education programs with a combined annual budget of over
                     J$40 million. In addition, the Ministry of Education has also announced its
                     intention to provide financial education in the high school curriculum. (For
                     more information, see commentary in the Technical Note.) However no
                     broad-based national financial literacy program is in place.

Rating               Partially applied

Recommendation       It would be helpful if the authorities launched a broad-based national
                     financial literacy program, with leadership from the office of the Prime
                     Minister or other high-level authorities.

Good Practice #33    A wide range of organizations (including government, state agencies and non-
                     governmental organization) are involved in developing and implementing the
                     financial literacy program. The government appoints a ministry (e.g. the
                     Ministry of Finance), the central bank or a financial regulator to lead and
                     coordinate the development and implementation of the program

Description          As noted above, only some of the concerned government agencies are
                     engaged in programs of financial education and these are conducted by each
                     agency separately. No specific agency has been appointed to lead and
                     coordinate a national program.

Rating               Materially not applied

Recommendation       A broad range of ministries and agencies should be engaged in improving
                     financial literacy in Jamaica. This should include the Ministries of Finance &
                     Planning, Education, Industry, Investment & Commerce, Agriculture, Defense,
                     Science, Technology, Energy & Mining as well as the Bank of Jamaica,
                     Financial Services Commission, Fair Trading Commission, Consumer Affairs
                     Commission, JDIC and Cooperative Credit Union League. Also important
                     would be the industry associations, such as the Bankers Association and the
                     National Consumers League.



                                               39
Good Practice #34   Initiatives are undertaken to improve financial literacy of consumers of all
                    ages. This includes encouraging the mass media to cover issues related to
                    consumer finance, including consumer protection in financial services.

Description         Some media cover issues of consumer finance. For example, the daily
                    Kingston newspaper, The Gleaner, covers financial news including stories
                    related to consumer finance. One example was the extensive coverage of the
                    proposed government tax on withdrawals of cash from banks. In addition, the
                    media provide the FSC Minute as a form of public service announcement.
                    Also the Financial Services Commission publishes Compass and FSC Score,
                    which are targeted to the industry and the licensees and registrants. However
                    there is little coverage of broad financial consumer protection issues targeted
                    to the general public.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      The authorities might consider creative ways of obtaining free coverage of
                    issues related to financial consumer protection. For example, the Banking
                    Services Act requires that both banks and their supervisory agencies publish
                    their annual complaint statistics. The authorities could ensure that the media
                    organizations receive the reports. Price surveys are also often of great
                    interest to media organizations and their audiences. In addition, in light of the
                    oral traditions of Jamaica, consideration might be given to oral methods of
                    dissemination of information through radio and town hall meetings.

Good Practice #35   Government and state agencies consult consumers, industry associations and
                    financial institutions to develop proposals that meet consumers’ needs and
                    expectations. They also undertake consumer testing to try to ensure that
                    proposed initiatives, including those regarding pre-contractual consumer
                    disclosure and dispute resolution, are likely to have their intended outcomes.

Description         The financial supervisory agencies in Jamaica frequently consult and work
                    with the industry associations. However less frequent is their contact with the
                    Consumer Affairs Commission or the consumer associations. In addition,
                    there is virtually no consumer testing of proposed initiatives.

Rating              Partially applied

Recommendation      Consumer testing of different initiatives, particularly the financial
                    ombudsman now under discussion, would be useful.

Good Practice #36   The financial literacy of consumers and the impact of consumer
                    empowerment measures are measured through broad-based household
                    surveys that are repeated from time to time to see if the current policies are
                    having the desired impact on the financial marketplace.

Description         In 2012 the Financial Services Commission conducted a financial literacy
                    survey in Jamaica, using a questionnaire developed by the International
                    Network of Financial Education (which is led by the Organization for

                                               40
                           Economic Co-operation and Development). Annual surveys are also
                           conducted by institutions licensed by the Financial Services Commission with
                           the data provided to the Commission. Other surveys have also been
                           conducted, including surveys in 2006 and 2012 by the JDIC to determine
                           popular understanding of the extent of deposit insurance. In addition, the
                           Financial Investigations Division of the Ministry of Finance & Planning is
                           intending to conduct a survey regarding popular understanding of the rules
                           and regulations related to anti-money laundering and related counter-
                           terrorism financing. While useful, the surveys provided only an initial level of
                           analysis of the levels of financial literacy and types of financial behavior in
                           Jamaica. Furthermore the raw data from the survey was not made publicly
                           available.

 Rating                    Partially applied

 Recommendation            A detailed national financial literacy survey would be helpful in providing a
                           comprehensive baseline assessment. The survey should be broken down by
                           age, gender, occupation, education, and geographic location. Such detail
                           would provide crucial input in designing an effective financial education
                           program for all parts of society, particularly those excluded from formal
                           financial services. Follow-up studies should be conducted every few years in
                           order to evaluate the effectiveness of the ongoing programs and propose
                           recommendations on measures to improve the programs.31

 Competition

 Good Practice #37         Financial regulators and competition authorities consult with one another.

 Description               The financial regulatory and supervisory authorities coordinate on financial
                           consumer protection issues, but less on competition issues. The Fair Trading
                           Commission informally provides its advice to the Bank of Jamaica, the
                           Financial Services Commission and the Ministry of Finance & Planning on
                           competition issues. However the Fair Trading Commission has limited
                           authority with regard to consumer financial services. Its primary work relates
                           to the issues of misleading advertising and tied selling.

 Rating                    Not applied

 Recommendation            It would be helpful if the Bank of Jamaica, the Financial Services Commission
                           and the Ministry of Finance & Planning could institute a coordination
                           mechanism for working together on competition issues related to consumer
                           finance.



31
  National financial literacy surveys have been conducted by the Financial Services Authority (now Financial
Conduct authority) in the U.K. and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority in the U.S. In addition, the World Bank
has conducted a number of national financial literacy surveys. See
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/0,,contentMDK:22766495~pagePK:1
48956~piPK:216618~theSitePK:282885,00.html

                                                       41
 Good Practice #38        Competition policy in financial services considers the impact of competition
                          issues on consumer welfare, and especially planned or actual limits on choice.

 Description              Although there is much concern over the level and number of fees and
                          charges imposed by the commercial banks, there is currently no government
                          competition policy related to financial services.

 Rating                   Not applied

 Recommendation           It would be helpful if the Bank of Jamaica, the Financial Services Commission,
                          the Fair Trading Commission and the Ministry of Finance & Planning could
                          together develop a competition policy related to financial services, especially
                          consumer financial services. That policy could assess the impact of limited
                          competition on consumer welfare and identify ways in which competition for
                          consumer financial services could be expanded.

 Good Practice #39        Competition authorities conduct and publish periodic assessments of
                          competition among retail financial institutions and make recommendations
                          on how competition among retail financial institutions can be optimized.

 Description              In addition to the 2013 Bank of Jamaica review of fees and charges applied by
                          banks and building societies, the Fair Trading Commission conducted a 2010
                          study on competition in the banking sector and proposed some
                          recommendations.32 However the Commission has conducted no
                          assessments of competition for the rest of consumer financial services. Nor
                          has the Commission presented recommendations on measures to strengthen
                          competition in other parts of the consumer financial services sector.

 Rating                   Partially applied

 Recommendation           It would be helpful if the Fair Trading Commission could prepare a study
                          issues of competition in all consumer financial services and present
                          recommendations on measures to strengthen competition. The study should
                          cover the level and quality of competition for all consumer financial services,
                          including payday lenders and microfinance institutions.




32
  http://www.jftc.com/Libraries/Industry_Studies/2011_1_10_Final_-
_Nature_and_Extent_of_Competition.sflb.ashx

                                                    42
Annex 4. National Program of Consumer Protection and Financial Literacy
Implementation Plan Components

(for discussion)



     Measures                                                     Type of     Responsible   Priority
                                                                  Action        Agency
                                           High Level Measures
 1   Set up High Level Task Force to develop a National          Government                  High
     Program on Consumer Protection & Financial Literacy.         Decision
 2   Adopt the National Program.                                 Government                  High
                                                                  Decision
 3   Create a secretariat to develop an Action Plan and             TA                       High
     report on its implementation.
                                              Short-Term Plan
 1   Develop further in-depth analysis on consumer                  TA                      Medium
     protection for parts of the financial services sector.
 2   Strengthen – and simplify – standard disclosure on             TA                      Medium
     common financial services, including key facts
     statements
 3   Publish timely price surveys of commonly used                  TA                      Medium
     financial services to encourage comparison shopping
     by consumers.
 4   Create an independent statutory ombudsman to cover             TA                       High
     all consumer financial services.
 5   Create mechanism to finance the ombudsman with a               TA                       High
     levy on the financial services sector.
 6   Establish a regular national survey of consumer                TA                      Medium
     finances.
 7   Conduct an in-depth baseline survey of financial               TA                      Medium
     literacy.




                                                    43
                                            Medium-Term Plan
     Measures                                                     Type of      Responsible   Timeline
                                                                  Action         Agency
1    Require that all legal entities that provide consumer       Revise law                   High
     financial services be registered with a financial
     supervisory agency or fall under the supervision of a
     financial supervision agency. Ensure adequate funding
     for consumer protection supervision.
2    Develop a coordination mechanism for government                 TA                       High
     agencies regarding competition in consumer finance.
3    Request that the Fair Trading Commission study issues           TA                      Medium
     of competition in all consumer financial services and
     present recommendations on measures to strengthen
     competition.
4    Developing one common code of conduct to cover all            Develop                   Medium
     types of financial institutions that deal with               voluntary
     consumers. Or develop industry-specific codes.                 codes
5    Develop plan to involve media and consumer                    Develop                   Medium
     associations, ex. mystery shopping or a newspaper             strategy
     column on resolving financial consumer complaints.              plan
     Ensure adequate funding.
6    Ensure that financial institutions verify that the            Revise                    Medium
     services meet the customer’s needs.                          conduct
                                                                    code
7    Develop reader-friendly fact-sheets, standard contract        Revise                    Medium
     language & plain English descriptions of consumer            conduct
     financial services.                                            code
8    Prohibit misleading advertising in private pensions.        Revise law                  Medium
9    Establish cooling-off periods for pensions (and other       Revise law                  Medium
     long-term savings schemes) and any financial services
     sold through high-pressure tactics.
10   Ensure that financial institutions identify their primary   Regulations                 Medium
     supervisory agency in their advertising. Ensure that
     deposit-taking institutions to include the name of the
     JDIC in their advertising.
11   Review professional qualifications for retail staff         Regulations                 Medium
     selling complex financial services, especially where
     intermediaries are individuals.
12   Require that financial institutions provide a written       Regulations                 Medium
     monthly statement of accounts free of charge.
13   Require that financial institutions absolve consumers       Revise law                  Medium
     of responsibility for losses (over a minimum amount
     such as US$ 500 equivalent) in case of fraud.
14   Ban exclusivity arrangements for remittance                 Regulations                 Medium
     companies and non-bank payment servicers. Ensure
     interoperability among authorized entities.


                                                   44
16   Draft and adopt a Data Protection Bill.                   Revise law    Medium
17   Develop a standard consumer consent clause for            Regulations   Medium
     credit applications; require credit bureaus to publish
     consumers’ rights, including the dispute resolution
     mechanism; add links to the consumer complaint
     sections of the credit bureaus on BoJ website; allow
     consumers to access online their own credit reports;
     publish aggregate data regarding the numbers of
     consumer inquiries; and build a consumer awareness
     campaign.
18   Develop guidelines on handling of customer                Guidelines    Medium
     complaints.
19   Prepare recommendations on measures to address            Regulations   Medium
     issues raised in consumer complaints.
20   Clarify stabilization fund provided by the Co-operative   Regulations   Medium
     Credit Union League.
21   Review international experience in insolvency regimes         TA        Medium
     for different types of financial institutions.
22   Conduct consumer testing of different initiatives,            TA        Medium
     particularly the financial ombudsman.




                                                  45
