                                                                                     96317




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM
DEVELOPMENT MODULE


JAMAICA
FINANCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE
TECHNICAL NOTE
April 2015


This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a World Bank Financial Sector Assessment
Program mission in Jamaica during April-May 2014 led by Alfonso Garcia Mora, and overseen
by Finance & Markets Global Practice, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital Markets
Department, IMF. The note contains technical analysis and detailed information underpinning
the FSAP assessment’s findings and recommendations. Further information on the FSAP
program can be found at www.worldbank.org/fsap.



                       THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                       FINANCE & MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                                                                       i




                                                  Contents                                                                     Page
I.        Executive Summary ........................................................................................................ 1
II. Introduction ................................................................................................................... 15
III.        Payment and Settlement Systems ............................................................................. 16
     A.        Legal and regulatory framework .............................................................................. 16
     B.        Large-value payment systems .................................................................................. 18
     C.        Retail payment systems and instruments ................................................................. 20
     D.        Government payments and receipts ......................................................................... 25
     E.        Securities clearing and settlement systems .............................................................. 26
     F.        Interbank money market........................................................................................... 31
     G.        International remittances .......................................................................................... 32
     H.        Payment system oversight ........................................................................................ 34
     I.     Cooperation with stakeholders and other relevant authorities ..................................... 38
IV.         Credit Reporting Systems ......................................................................................... 39
     A.        Overview .................................................................................................................. 39
     B.        Legal and regulatory framework and consumer protection ..................................... 41
     C.        Credit reporting service providers ............................................................................ 45
     D.        Other public databases ............................................................................................. 49
     E.        Oversight and cooperation ....................................................................................... 50
Annex 1: World Bank General Principles for Credit Reporting ..................................... 54


Figures
Figure 1. Outreach indicators in Jamaica and peer countries ................................................. 20
Figure 2 Credit information flow in Jamaica .......................................................................... 40
Figure 3: Example of a consumer dispute resolution framework ........................................... 45

Tables
Table 1: Recommended actions ................................................................................................ 6
Table 2: JamClear-RTGS – volume and value of transactions ............................................... 18
Table 3: Retail Payments – volume and value of transactions in JMD .................................. 21
Table 4: Jamaica’s Remittances .............................................................................................. 32
                                          ii




                                     GLOSSARY

ACH         Automated Clearing House
AG          Accountant General
ATM         Automated Teller Machine
BCP         Business Continuity Plan
BIS         Bank for International Settlements
BoJ         Bank of Jamaica
CBS         Core Banking System
CCP         Central Counterparty
CD          Certificate of Deposit
CIP         Credit Information Provider
CoJ         Company Office of Jamaica
CPSS        Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
CSD         Central Securities Depository
CRS         Credit Reporting System
CTMS        Central Treasury Management System
DvP         Delivery versus Payment
FSC         Financial Services Commission
FX          Foreign Exchange
G2B         Government to Business
G2P         Government to Person
GDP         Gross Domestic Product
GOJ         Government of Jamaica
GSDA        Government Securities Dematerialization Act
IDL         Intraday Liquidity
IMF         International Monetary Fund
IOSCO       International Organization of Securities Commissions
Jamclear-   JamClear Central Securities Depository
CSD
JamClear-   JamClear Real time Gross settlement system
RTGS
                                       iii




JCBA    Jamaica Clearing Bankers Association
JCSD    Jamaica Central Securities Depository
JCUL    Jamaica Credit Union League
JSE     Jamaica Stock Exchange
JMD     Jamaican Dollar
KYC     Know Your Customer
MICR    Magnetic Ink Character Recognition
MDAs    Ministries, Departments and Agencies
NCB     National Commercial Bank
NDX     National Debt Exchange
NIS     National Insurance Scheme
NPS     National Payments System
NPSC    National Payment System Council
OTC     Over the Counter
OUR     Office of utility regulation
P2B     Person to Business
P2P     Person to Person
PATH    Programme of Advancement through Health and Education
PCSA    Payment Clearing and Settlement Act
PFMI    Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures
POS     Point of Sale
PSDG    Payment Systems Development Group (of the World Bank)
PvP     Payment versus Payment
Repo    Repurchase Agreement
RMOC    Regulatory and Market oversight Committee
ROSC    Report on Observance of Standards and Codes
RSP     Remittance Service Provider
RTO     Recovery Time Objective
SIPS    Systemically Important Payment System
SIRPS   Systemically Important Retail Payment System
SRO     Self-Regulatory Organization
                                     iv




SSS     Securities Settlement System
STP     Straight Through Processing
SWIFT   Society for World-wide Interbank Financial Telecommunication
TAJ     Tax Administration Jamaica
TRN     Tax registration number
TSA     Treasury Single Account
USD     United States Dollar
WB      World Bank
                                                1



                                  I.    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1

Payment and Settlement Systems

1.      Payment and settlement systems play a crucial role in fostering financial inclusion
and in contributing to financial stability and containing systemic risk. It is often the case,
that either sending and receiving remittances or being beneficiaries under Government
schemes are the first steps towards accessing formal financial services by the financially
excluded. It has therefore been recognized by policy makers that providing access to safe and
efficient payment systems with easy to use safe and innovative payment instruments is a first
step towards financial inclusion. Innovations in technology enable provision of retail payment
services at a relatively low cost to the financially excluded and therefore need to be actively
encouraged by policy makers for adoption in delivering payment services to the poorer and
marginalized sections of society. At the same time access to the domestic payments
infrastructure should be widened as to embrace a wider section of the stakeholders, to enable
these stakeholders to provide modern payment products to their customers at competitive
prices.

2.      Jamaica has a well-developed payment and settlement infrastructure, in which all
systemically important payment systems and the funds leg of the securities segments
settle in central bank money, through the JamClear-RTGS system, thereby mitigating
credit and liquidity risks. The main components of the payments and settlement systems
infrastructure in Jamaica are: (i) BoJ owned and operated JamClear-RTGS (real time gross
settlement system); (ii) JamClear-CSD (the central securities depository for the Government
and BoJ securities), also owned and operated by BoJ; (iii) Jamaica Central Securities
Depository (JSCD) a fully- owned subsidiary of the Jamaican Stock Exchange (JSE)
performing the roles of a central securities depository (CSD), securities settlement system
(SSS) and central counterparty (CCP) for corporate securities; (iv) the Automated Clearing
House (ACH) for retail payments, owned and operated by a consortium of seven commercial
banks clearing and settling JMD denominated cheques, credit transfers and debit transfers; and
(v) two payment card switches – MultiLink (owned by four commercial banks, credit union
league and two building societies), and QNet (owned by the Credit Union League). The net
settlement files from the retail Automated Clearing House (ACH), the payment card switch
MultiLink, and funds leg of the capital markets emanating from the Jamaica Central Securities
Depository (JCSD) are all settled in the JamClear-RTGS system.

3.      The BoJ should immediately document and formally adopt a Business Continuity
Plan taking into account its own systems and the systems of participants. The BCP should
have arrangements including procedures for crisis management and information dissemination.
The BCP once finalized, should be regularly tested and reviewed. The BCP should also cover
other systems such as the JCSD and JamClear-CSD.

1
  This Technical Note has been prepared by Gynedi Srinivas (payment and settlement systems) and
Fredes Montes (credit reporting), both from the World Bank, team members of the Jamaica Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission that took place during April 28 – May 9, 2014.
                                                        2




4.       The legal framework for the payment systems and Government securities has
been strengthened and harmonized as per international standards as part of the NPS
reform strategy. The PCS Act enacted in 2010 provides a legal basis for netting, finality and
irrevocability of payments and provides the BoJ with statutory powers of oversight over the
payment and settlement systems in Jamaica. The GSD Act, 2010 provides the statutory basis
for the immobilization and dematerialization of Government and BoJ securities and enables
their trading and settlement in scripless form through electronic book-entry.

5.      The BoJ should take necessary measures to ensure that JamClear-CSD functions
with robust audit and accounting arrangements in compliance with Principle 11 of the
PFMIs. These include putting in place appropriate rules, procedures, and controls, including
robust accounting practices, and conducting periodic and at least daily reconciliation of
securities issues and balances that are held in its books of accounts.

6.     The BoJ should take should take necessary measures in consultation and
coordination with the Government for the dematerialization of Treasury bills. In addition,
the process of developing an integrated primary auction module may be expedited and
implemented.

7.      The FSC should undertake a comprehensive legal review of the various provisions
under the Securities Act, to provide a robust legal basis for the safe and efficient
functioning of the securities market, as laid down in Principle 1 of the Principles for
Financial Market Infrastructures. For example, the Securities Act, 1993 and regulations
framed thereunder do not provide a legal basis for (i) immobilization and dematerialization of
corporate securities; and (ii) for the functioning of a SSS and a CCP in the corporate securities
market. Similarly, while a central counterparty is defined and recognized under the Payment
Clearing and Settlement Act, it is not defined under the Securities Act. The FSC Act, 2001
should also be amended to specifically provide statutory powers to the FSC to authorize the
establishment of a SSS and CCP in the corporate securities market and vest necessary
regulatory oversight powers.2 In addition, legal opinion may be obtained to ensure that the
Securities Act and the FSC Act cover all the relevant material aspects of a sound legal
framework as laid down in Principle 1 of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures.

8.      The JCSD should undertake a study based on historical data whether the line of
credit, IDL facility and its capital and reserves are sufficient to take care of the default
of the participant with the single largest debit in the system and share the results with
the FSC. In the event, that the extant measures are insufficient, the JCSD in consultation with
FSC may introduce appropriate risk management measures such as margins, with a clearly
defined water-fall approach to take care of defaults. These studies may be carried out on a
periodical basis.


2 The FSC regulates registration stock exchanges in keeping with section 18 of the Securities Act. FSC also has
powers to regulate a central securities depository pursuant to section 67A of the Securities Act. The JSE operates
a securities settlement system and the JSE rules are enforced by the FSC.
                                               3



9.       Regarding retail payments, consideration should be given to finding measures for
expanding electronic use of retail payments. Policy measures should be taken by BOJ in
consultation with all stakeholders to increase the usage of retail electronic payments. These
include amongst others: (i) deepening the payment infrastructure in the rural areas possibly by
locating ATMs in Post Offices in consultation with the Government and other stakeholders;
(ii) reviewing and revising the extant direct membership access criteria based on ownership
for the ACH to one based on risk and efficiency considerations; (iii) using the Centralised
Treasury Management System (CTMS) for effecting Government welfare and pension
payments. In order to eliminate unwinding of the ACH net settlement file, BOJ is encouraged
to use the intraday liquidity facility in the RTGS for overcoming funds shortages in a member’s
account, when the net settlement position file from the ACH is settled in the JamClear-RTGS
system.

10.     BoJ should consider measures to expand consumer choices and increase
competition in retail payments systems. As part of its oversight function, BOJ may undertake
an exercise in compiling the fees and charges levied by banks and other authorized entities for
various payment services and products and publish it on its website. This would serve the aim
of fostering transparency and would enable the consumers to make educated choices and foster
competition. As a first step, the charges levied by banks for using ATMs may be prominently
displayed at ATMs. Exclusivity arrangements in respect of both remittance companies and
non-bank electronic payment service providers may be explicitly barred to increase market
penetration and competitive prices for customers. In addition, BOJ should develop and
implement a policy framework for opening of “no frill” accounts in banks for deepening
financial access. As a reference point, the BOJ may take into account the prescribed graded
KYC requirements laid down in the case of Custodian Account Based Payment Services under
the Guidelines for Retail Electronic Payment Services. In addition, in providing its final
approval to the two mobile wallet pilots, BOJ should ensure that the authorized entities adhere
to interoperability and also prohibit any exclusivity arrangements for agents.

11.     BoJ should take a comprehensive overview of its regulatory framework for the
appointment of agents and design a coordinated approach. BOJ is encouraged to achieve
the objectives of safety and efficiency by prescribing policy guidelines to be followed by the
remittance companies, non-bank payment service providers, and banks (at a later stage), and
devolve the responsibility of appointing agents as per the prescribed policy framework on to
the Principal authorized entities. While it is recognized that a consensus on this needs to be
evolved within the BOJ, as an interim measure, steps may be taken to automate the process of
authorization of agents and minimize the use of paper. Oversight arrangements may be fine-
tuned to achieve the objectives of safety and efficiency in agency linked payment system
arrangements.

12.    A strategic plan on increasing usage of retail payments in coordination with
relevant stakeholders would be helpful. BoJ should consider establishing a Working Group
on Retail Payments under the NPSC, with representation of all relevant stakeholders including
the Government, to develop a strategic Action Plan. In addition, to ensure buy-in from all
                                                4



stakeholders, BOJ is encouraged to include remittance companies in the NPSC as a first step,
and later Custodian Account Service providers of payments.

Credit Reporting System

13.     Creditors still face information asymmetry problems and large expectations are
present in the market regarding the role that recently established credit bureaus will play
in the credit market. It is expected that the fully operation of credit bureaus will allow banks
and other financial institutions to extend their credit portfolios to new clients, establish risk
based pricing in their lending practices, venture into new lending instruments, and reduce their
current levels of NPLs.

14.     There is no National Strategy for the development of CRS, including policy
objectives developed and adopted by the authorities. There is no credit registry, but there
are two credit bureaus operating in the country since 2013. A third credit bureau was licensed
in 2014, but it has not started operations as of December 2014. The BoJ has acted as a catalyst
to the establishment of the Credit Bureaus. Due to the recent reforms to the credit reporting
system, Jamaica is well-positioned vis-à-vis its Caribbean regional peers. Commendable
efforts undertaken by the BoJ have created the foundation blocks of a robust credit reporting
system in Jamaica; fine-tuning the implementation of the system is the next step.

15.     The Credit Reporting Act enables the establishment of credit bureaus and governs
their operations. In general, both positive and negative credit information is shared within the
industry. Solidifying the recent reforms would entail the implementation of effective
supervision and more inclusive credit information from government agencies, banks, building
societies, cooperatives, microfinance institutions, and telecommunication companies.
Although several banks have committed to the sharing of information with the credit bureaus,
in practice not all key banks are currently sharing data with a credit bureau.

16.    The data collection process from the two credit bureaus is taking place at a slower
pace than initially expected. The two credit bureaus were licensed in 2012, but the initial
period of six months established in the Credit Reporting Act for credit bureaus to start
operations was extended to twelve months allowing them more time for the data collection
process. Some reasons to this problem are attributed to: (i) the existence of individual and
substantially different data structure and requirements by each credit bureau; (ii) technological
requirements and modifications needed in their core banking systems to contribute data to the
system; (iii) lack of current practices from the banks to collect certain key data items required
by credit bureaus as mandatory fields, and; (iv) competition fears faced by creditors.

17.     Information flow and current data supply practices shows signs of data
fragmentation. There are signs in the market that show that relevant creditors are willing to
participate in one of the credit bureaus but not in both which might lead to data fragmentation.
Because credit bureaus operate in the form or reciprocity, if creditors are not providing data
they will not be able to access data, therefore preventing them from accessing comprehensive
credit reports.
                                                          5




18.    Creditors are currently requesting consumers to access their credit reports before
obtaining a loan. Creditors that do not participate in a credit bureau are able to access data
from such credit bureau through the consumer; this is becoming a common practice in the
market. This practice might hamper the confidentiality in the CRS and might impede its
adequate development in a safe and efficient manner.

19.     The prescriptive nature of the Credit Reporting Law imposes some challenges to
the inclusion of additional sources as credit information providers (CIPs, e.g.
microfinance institutions and retailers) to the credit bureaus. The legal framework does
not seem to be an impediment for the participation of most of the relevant CIPs to the credit
bureaus; however some additional clarification is still required due to the excessively
prescriptive nature of Section 8.23 of the Credit Reporting Act.

20.     The consumer consent requires further clarification. The market has not clearly
understood the meaning of Section 8.6 of the Credit Reporting Act as regards to consumer
consent – whether this is required for data disclosure or also for data collection. In practice,
the consumer consent clauses analyzed do not follow the minimum requirements for a clear
consent on the disclosure of consumer’s information. This might be caused by a conflict of
rules between Section 8.6c) and Section 8.10b) of the Act.

21.      There are areas of the credit information system that could benefit from
complementing with the information already available in public databases. In this regard,
there is no framework for cooperation between participants of the CRS that allows coordinating
progress being made by the public and the private sector in Jamaica. For instance Information
from other databases such as the Companies Office of Jamaica, the Collateral Registry, the tax
registration number (TRN), and utility companies is not currently available in the credit
bureaus.

22.     Implementation of a comprehensive oversight function is in progress. The BoJ is
responsible for the oversight of the CRS. Currently, there are no other authorities involved in
the oversight function besides the BoJ and the Ministry of Finance. Other authorities and
Government agencies are not currently playing any role in the development of the CRS in
Jamaica (e.g. the Company Office of Jamaica, the Broadcasting Commission, the Office of
Utilities, and the Fair Trading Commission). Therefore, the establishment of a cooperation
framework between authorities could contribute to the development of a safe, efficient, and
reliable CRS.




3
 Section 8.2 establishes the type of CIPS that are able to participate and consists on a defined list of potential
participants.
                                                                     6



 Table 1: Recommended actions

Pillar                  Recommendation                                                                    Priority and timeline

1. Legal framework   The Securities Act, 1993 and regulations framed thereunder may be suitably           High priority / short term
                     amended to provide a legal basis for (i) immobilization and dematerialization
                     of corporate securities; and (ii) for the functioning of a SSS and a CCP in the
                     corporate securities market. The FSC Act, 2001 should also be amended to
                     specifically provide statutory powers to the FSC to authorize the establishment
                     of a SSS and CCP in the corporate securities market and vest necessary
                     regulatory oversight powers. In addition, legal opinion may be obtained to
                     ensure that the Securities Act and the FSC Act cover all the relevant material
                     aspects of a sound legal framework as laid down in Principle 1 of the Principles
                     for Financial Market Infrastructures.
1. Legal framework   The BoJ may obtain expert legal opinion as to whether the definition of transfer     Medium priority/ medium term
                     order under the PCS Act and the reference to payment messages in Section 27
                     of the BoJ Act can be construed as defining electronic payment/transfer order
                     and whether these provide a statutory basis for electronic transfers. The decision
                     to amend any relevant laws may be taken based on the expert legal opinion
                     obtained.
2.    Large    value BoJ should amend Rule 7.7.6 of the RTGS participant rules to clearly define          High priority / short-term
payment systems      the time after which an unsettled payment instruction may not be revoked by
                     the sending participants as laid down in Principles 7 and 8 of the Principles for
                     Financial Market Infrastructures. This would to a large extent help in mitigating
                     any liquidity risk.
2.    Large    value BoJ should immediately document and formally adopt a Business Continuity             High priority / short-term
payment systems      Plan taking into account its own systems and the systems of participants. The
                     BCP should have arrangements including procedures for crisis management and
                     information dissemination. The BCP once finalized, should be regularly tested
                     and reviewed. The BCP should also cover other systems such as the JCSD and
                     JamClear-CSD.
2.    Large    value IDL facility should be made available for settling the net settlement batch files    High priority / short-term
payment systems      to enable their settlement on an “all or none” basis in JamClear-RTGS. The
                                                                    7



                     practice of returning the file and its resubmission after unwinding the defaulting
                     participant’s position, for settlement to the JamClear-RTGS can create liquidity
                     pressures for the other members in the system and in extreme circumstances can
                     lead to systemic risk.
3. Retail payments   BoJ should frame an access policy for retail payments infrastructure in               High priority / short-term
                     consultation with various stakeholders. The access to the retail payment
                     infrastructure in Jamaica continues to be skewed and restrictive in nature, in the
                     absence of any specific policy framework initiatives and regulations by BoJ.
                     This has resulted in sub-optimal utilization of the infrastructure with the
                     concomitant effect of impeding the growth of retail electronic payment products
                     and has constrained the ability of the various stakeholders to leverage on the
                     existing infrastructure to promote retail electronic payment products.
3. Retail payments   Policy measures are required to be taken by the BoJ in consultation with all          High priority / short-term
                     stakeholders to deepen the payment infrastructure in the rural areas to provide
                     a fillip to the use of retail electronic payment products. To begin with, in
                     consultation with the Government and other stake holders, the possibility of
                     locating ATMs in Post Offices could be explored. In order to fully utilize ATM
                     infrastructure (and not only for cash withdrawal and balance enquiry as is
                     largely done now), additional functionalities such as bill payments, internet
                     banking etc. should be operationalized to encourage the growth of cashless
                     payments.
3. Retail payments   BoJ may undertake an exercise to compile the fees and charges levied by banks         High priority / short-term
                     and other authorized entities for various payment services and products and
                     publish the same on its website. This would foster transparency, competition
                     and enable the consumers to make educated choices.
3. Retail payments   The BoJ is encouraged to achieve the objectives of safety and efficiency by           High priority / short-term
                     prescribing policy guidelines to be followed by the remittance companies, non-
                     bank payment service providers, and banks (at a later stage), and devolve the
                     responsibility of appointing agents as per the prescribed policy framework on
                     to the Principal authorized entities. As a part of this exercise, BoJ should take a
                     comprehensive overview of its regulatory framework for the appointment of
                     agents and design a coordinated approach. While it is recognized that a
                     consensus on this needs to be evolved within the BoJ, as an interim measure,
                                                                    8



                     steps may be taken to automate the process of authorization of agents and
                     minimize the use of paper. Oversight arrangements may be fine-tuned to
                     achieve the objectives of safety and efficiency in agency linked payment system
                     arrangements.
3. Retail payments   Exclusivity arrangements may be explicitly barred to increase market                  High priority / short-term
                     penetration and competitive prices for customers.
3. Retail payments   In providing its final approval to the two mobile wallet pilots, the BoJ should       High priority / short-term
                     ensure that the authorized entities adhere to interoperability and also prohibit
                     any exclusivity arrangements for agents.
3. Retail payments   The BoJ may develop and implement a policy framework for opening of “no               High priority / short-term
                     frill” accounts in banks for deepening financial access. As a reference point, the
                     BoJ may take into account the prescribed graded KYC requirements laid down
                     in the case of Custodian Account Based Payment Services under the Guidelines
                     for Retail Electronic Payment Services.
3. Retail payments   BoJ should establish a Working Group on Retail Payments under the NPSC,               High priority / short-term
                     with representation of all relevant stakeholders including the Government, to
                     develop a strategic Action Plan. Such a plan should focus on optimal utilization
                     of infrastructure through greater access to the participants and their customers
                     with a view to achieving and promoting greater usage of retail electronic
                     payment products. In addition, to ensure buy-in from all stakeholders, the BoJ
                     is encouraged to include remittance companies in the NPSC as a first step, and
                     later Custodian Account Service providers of payments.
4. Government        The Government should develop a comprehensive strategy to reduce                      High priority / medium term
payments             administrative costs and improve efficiency of the direct benefit transfer
                     schemes such as PATH and NIS through retail electronic payment products.
                     The strategy should be drawn up in coordination with BoJ and other
                     stakeholders for bringing about a shift in G2P payments to electronic payment
                     modes within a defined time frame. The contours of such a strategy should
                     encompass amongst others: (i) streamlining the approval process for a
                     beneficiary to obtain a KeyCash card; (ii) enabling cash-outs at Post offices
                     through KeyCash cards; (iii) simplifying the KYC requirements for opening a
                     “no frills” bank account to enable beneficiaries to receive benefits their benefits
                     into their bank accounts; and (iv) fully leveraging upon the CTMS application
                                                                     9



                     for effecting transfers directly to bank accounts of beneficiaries. As part of the
                     strategy and as part of BoJ supervision and oversight functions, BoJ should use
                     moral suasion and its statutory powers for putting a stop to restrictive practices
                     such as charging for balances falling below the minimum thresholds prescribed.
4. Government        The functionalities of the web portal of Tax Administration Jamaica should be          High priority / medium term
payments             enhanced to enable it to accept payments made through credit cards and through
                     online banking. To this end, a Task Force may be constituted to work out the
                     modalities of the scheme including the collection of customs duties.
5. Securities        The BoJ should take necessary measures to ensure that JamClear-CSD                     High priority / short-term
settlement systems   functions in compliance with Principle 11 of the PFMIs. These include putting
                     in place appropriate rules, procedures, and controls, including robust accounting
                     practices, and conducting periodic and at least daily reconciliation of securities
                     issues and balances that are held in its books of accounts.
5. Securities        JCSD may obtain legal opinion and place it in the public domain clarifying the         High priority / short-term
settlement systems   details of beneficial ownership and segregation of securities held in its custody,
                     in view of the conflicting claims made on its website. This would serve
                     customer interests and aid in transparency.
5. Securities        The legal basis for the JCSD to act as a SSS and CCP is not available under the        High priority / short-term
settlement systems   extant legal provisions. The Securities Act would have to be amended for this
                     purpose. As amending the law may take time, as an interim measure FSC may
                     obtain a legal opinion as to whether JCSD could continue to function as a SSS
                     or CCP under any relevant contractual arrangement recognized under the law,
                     with relevant risk management provisions.
5. Securities        JCSD should undertake a study based on historical data whether the line of             High priority / short-term
settlement systems   credit, IDL facility and its capital and reserves are sufficient to take care of the
                     default of the participant with the single largest debit in the system and share
                     the results with the FSC. In the event, that the extant measures are insufficient,
                     JCSD in consultation with FSC may introduce appropriate risk management
                     measures such as margins, with a clearly defined water-fall approach to take
                     care of defaults.
5. Securities        JCSD as a measure of transparency should publish its audited balance sheet,            High priority / short-term
settlement systems   independent of JSE to enable the overseers to determine its sound financial
                                                                   10



                   footing, given the multifarious tasks and its systemic importance to the financial
                   stability of the Jamaican economy.
5. Securities      The BoJ should take should take necessary measures in consultation and               Medium priority / medium-term
settlement systems coordination with the Government for the dematerialization of Treasury bills.
                   In addition, the process of developing an integrated primary auction module
                   may be expedited and implemented.
6. Interbank money BoJ may draw up suitable action plans to revitalize the interbank money market       Medium priority / medium term
markets            as it is an important source of liquidity to the participants in the system. It is
                   gathered that BoJ is already engaged in this exercise and that discussions are
                   being held with the market participants.
6. Interbank money BoJ is encouraged to take up suitable measures for implementing the                  Medium priority / medium term
markets            recommendations made by an IMF Technical Assistance team on the measures
                   needed to be taken to make the interbank foreign exchange market more
                   transparent and vibrant. Amongst others, the recommendations include: (i)
                   issuance of price-discovery data on exchange rate on an intra-day basis; (ii)
                   enhancements to the e-gate system to make it a web based application; and (iii)
                   developing a trading for FX transactions.
7. International   As stated elsewhere, BoJ should take a comprehensive overview of its                 High priority / short-term
remittances        regulatory framework for the appointment of sub-agents and design a
                   coordinated approach. The current regulatory framework for licensing of sub-
                   agents is quite onerous and time consuming. The BoJ is encouraged to achieve
                   the objectives of safety and efficiency by prescribing policy guidelines to be
                   followed by the remittance companies, and devolve the responsibility of
                   appointing agents as per the prescribed policy framework on to the primary
                   agents.
7. International   The BoJ is encouraged to revisit its regulations to be in line with the General      High priority / short-term
remittances        Principles for Remittances. As stated in the General Principles of Remittances
                   (CPSS and World Bank, 2007)4 the relatively small values involved in
                   remittance transfers mean that it is unlikely that these would pose a systemic
                   risk. However, it is necessary to acknowledge that remittance companies face
                   the possibility of financial, legal, operational, fraud and reputational risks.

 4
     http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss76.htm
                                                                    11



                   Accordingly, General Principle 5 recognizes that remittance services should be
                   supported by appropriate governance and risk management practices. Such
                   governance and risk management practices need to be proportionate for the size
                   and type of an RSP’s business and the level of risks can improve the safety and
                   soundness of remittance services and help protect consumers.
7. International   The BoJ may explicitly ban exclusivity arrangements. As stated elsewhere              High priority / short-term
remittances        above, exclusivity arrangements stifle market competitiveness and lead to de
                   facto monopolies. Exclusivity conditions can pose particular difficulties,
                   especially where an exclusivity clause would mean that an agent retail outlet
                   would be able only provide a single remittance service. This is particularly
                   important in receiving countries if a local market such as a small village has
                   only one potential agent (e.g. the local shop) so that there is only one remittance
                   service available if an exclusivity condition is allowed to be in operation and
                   result in higher remittance costs.
7. International   The BoJ should consider carrying out a study weighing the costs and benefits          High priority / short-term
remittances        of allowing remittance companies to be direct participants in the domestic
                   payments system infrastructure. The study should take into account the
                   conditions that banks may impose on non-bank RSPs in providing indirect
                   access to the domestic payments system infrastructure, which in some cases
                   could result in higher costs and confer undue advantages to the direct
                   participants.
7. International   There is a need to have in place policy measures by BoJ to target the remittance      Medium priority / medium term
remittances        proceeds to be deposited in bank accounts as a first step towards financial
                   inclusion.
8. Payment systems In order to foster and transparency and competition in the market, BoJ is             High priority / short-term
oversight          encouraged to compile a database of the fees and charges being charged by
                   payment service providers (both banks and non-banks) and make it available in
                   the public domain. Illustratively, the database could contain charges for various
                   payment services such as cheque collection; ATM usage fees (own bank ATM
                   and other bank ATM); fees for direct credits and debits; etc.
8. Payment systems BoJ should undertake a self-assessment of the systems owned and operated by           High priority / medium term
oversight          it as laid down in the PFMIs. The BoJ should use the Assessment Methodology
                                                                      12



                       for the self-assessment and publish the same as indicated in Principle 23 of the
                       PFMIs.
8. Payment systems     BoJ should establish a Working Group on Retail Payments under the NPSC,               High priority / short-term
oversight              with representation of all relevant stakeholders including the Government, to
                       develop a strategic Action Plan for promoting electronic retail payments and
                       aiding financial inclusion.
8. Payment systems     BoJ is encouraged to undertake a review of the adequacy of the human resources        Medium priority/short-term
oversight              engaged in the discharge of the oversight function. The review would help BoJ
                       in assessing the resources with a view to fulfilling its oversight mandate as laid
                       down in the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act, 2010. This would also help
                       in furthering its objective of ensuring a safe and efficient national payment
                       systems in Jamaica as outlined in the Oversight Policy document.
8. Payment systems     FSC may obtain a legal opinion as to whether JCSD could continue to function          High priority / short-term
oversight              as a SSS or CCP under any relevant contractual arrangement recognized under
                       the law, with relevant risk management provisions, pending amendments to the
                       Securities Act. As indicated elsewhere, the FSC has licensed the JCSD as a
                       central securities depository in terms of Section 67 B of the Securities Act. In
                       addition to its role as a central securities depository, the JCSD also functions as
                       SSS and a CCP.
8. Payment systems     FSC should mandate JSCD to undertake an individual self-assessment as a               High priority / short-term
oversight              CSD, as a SSS and as a CCP using the Assessment Methodology5 for the self-
                       assessment and publish the same as indicated in Principle 23 of the PFMIs. The
                       self-assessment should be reviewed by the FSC and suitable remedial measures
                       in furthering prudent and effective risk management guidelines should be
                       prescribed with a defined time frame for compliance by the JCSD.
8. Payment systems     FSC is encouraged to undertake a comprehensive legal review of the various            High priority / short-term
oversight              provisions under the Securities Act, to provide a robust legal basis for the safe
                       and efficient functioning of the securities market, as laid down in Principle 1 of
                       the principles for Financial market Infrastructures. 6Illustratively, while a

 5
   http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss106.htm
 6
  The Prudential Regulations and the Retail Repurchase Agreement Regulations were issued in 2014 covering investor protection mechanisms
 to support the functioning of the securities markets. The Regulations were issued following the assessment in this Note.
                                                                      13



                         central counterparty is defined and recognized under the Payment Clearing and
                         Settlement Act, it is not under the Securities Act.
8. Payment systems       FSC should mandate JCSD to obtain a legal opinion and place it in the public       High priority / short-term
oversight                domain clarifying the details of beneficial ownership and segregation of
                         securities held in its custody, in view of the conflicting claims made on its
                         website. This would serve customer interests and aid in transparency.
8. Payment systems       FSC may implement the recommendations of the IMF technical assistance              High priority / short-term
oversight                mission with regard to the interim arrangements for protecting investor rights
                         under a Trust.
9. Cooperation with      Given the significant role played by remittance companies in the remittances       High priority / short-term
stakeholders and other   market, the BoJ is encouraged to bring on board remittance companies as
relevant authorities     members of the NPSC. At a later stage, the membership of the NPSC could be
                         extended to Custodian Account Service providers authorized by the BoJ to
                         provide payment services. Such a broad basing of membership of the NPSC
                         will help in evolving a more holistic strategy in the development of retail
                         electronic payments and encourage the optimal usage of the domestic payments
                         infrastructure in this regard.
9. Cooperation with      The BoJ should establish a Working Group on Retail Payments under aegis of         High priority / medium term
stakeholders and other   the NPSC, with representation of all relevant stakeholders including the
relevant authorities     Government, to develop a strategic Action Plan. The plan should have definite
                         time lines of implementation for the greater usage of retail electronic payment
                         products in a safe and efficient manner at affordable prices to foster financial
                         inclusion.
Credit Reporting         Authorities should develop a comprehensive oversight framework, whereby            Short term
                         they identify clear policy objectives and roles and the responsibilities of all
                         participants.
Credit Reporting         Authorities should establish a cooperation framework that include the              Medium term
                         Department of Co-operatives and Friendly Societies (DCFS), the Financial
                         Services Commission, the Fair Trading Commission, and the BoJ
Credit Reporting         Authorities should develop a comprehensive consumer protection framework           Medium term

Credit Reporting         The BoJ should conduct a post-operation examination to credit bureaus and High priority/ short term
                         CIPs regarding the CRS activities.
                                                               14



Credit Reporting   Authorities should take into consideration the development of adequate            High priority
                   regulations, guidelines, and other regulatory instruments to ensure adequate
                   implementation of the Credit Reporting Act.
Credit Reporting   Authorities should adopt measures to encourage credit bureaus to compete in       High priority/ short term
                   services and not in data, and should review the current information sharing
                   arrangements to ensure the absence of anticompetitive practices among certain
                   creditors.
Credit Reporting   The BoJ should establish additional measures to ensure that banks and other       Medium term
                   financial institutions are effectively providing the entire credit and loan
                   portfolio to the credit bureaus on a systematic basis.
Credit Reporting   Authorities should consider the creation of a “Credit Information Task            Short term
                   Force/Council” to identify the needs of credit information and establish goals.
Credit Reporting   Credit bureaus should seek reliable and cost-efficient methods to access          Medium term
                   information from the Company Office of Jamaica regarding SMEs, the
                   collateral registry, telecommunication companies, and utilities.
                                                  15



    II.   INTRODUCTION

23.      Financial infrastructure is the underlying foundation of a country’s financial
system. It is comprised of all institutions, information, technologies, rules, and standards which
enable financial intermediation. The quality of a country’s financial infrastructure determines
the efficiency of intermediation, the ability of lenders to evaluate risk and of borrowers to
obtain credit, insurance, and other financial products at competitive terms. For instance, the
efficient and smooth functioning of the payment, remittances, and securities settlement systems
facilitates the discharge of financial obligations and the safe transfer of funds across distances
and institutions; hence, it support the stability of the financial system. A robust credit reporting
system reduces information asymmetries between lenders and borrowers, permitting more
efficient and less costly allocation of credit.

24.    This report covers two dimensions of Jamaica’s financial infrastructure: 1)
payments, remittances, and securities settlement systems, and; 2) credit reporting
systems. The assessment was undertaken in the context of the World Bank’s (WB’s) Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) Development Module in Jamaica from 28 April to 9 May,
2014. The assessors would like to thank the Jamaican counterparts for their excellent
cooperation during the mission.

25. This Technical Note does not provide a detailed assessment of individual payments
system in the form of a Report on Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC), but uses
the framework of international standards for carrying out a detailed analysis of the
existing systems in Jamaica, including the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems
(CPSS) and International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) Principles for
Financial Markets Infrastructure (PFMIs), the CPSS General Guidance for National Payment
System Development, the CPSS-World Bank General Principles on International Remittance
Services (GPs), the World Bank General Principles for Credit Reporting and related
methodologies.7

26. The information used in the assessment includes relevant national laws, regulations,
rules and procedures governing the systems and other available material. Other available
material included the responses to the WB mission questionnaires; websites of the various
stakeholders and other relevant documents. In addition, discussions were held with regulators
i.e. the BoJ, the FSC and various stakeholders including the Ministry of Finance, the Jamaica
Stock Exchange, the Jamaica Central Securities Depository, commercial banks, the Bankers
Association, building societies, credit union, Jamaica Credit Union League, remittance
companies, ACH operator, ATM switch operators, and a telecom company. In addition
meetings where held with Victoria Mutual, JPS electricity service provider, National Water

7
  The review of the National Payments System (NPS) in Jamaica adopts the World Bank (WB) “nine
pillars” approach. The nine pillars comprise: Pillar 1 – Legal framework; Pillar 2 – Settlement
mechanisms for large-value and time critical payments; Pillar 3 – Securities settlement systems; Pillar
4 – Inter-bank money markets; Pillar 5 – Retail payment systems; Pillar 6 – Government payments;
Pillar 7 – Remittances; Pillar 8 – Oversight of the NPS; and Pillar 9 – Cooperative framework for the
development of payment systems in Jamaica.
                                                          16



Commission, NCB, RBC, First Caribbean, Companies Office of Jamaica, CRIF credit bureau
and Creditinfo Credit Bureau and Office of the Presidency as regards to the National
Identification Initiative (NIDS).


III.     PAYMENT AND SETTLEMENT SYSTEMS

    A. Legal and regulatory framework

27. There are several statutes governing the payment and securities settlement systems
in Jamaica. These are the Bank of Jamaica Act (BoJ Act), 1960 with latest amendments;
Payment Clearing and Settlement Act (PCS Act), 2010; Government Securities
Dematerialization Act (GSD Act), 2010; Financial Services Commission Act (FSC Act), 2001;
the Securities Act, 1993 with latest amendments and the Bills of Exchange Act, 1893 with
latest amendments.

28.     The legal framework for the payment systems and Government securities has
been strengthened and harmonized as per international standards as part of the NPS
reform strategy. In 2010, as part of the reform strategy the PCS Act and the GSD Act were
enacted. The PCS Act provides a legal basis for netting, finality and irrevocability of payments
and provides the BoJ with statutory powers of oversight over the payment and settlement
systems in Jamaica. The GSD Act provides the statutory basis for the immobilization and
dematerialization of Government and BoJ securities and enables their trading and settlement
in scripless form through electronic book-entry. In addition, the amended Section 27 of the
BoJ Act provides powers to BoJ to clear and settle payment obligations or payment messages
between financial institutions and reinforces oversight powers of the BoJ over the payments
and settlement systems in Jamaica.

29.     While cheques and bank drafts are defined under the Bills of Exchange Act, there
is no clear definition and legal recognition to electronic payment transfers in the existing
legislation. The PCS Act defines a transfer order8 in very broad terms and amended Section
27 of the BoJ Act makes a reference to the clearing and settlement of payment messages 9.
Taken together, these could be surmised as alluding to electronic payment transfer/payment
messages/orders, but it is not very clear.

30.    In respect of the corporate securities market, the legal framework in terms of the
Securities Act, 1993 needs to be amended to harmonize and strengthen it. Amendments to
the Securities Act, 1993 are required to provide a legal basis for the immobilization and

8
  Section 2 of the PCS Act defines transfer orders as “any instruction by a participant to place at the disposal of
a recipient an amount of money by means of a book entry on the accounts of a credit institution, settlement
agent or the Bank, or any instruction which results in the assumption or discharge of a payment obligation, or
any instruction by a participant to transfer the title to, or interest in a security, or securities by means of a book
entry on register or otherwise”.
9
  Amended Section 27 of the BoJ Act while defining a clearing and settlement system says that a “clearing and
settlement system or System means a system or arrangement for the clearing or settlement of a payment
obligations or payment messages”.
                                                     17



dematerialization of corporate securities. In addition, while the Act provides for the
establishment of a central securities depository for corporate securities, it does not contain any
legal provisions for the establishment of a securities settlement system (SSS) and a central
counterparty (CCP) for the corporate securities market10. A noteworthy feature in the Securities
Act is that it provides for the establishment of a Trust account under Section 36 whereby a
securities dealer has to open a trust account with a bank for depositing client funds which can
only be used for designated purposes as laid down in the Act.

31.     The Financial Services Commission established under the Financial Services
Commission Act 2001, has the regulatory and oversight powers over the corporate
securities market. Article 6 of the Financial Services Commission Act, lists out the
General duties and powers of the FSC. Article 6 provides powers to FSC to licence, regulate
and supervise financial institutions for the purpose of protecting customers of financial
services. To this end, FSC promotes the adoption of risk management practices by the boards
of financial institutions. FSC’s mandate also includes promoting public confidence and
transparency and emphasizes on the stable operations of the institutions in line with
international standards. The FSC is authorized to carry out annual examinations to determine
the regulated institutions’ compliance with the prescribed standards.

Recommendations

32.    The BoJ may obtain expert legal opinion as to whether the definition of transfer
order under the PCS Act and the reference to payment messages in Section 27 of the BoJ
Act can be construed as defining electronic payment/transfer order and whether these
provide a statutory basis for electronic transfers. The decision to amend any relevant laws
may be taken based on the expert legal opinion obtained.

Medium priority/Medium term

33.     The Securities Act, 1993 and regulations framed thereunder may be suitably
amended to provide a legal basis for (i) immobilization and dematerialization of
corporate securities; and (ii) for the functioning of a SSS and a CCP in the corporate
securities market. The FSC Act, 2001 should also be amended to specifically provide
statutory powers to the FSC to authorize the establishment of a SSS and CCP in the corporate
securities market and vest necessary regulatory oversight powers. In addition, legal opinion
may be obtained to ensure that the Securities Act and the FSC Act cover all the relevant
material aspects of a sound legal framework as laid down in Principle 1 of the Principles for
Financial Market Infrastructures.

High priority/Short term




10
  The Jamaican Central Securities Depository (JCSD) established under Part VIA of the Securities Act also acts
as a SSS and a CCP in addition to its statutory functions as a CSD.
                                                      18



       B. Large-value payment systems

34.      All systemically important payment systems and the funds leg of the securities
segments settle in central bank money in Jamaica, through the JamClear-RTGS system,
which is owned and operated by the BoJ. Implemented in February 2009, the JamClear-
RTGS system is a multi-currency system (JMD and USD) that enables real time funds transfer
on own account and third-party transfers in a gross mode between its members – the
commercial banks, primary dealers and other financial institutions. Transactions once settled
are final and irrevocable. Settlement of the funds leg in respect of Government and BoJ
securities takes place in the JamClear-RTGS in a DVP 1 mode through an interface between
the JamClear-RTGS and the JamClear CSD. In addition, the net settlement files from the retail
Automated Clearing House (ACH), the payment card switch MultiLink, and funds leg of the
capital market segment emanating from the Jamaica Central Securities Depository (JCSD) are
settled in it. The volume and value of transactions settled in JamClear-RTGS are given below.
Table 2: JamClear-RTGS – volume and value of transactions

            2012                            2013                           February 2014
            Volume     Value                Volume         Value           Volume     Value
                       (in millions)                       (in millions)              (in millions)
 JMD 214,689           13,308,755           249,265        14,179,723      26,598     1,518,976
 USD 5,742             2,387                6,810          1,958           2,561      1,201
 Total 220,431                              256,075                        29,159
Source: Bank of Jamaica

35.     The BoJ has a well laid down clear and transparent access policy 11 for
participation in JamClear RTGS. The policy framework lays emphasis on broadening access
to JamClear-RTGS to promote finality and irrevocability of payments, and improve the safety
and efficiency of the payment and settlement system. Entities licensed under the Bank of
Jamaica Act; Banking Act; Financial Institutions Act; Building Societies Act; and the
Payments Clearing and Settlement Act are eligible to access the JamClear-RTGS. In addition
entities such as securities dealers operating as Primary Dealers, Clearing houses and clients of
the BoJ such as the Government of Jamaica and the Jamaica Stock Exchange are also eligible
for access. The access criteria also permit direct and indirect participation. The total number
of direct participants is 21 and there are two indirect participants. The BoJ is also a participant
in the system.

36.    The types of services that participants can avail in JamClear-RTGS depend on
their activity profile. For example deposit taking institutions, primary dealers and the JCSD
have access to intraday liquidity facility from the BoJ and have settlement accounts in the
JamClear-RTGS system. Only deposit taking institutions are allowed to perform third-party
funds transfers for their customers. Clearing houses are only allowed to submit their net
settlement files for settlement in central bank money in JamClear-RTGS, but do not hold a
settlement account in JamClear-RTGS system. The net settlement file is settled on an “all or
none” basis and in the event of lack of balances in any member’s account, the file is returned

11
     JamClear-RTGS Access Policy, July, 2012, BoJ
                                                  19



to the sender, and the defaulting member’s position is unwound by the Clearing house and a
new net settlement file is resubmitted for settlement in JamClear-RTGS.

37.     The BoJ does not incur any credit risk when providing intraday liquidity (IDL)
facility to eligible participants in the system. The IDL is extended on a fully collateralized
basis and at the discretion of the BoJ. the participants have to repay the funds at the end of the
day. In the event that a participant fails to repay at the end of the day, the RTGS rules provide
for the collateral to be liquidated immediately by BoJ. Government Treasury Bills are taken as
collateral with a prescribed haircut to take care of market risk.

38.     The operating hours of the system are well defined with specified cut-off times for
various types of transactions. Priority is set for the BoJ transactions at the beginning of the
operating hours for transactions such as securities maturity proceeds and return leg of overnight
repos. This aids in adding liquidity to the system at the beginning of the day. Cut-off times are
prescribed for the net settlement batches emanating from the ACH and MultiLink systems.
Customer transactions are not accepted beyond the initial cut-off time of 16:20 hours. Inter-
participant transactions can happen till the final cut-off time at 16:45 hours. Thereafter, all
pending transactions are cancelled and the end-of-day operations take place.

39.     Payment orders are settled on a First-in-First-out basis, with a centralized
queuing mechanism. In the case of insufficient balances, the payment is queued and taken up
for processing later. Participants can assign priority to their payment messages. Multilateral
offsetting mechanism is used as a resolution algorithm, which is triggered at discrete intervals.
Participants have the option to cancel transactions in the queue pending settlement. Pricing
policy is used as an incentive by the BoJ to smoothen payment flows in the system. In addition,
participants have real time access to their settlement balances.

40.    RTGS messages are based on SWIFT MT standards. A proprietary communication
network is used for the transmission of messages. They are communicated through a
proprietary network, the Payments System Communication Network provided by the BoJ.

41.    In line with international best practices, the system has a Recovery Time Objective
(RTO) of 30 minutes, but it is not very clear whether this has been tested. Back-up servers
are available at the main site and a fully equipped alternate site exists. However, there is no
formally documented business continuity plan, nor has any testing been carried out.
Recommendations

42. The BoJ should amend Rule 7.7.6 of the RTGS participant rules12 which permits
the cancellation of a payment instruction by the sending participant, pending its
settlement. The BoJ should amend the rule to clearly define the time after which an unsettled
payment instruction may not be revoked by the sending participants as laid down in Principle
8 of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures. This would to a large extent help in
mitigating any liquidity risk.

12
     RTGS Participant Rules, BoJ, February 2009
                                                     20



High priority / short-term

43. The BoJ should immediately document and formally adopt a Business Continuity
Plan taking into account its own systems and the systems of participants. The BCP should
have arrangements including procedures for crisis management and information dissemination.
The BCP once finalized, should be regularly tested and reviewed. The BCP should also cover
other systems such as the JCSD and JamClear-CSD.
High priority/short-term

44. The IDL facility should be made available for settling the net settlement batch files
to enable their settlement on an “all or none” basis in JamClear-RTGS. The practice of
returning the file and its resubmission after unwinding the defaulting participant’s position, for
settlement to the JamClear-RTGS can create liquidity pressures for the other members in the
system and in extreme circumstances can lead to systemic risk.
High priority/short-term

     C. Retail payment systems and instruments

45. Compared to regional peer countries, Jamaica has one of the lowest outreach levels
in terms of the distribution of bank branches, ATMs and POS terminals13. There are 27
ATMs and 6 commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults in Jamaica, way behind the
Bahamas (74 and 35 respectively) or Antigua and Barbados (58 and 27 respectively).
According to the 2010 World Bank Global Payment Systems Survey, there were almost 5,000
POS terminals per million inhabitants in Jamaica, below 12,000 and 9,450 in Belize and
Trinidad and Tobago, respectively.

Figure 1. Outreach indicators in Jamaica and peer countries




Source: IMF FAS, 2012

46. Cash and cheques continue to remain the dominant payment modes, though there
are a range of retail electronic payments available. Although the usage of cheques has been
steadily declining by volume and value over the years, they still continue to remain the most
widely used non-cash payment instrument with Government welfare payments in cheques

13
   Towards the end of 2013, there were 112 bank branches, 33 building society branches and 444 remittance
company locations with 446 ATMs and 19,666 POS terminals in the island. ATMs and POS terminals are
largely concentrated in three parishes.
                                                  21



contributing significantly to cheque volumes. The range and usage of retail payment
instruments, including debit and credit cards, debit and credit transfers and funds transfers
within accounts in the same institution, bill payments and mobile top-ups has been increasing.
About 40 percent of the population has debit cards, and about 7 percent have credit cards. In
addition, two mobile payment projects initiated by non-bank service providers have been
approved to operate on a pilot basis providing bill payment and mobile air-time top-up services
to customers. Data on volume and value of transactions with various retail payment
instruments is given in the Table below.

Table 3: Retail Payments – volume and value of transactions in JMD

             2012                          2013                         February 2014
                          Value                         Value                      Value
             Volume                        Volume                       Volume
                           (in millions)                (in millions)               (in millions)
 Cheques     19,251,523   2,615,086        18,734,491   2,433,362       1,410,226 172,927
 Credit
             969,350      81,645           1,405,706    107,212         138,329     10,193
 transfers
 Direct
             443,599      9,545            461,650      8,151           15,039      487
 debits
 Debit
             55,706,312   404,189          58,673,799   463,965         4,793,130   38,994
 cards
 Credit
             18,420,827   152,352          20,672,283   183,961         1,690,805   15,481
 cards
 Total       94,791,611   3,262,816        99,947,929   3,196,650       8,047,529   238,083
Source: Bank of Jamaica

47. The retail payments infrastructure in Jamaica comprises an Automated Clearing
house (ACH) and two card switches – MultiLink and Q Net. There are 445 ATMs and
19,666 POS terminals in the country, with most of them largely concentrated in three parishes.
The details of these infrastructures are given in the subsequent paragraphs.

48. The Automated Clearing House (ACH) handles the clearing and settlement of JMD
denominated cheques, credit transfers and debit transfers. The ACH is owned by a
consortium of the seven commercial banks in Jamaica, which have formed a company – APL
Limited, with equal shareholding. The operation of the ACH has been outsourced by APL
Limited to another company – JETS. Governance arrangements and rules and regulations for
the ACH operations for the clearing and settlement process have been laid by the Jamaica
Clearing Bankers Association (JCBA), and the APL Limited is bound to follow the rules laid
down by the JCBA. The maximum value of a single transaction in the ACH has been capped
at JMD$ 2 million by the BoJ, in 2013. This has resulted in a decrease in the total value of
transactions processed by the ACH and at the same time ensuring that all higher value items
are cleared and settled in JamClear-RTGS.

49. Settlement of the net clearing position files of the ACH happen in central bank
money in the JamClear-RTGS system twice a day. The net settlement file is settled on an
“all or none” basis. In the event of lack of balances in a members settlement account in
JamClear-RTGS, the file is returned and the defaulting member’s position is unwound and the
file is resubmitted for settlement. Unwinding of the net settlement file can cause liquidity risks
                                               22



to the remaining participants and in extreme scenarios contribute to and exacerbate systemic
risk.

50. Access to the ACH is restricted to the seven commercial banks. Other significant
players in the retail payments arena such as building societies, credit unions and remittance
companies do not have any direct access to the ACH. This to a significant extent has hampered
their ability to provide various electronic retail payment products to their customers.

51. The Multilink is a payment card switch which clears and settles both ATM and
POS transactions. It is owned and operated by JETS which is owned by a consortium of four
commercial banks, two building societies and the Jamaica Credit Union League (JCUL). There
are 3 additional entities (2 commercial banks and 1 merchant bank) participating as licensed
issuers in the MultiLink system.

52. In order to mitigate settlement risk failure, JETS collects collateral in form of
pledged government securities equivalent to four days gross issuer positions for the peak
weekend period in the last year for each participant. The net settlement position file from
MultiLink is settled in the JamClear-RTGS system once a day at 11 am.

53. The JCUL owns a payment card switch which is operated by QNet an independent
technology company. The QNet is connected to the MultiLink system, thus ensuring
interoperability of the cards issued by the credit unions branded as “AccessPlus” amongst
ATMs and POS terminals across the country. The settlement of QNet card “off us” transactions
are done in MultiLink system, once a day at 11 am. “On us” transactions of the QNet cards are
settled on a multilateral net basis in the books of JCUL which holds the accounts of all the
credit unions.

Regulatory and policy framework developments

54. In order to facilitate financial inclusion and provide an impetus to the use of retail
electronic payments, the BoJ issued “Guidelines for Electronic Retail Payment Services”
in 2013. With this objective in mind, the Guidelines permit both non-banks and banks to
provide retail electronic payment services through agents. All such agents have to be approved
and licensed by the BoJ through a vetting process which includes the directors and officers of
the agent fulfilling fit and proper criteria amongst other requirements as prescribed by the BoJ.

55. In order to provide greater access to retail electronic payments, simplified KYC
requirements have been prescribed for users to avail services from non-bank service
providers in the Guidelines. Amongst others the Guidelines also prescribe the requirements
for authorization and outline the standards to be observed by authorized entities in providing
safe, efficient and reliable retail electronic payment services.

56. In order to protect customer funds in the event of bankruptcy of a non-bank
payment service provider, the Guidelines enjoin upon such entities to deposit the
customer funds in specialized trust accounts in deposit taking institutions regulated by
                                               23



the BoJ with bankruptcy remote provisions. These services are known as Custodian
Account Based Payment Services. Only banks are permitted to provide Customer Account
Based Payment Service, which allows customers to effect payments from their deposit
accounts held with the banks.

57. Exclusivity arrangements which hinder competition are not explicitly barred in the
Guidelines. Exclusivity arrangements are required to be submitted to the BoJ for prior
authorization, with the BoJ retaining the right to prohibit such arrangements in the interest of
development, access, and utilization of electronic retail payment services.

58. The BoJ has since received applications from 13 entities, interested to operate
electronic retail payment service, and has accorded “in principle” approval to two pilot
projects of non-bank payment service providers using mobile technology. In the pilot
phase bill payments and mobile air time top-up have been permitted. The final approval would
enable other services such as P2P and P2B payments.

Recommendations

59. The BoJ should frame an access policy for retail payments infrastructure in
consultation with various stakeholders. The access to the retail payment infrastructure in
Jamaica continues to be skewed and restrictive in nature, in the absence of any specific policy
framework initiatives and regulations by the BoJ. This has resulted in sub-optimal utilization
of the infrastructure with the concomitant effect of impeding the growth of retail electronic
payment products. For example, access to the ACH is restricted to the shareholders of APL
Limited i.e. the banks. Building societies and the JCUL do not have a direct participant access
to the ACH, though they have access to the card switches. Other significant players like
remittance companies can access any infrastructure only through a direct participant. This has
constrained the ability of the various stakeholders to leverage on the existing infrastructure to
promote retail electronic payment products.

High priority/short-term

60. Policy measures are required to be taken by the BoJ in consultation with all
stakeholders to deepen the payment infrastructure in the rural areas to provide a fillip
to the use of retail electronic payment products. To begin with, in consultation with the
Government and other stake holders, the possibility of locating ATMs in Post Offices could be
explored. In order to fully utilize ATM infrastructure (and not only for cash withdrawal and
balance enquiry as is largely done now), additional functionalities such as bill payments,
internet banking etc. should be operationalized to encourage the growth of cashless payments.

High priority/short-term

61. The BoJ may undertake an exercise to compile the fees and charges levied by banks
and other authorized entities for various payment services and products and publish the
                                              24



same on its website. This would foster transparency, competition and enable the consumers
to make educated choices.

High priority/short-term

62. The BoJ is encouraged to achieve the objectives of safety and efficiency by
prescribing policy guidelines to be followed by the remittance companies, non-bank
payment service providers, and banks (at a later stage), and devolve the responsibility of
appointing agents as per the prescribed policy framework on to the Principal authorized
entities. As a part of this exercise, the BoJ should take a comprehensive overview of its
regulatory framework for the appointment of agents and design a coordinated approach. While
it is recognized that a consensus on this needs to be evolved within the BoJ, as an interim
measure, steps may be taken to automate the process of authorization of agents and minimize
the use of paper. Oversight arrangements may be fine-tuned to achieve the objectives of safety
and efficiency in agency linked payment system arrangements.

High priority/short-term

63. Exclusivity arrangements may be explicitly barred to increase market penetration
and competitive prices for customers.
High priority/short-term

64. In providing its final approval to the two mobile wallet pilots, the BoJ should ensure
that the authorized entities adhere to interoperability and also prohibit any exclusivity
arrangements for agents.
High priority/short-term

65. The BoJ may develop and implement a policy framework for opening of “no frill”
accounts in banks for deepening financial access. As a reference point, the BoJ may take
into account the prescribed graded KYC requirements laid down in the case of Custodian
Account Based Payment Services under the Guidelines for Retail Electronic Payment Services.

High priority/short-term

66. Given the above reform agenda, the BoJ should establish a Working Group on
Retail Payments under the NPSC, with representation of all relevant stakeholders
including the Government, to develop a strategic Action Plan. Such a plan should focus on
optimal utilization of infrastructure through greater access to the participants and their
customers with a view to achieving and promoting greater usage of retail electronic payment
products. In addition, to ensure buy-in from all stakeholders, the BoJ is encouraged to include
remittance companies in the NPSC as a first step, and later Custodian Account Service
providers of payments.

High priority/short-term
                                               25



       D. Government payments and receipts

67. The Government has implemented a Centralized Treasury Management system
(CTMS), which went live in November 2012 with three ministries. By June 2013, it is
expected to cover all Ministries and Departments. Under this system, the multiple accounts of
the various ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) of the government have been
consolidated into a single treasury account within the BoJ. All MDAs access the system
through the CTMS web portal and upload their payment files (G2P and G2B), comprising
salary and vendor payments. The file is downloaded at the Accountant General’s (AG’s) office
and validation checks are conducted with regard to availability of budget, beneficiary bank
account number etc. The files are also split into G2P and G2B payment files and are then
uploaded to the BoJ payment gateway. BoJ releases the files either into the ACH (for all
payment orders up to JMD $2 million) or to the RTGS for higher value payment orders and
the accounts of the beneficiaries are credited.

68. Government benefit transfers are not part of the CTMS and continue to be paper
based and need to be migrated to retail electronic payments more effectively. The Ministry
of Social Security and Labour administers the Programme of Advancement through Health
and Education (PATH) which provides cash grants to various needier sections of society.
PATH payments are made by way of cheques drawn on a commercial bank which the
beneficiaries encash at local Post Offices. It is estimated that approximately 700,000 cheques
are issued per annum to more than 120,000 beneficiaries. In addition, the Ministry also
administers the National Insurance Scheme (NIS) which is a compulsory contributory funded
social security scheme. Pensions are paid through pension vouchers which can be encashed at
the post office selected by the pensioner or at any branch of the National Commercial Bank
(NCB), with each voucher representing payment for two weeks.

69. A small beginning in using pre-paid cards for PATH payments has been made but
the progress of migration to this instrument has been very slow. The beneficiaries can also
receive their welfare payments through KeyCash card (a branded pre-paid card of the NCB).
To date only 15,000 beneficiaries are using pre-paid cards. Some of the inhibiting factors for
the slow offtake are (i) the time taken in the approval process for a beneficiary to obtain a
KeyCash card; (ii) the lack of adequate number of cash-out points such as ATMs and agents
in rural areas. In addition, other major impediments are: (i) the beneficiaries not being able to
fulfill KYC requirements for opening a bank account to receive direct credits and (ii) banks
levying charges if the minimum balance is not maintained in the account.

70. Government revenue collections are largely cheque and cash based, though with
limited usage of cards. Domestic taxes such as stamp duty, property tax, income tax, general
consumption tax, vehicle registration fees etc. can be paid at 29 tax offices nation-wide through
cash, cheques and debit and credit cards. Payments can also be made online through the Tax
Administration Jamaica (TAJ) web portal14 though by using only credit cards. Taxes can also
be paid directly to the bank account of TAJ. The tax payer after effecting the transfer through

14
     https://www.jamaicatax-online.gov.jm
                                                26



his bank has to send a Direct Banking Payment Advice containing the details of the transfer
(amount and type of tax) and his TRN. The receipt can be picked up after 24 hours from any
one of the offices indicated by the tax payer in the Banking Payment Advice. Customs duties
and taxes are also largely paid through cash and cheques at the Customs Department Offices
and at post Offices for imported postal packages.

Recommendations

71. The Government should develop a comprehensive strategy to reduce
administrative costs and improve efficiency of the direct benefit transfer schemes such as
PATH and NIS through retail electronic payment products. The strategy should be drawn
up in coordination with the BoJ and other stakeholders for bringing about a shift in G2P
payments to electronic payment modes within a defined time frame. The contours of such a
strategy should encompass amongst others: (i) streamlining the approval process for a
beneficiary to obtain a KeyCash card; (ii) enabling cash-outs at Post offices through KeyCash
cards; (iii) simplifying the KYC requirements for opening a “no frills” bank account to enable
beneficiaries to receive benefits their benefits into their bank accounts; and (iv) fully leveraging
upon the CTMS application for effecting transfers directly to bank accounts of beneficiaries.
As part of the strategy and as part of the BoJ supervision and oversight functions, BoJ should
use moral suasion and its statutory powers for putting a stop to restrictive practices such as
charging for balances falling below the minimum thresholds prescribed.

High priority/medium term

72. The functionalities of the web portal of Tax Administration Jamaica should be
enhanced to enable it to accept payments made through credit cards and through online
banking, including providing the receipt online to the tax payers. To this end, a Task Force
may be constituted to work out the modalities of the scheme including the collection of customs
duties.

High priority/medium term

   E. Securities clearing and settlement systems

       Government securities

73. BoJ is the designated public debt manager of the Government as laid down in
Section 38 of the BoJ Act, 1960. In addition, BoJ issues its own securities in the form of
Certificates of Deposits (CDs) for conducting its open market operations (which also
involves the purchase and sale of government securities).

74. The Government Securities Dematerialisation Act, 2010 (GSD Act) provides the
statutory basis for the immobilization and dematerialization of Government and BoJ
securities and enables their trading and settlement in scripless form through electronic
book-entry.
                                                     27




75. Government securities comprise Treasury Bills and bonds. Treasury bills are issued
in tenors of 1, 3 and 6 months. The tenor of bonds ranges from 1 to 27 years. The bonds
comprise JMD$ Fixed rate and Variable notes; US$ denominated debt; US$ benchmark bonds
and CPI Indexed bonds. As at the end of the financial year 2013/14, the largest component of
the domestic debt portfolio15 was made up of Fixed rate notes at 41.1%, followed by Variable
rate notes at 32.7%. The US dollar Benchmark and CPI-Indexed Bonds represented 6.9% and
3.9% respectively. Merchant Banks, Trust Companies and Brokers were major holders of GOJ
securities accounting for 23.0%. In addition, Insurance companies’ holdings constituted
21.4%, which was followed by the Bank of Jamaica and other public sector entities which
accounted for 21.3% and Other Institutions which comprised 11.0%. The Government
borrowed from the PetroCaribe Development Funds during FY2013/14, and did not tap the
domestic markets for its borrowing needs. The Government also implemented the National
Debt Exchange (NDX)16 programme, to increase the maturity profile of its outstanding debt
and decrease its interest burden.

76. Government T-bills are issued in physical form and are not dematerialized. The
primary auction process is semi-automated with bids being received through fax or by
mail. The auction module is a proprietary application of the BoJ which has not yet been
integrated with the JamClear-RTGS system. Settlement occurs on a T+2 basis. The process of
developing an integrated module is underway.

77. The BoJ issues CDs as a tool for conducting its open market operations. It issues a
regular 30 day CD in Jamaican dollars and a longer term Variable rate CD in JMD for a tenor
of 6 to 18 months. BoJ also issues US$ Indexed loans for tenors of 6 to 12 months and foreign
currency CDs with maturities ranging from 2 to 5 years.

78. The JamClear-CSD implemented in May 2009, is the central securities depository
for sovereign and BoJ securities. It is owned and operated by the BoJ. The interface between
the JamClear RTGS and the JamClear CSD enables the settlement of securities trades in DVP
1 model, thereby mitigating principal risk. The CSD is an electronic registry of holders of debt
and money market instruments issued by the Government of Jamaica and the Bank of Jamaica,
respectively.

79. Participants in the JamClear-CSD are 7 commercial banks, 11 primary dealers 17,
and 33 secondary dealers18. While commercial banks and primary dealers can be members
of the JamClear-CSD and JamClear-RTGS systems, secondary dealers can only be members
of the JamClear-CSD. Secondary dealers settle their payment obligations through a
15
   Source: Public Debt Management Annual Report, FY 2013-14, Ministry of Finance and Planning,
Government of Jamaica http://www.mof.gov.jm/sites/default/files/publications/dmbar_2013-2014.pdf
16
   The NDX extended the maturity profile of the domestic portfolio by approximately five years and reduced
interest rates by 200 basis points (bps). Source
http://www.mof.gov.jm/sites/default/files/publications/dmbar_2013-2014.pdf
17
   Security dealers licensed by the Financial Services Commission (FSC) and designated as Primary dealers by
BoJ.
18
   Secondary dealers are licenses by FSC but who are not designated as Primary dealers by BoJ.
                                                      28



commercial bank which is a member of the JamClear-RTGS system. Primary dealers and
secondary dealers are permitted to hold proprietary positions and also trade on behalf of their
clients. Banks on the other hand can only hold proprietary positions.

80. JamClear-CSD has a segregated account structure in line with international
standards. It holds segregated accounts for each participant’s proprietary holdings known as
“Own account” and for their clients designated as “Client accounts”. All beneficial rights of
ownership are defined at the client account level, thereby protecting the customers in the event
of bankruptcy of the participant.

81. BoJ JamClear-CSD has clear and transparent participant rules19. The participant
rules define the roles and responsibilities of the participants, the operator of the systems, the
issuers and the overseer. The operating rules and the governance arrangements for JamClear-
CSD are clearly spelt out in the rules. There is however no mention in the governance
arrangements with regard to periodicity of reconciliation of securities balances and other
practices to ensure the integrity of the securities issues.

82. Efforts are underway to fine-tune the roadmap for phasing out retail repos. Retail
repo is an instrument used by retail customers to invest in Government securities through
brokers. The legal and regulatory framework for this instrument is not well defined. While the
retail investor parts with his funds, the underlying securities are not registered in the names of
the beneficial owners. With the IMF technical assistance, and in consultation with the sector,
as a first step, the authorities plan to submit for consultation to the industry the legal and
regulatory framework to establish a Trust to hold the underlying securities on behalf of the
retail repo clients’. The framework is expected to be in place by end June 2014.

           Corporate securities

83. The Jamaica Stock Exchange (JSE) was established as a private limited company
in 1969 and was demutualized in 2008. The JSE is licensed by the Financial Services
Commission (FSC) under the Securities Act. It is governed by a Board of Directors comprising:
the Governor of BoJ or his nominee; a representative from the Ministry of Finance; 3
independent members other than seat holders; and up to ten seat holders representing members.

84. Since its demutualization it has a regulatory division which reports to a committee
of the Board -the Regulatory and Market Oversight Committee (RMOC). The RMOC is
a committee of the Board comprising the independent Directors on the Board and is headed by
the Deputy Governor, BoJ. All decisions of the RMOC are final and binding on the JSE. The
RMOC provides a monthly report to the Board of the JSE. The RMOC interacts with the FSC
and seeks its approval for any amendments to the rules.

85. The JSE has four market segments: Main, Junior, US equity and corporate bonds.
The Main market comprises companies with a larger capital base, while companies in the

19
     JamClear-CSD Participant Rules, BoJ, June 2011 http://www.boj.org.jm/pdf/CSD_rules.pdf
                                                   29



Junior market have a threshold of JMD$ 500 million as their capital. Put together the total
number of shares listed comprising the Main and Junior markets is 55. There is one US equity
listed on the JSE. Corporate bonds segment was reintroduced in July 2013 and currently 2
bonds are listed.

86. Trading takes place on an exchange driven screen based trading platform, through
broker members. There are 12 broker members who are licensed by the FSC. Retail clients
execute their buy and sell orders through the brokers. The daily average trading volume is
around 75 trades for an approximate value of JMD$ 4.5 million in the Main market and around
25 trades for an approximate value of JMD$0.5 million in the Junior market.

87. Trades are settled on a DvP 3 basis on T+3 with the funds settlement happening in
central bank money in the JamClear-RTGS system. Buying brokers have to make their
funds pay-in by 10.30 am on settlement day, with funds pay-out to the selling brokers
happening at 12 noon. Once the funds settlement is complete, securities are delivered to the
buying broker.

88. The Jamaican Central Securities Depository (JCSD) is a fully owned subsidiary of
the JSE and is licensed by the FSC as a Central Securities Depository under the Securities
Act. Physical securities are immobilized by JSCD and trading takes place based on the creation
of a “Jumbo certificate” – a global note. At any point of time, the Jumbo certificate represents
the total value of a particular issue which has been custodized and is immobilized at the JCSD
and does not represent the total issue size.

89. In line with international best practices, the JCSD does a daily reconciliation of the
trades done with the Jumbo certificate balances. Internal audit of the JCSD custodial
operations is carried out twice a year. An external audit is conducted once a year.

90. The JCSD has a segregated account structure reflecting beneficial ownership
details. Retail investors open accounts in JCSD through their brokers. However, this aspect of
segregation and ownership is not very clear as it is stated in the public domain that the “JCSD
registers the stock in its nominee name, in this case the JCSD limited”20.

91. The JCSD also functions as a securities settlement system (SSS), facilitating the
transfer of securities through an electronic book-entry system and as a central
counterparty (CCP) which novates and guarantees all trades. The legal basis for the JCSD
to act as a SSS and CCP is not defined under the extant legal provisions. The current provisions
of the Securities Act do not provide a legal basis for novation.

92. There are no specific risk management provisions governing the activities of the
JCSD as a CCP. The recourse that is currently available is that in the event of a settlement
failure, is that JCSD can draw on a line of credit from the National Commercial Bank, and
avail IDL facility from the BoJ to complete the settlement and in a worst case scenario would

20
     http://www.jamstockex.com/controller.php?action=jcsd
                                              30



have to utilize its capital and reserves. There have been no specific studies done to ascertain
whether the current measures are adequate to take care of default of the participant with the
single largest debit position.

Recommendations

93. The BoJ should take should take necessary measures in consultation and
coordination with the Government for the dematerialization of Treasury bills. In
addition, the process of developing an integrated primary auction module may be expedited
and implemented.

Medium priority/medium-term

94. The BoJ should take necessary measures to ensure that JamClear-CSD functions
with robust audit and accounting arrangements in compliance with Principle 11 of the
PFMIs. These include putting in place appropriate rules, procedures, and controls, including
robust accounting practices, and conducting periodic and at least daily reconciliation of
securities issues and balances that are held in its books of accounts.

High priority/short-term

95. The JCSD may obtain legal opinion and place it in the public domain clarifying the
details of beneficial ownership and segregation of securities held in its custody, in view of
the conflicting claims made on its website. This would serve customer interests and aid in
transparency.

High priority/short-term

96. The legal basis for the JCSD to act as a SSS and CCP is not available under the
extant legal provisions. The Securities Act would have to be amended for this purpose.
As amending the law may take time, as an interim measure FSC may obtain a legal opinion as
to whether JCSD could continue to function as a SSS or CCP under any relevant contractual
arrangement recognized under the law, with relevant risk management provisions.

High priority/short-term

97. The JCSD should undertake a study based on historical data whether the line of
credit, IDL facility and its capital and reserves are sufficient to take care of the default
of the participant with the single largest debit in the system and share the results with
the FSC. In the event, that the extant measures are insufficient, JCSD in consultation with FSC
may introduce appropriate risk management measures such as collateral and margins, with a
clearly defined water-fall approach to take care of defaults.

High priority/short-term
                                                     31




98. The JCSD as a measure of transparency should publish its audited balance sheet,
independent of JSE to enable the overseers to determine its sound financial footing, given
the multifarious tasks and its systemic importance to the financial stability of the
Jamaican economy.

High priority/short-term

     F. Interbank money market

99. There is a collateralized interbank money market in operation in Jamaica, but
details regarding the same in terms of volumes and values transacted are not available.
Anecdotally, it has been gathered that very few trades happen. It is an OTC market. The
collateral can be in the form of GoJ, BoJ, corporate bonds and foreign securities.

100. There is an OTC interbank foreign exchange market in which the participants are
commercial banks, building societies and merchant banks who are licensed by BoJ as
Authorized dealers. On an average an amount of US$ 40 million is transacted in the market.
Both JMD$ and US$21 legs of the transaction are settled in the JamClear-RTGS system.

101. All trades have to be reported to the ‘e-gate’ system of BoJ by the end of day at 3.30
pm. BoJ publishes the weighted average exchange rate of the JMD$ based on the trades
reported to “e-gate” and publishes the same on its website on a daily basis.

Recommendations

102. The BoJ may draw up suitable action plans to revitalize the interbank money
market as it is an important source of liquidity to the participants in the system. It is
gathered that BoJ is already engaged in this exercise and that discussions are being held with
the market participants.

Medium term/medium priority

103. The BoJ is encouraged to take up suitable measures for implementing the
recommendations made by an IMF Technical Assistance team on the measures needed
to be taken to make the interbank foreign exchange market more transparent and
vibrant. Amongst others, the recommendations include: (i) issuance of price-discovery data
on exchange rate on an intra-day basis; (ii) enhancements to the e-gate system to make it a web
based application; and (iii) developing a trading platform for FX transactions.

Medium term/medium priority


21
  The US$ dollar balances reflected in the accounts in the JamClear-RTGS system represent the actual US$
balances in the Nostro account of BoJ.
                                                       32



       G. International remittances

104. Cross-border inward remittances are a very important source of income for the
economy of Jamaica. At end-2013, remittances constituted about 13 percent of Jamaica’s
GDP. Remittance transfers come mainly from the US, the UK, and Canada. The remittances
are largely small value in nature with the average value of a remittance being US$200.00.

105. The bulk of remittance inflows into Jamaica are received through the remittance
companies. As can be seen from the table below, of the total of US$ 1730 million received in
remittances the bulk of the remittances amounting to US$1478 million were received through
remittance companies during the fiscal year 2013/14.

Table 4: Jamaica’s Remittances




Source: Bank of Jamaica

106. Jamaica has 8 remittance companies which have 444 remittance locations across
the country. Remittance companies and their sub-agents are licensed by BoJ under Section 22
of the BoJ Act. The licensing requirements for operating a remittance service in Jamaica are
available on the website of the BoJ.22 Remittance companies and their sub-agents have to fulfill
the requirements of fit and proper criteria as part of the licensing requirements in order to
undertake remittance business in Jamaica. The licensing requirements for sub-agents are
onerous and it takes about 3 to 6 months on an average to obtain a license from the BoJ. All
licenses are renewed on an annual basis by the BoJ.


22
     http://www.boj.org.jm/pdf/remittance_requirements.pdf
                                                       33



107. The remittance companies have to adhere to the “Operating directions for
remittance companies”.23 The operating directions designate remittance companies in
Jamaica as “primary agents”, where they have a tie-up with an overseas remittance services
provider. In addition, the operating directions list out the requirements that have to be fulfilled
in terms of providing: (i) the details of the overseas service provider, primary agent and sub-
agents; (ii) maintenance of transaction records and their submission to the BoJ; (iii) disclosure
of fees and conversion rates to the beneficiary on the transaction slips; (iv) settlement account
arrangements. The directions specifically prohibit in-bound cross-border remittances through
stored-value cards. All in-bound remittances have to be properly accounted for and pay-outs
can happen either through cash or through credit to a bank account, which is afforded upon a
written request from the recipient to the remittance company.

108. The directions do not explicitly bar exclusivity arrangements for primary agents
and sub-agents. This has led to exclusivity arrangements being put in place by the overseas
service provider on primary agents and by primary agents on their sub-agents, stifling market
competitiveness and resulting in de facto monopolies with higher remittance costs. The average
percentage costs of sending remittances into Jamaica by the Jamaican diaspora are significantly
higher than the global average percentage costs.24

109. The remittance companies do not have any direct access to the domestic payments
infrastructure, as for example direct participation in the ACH. During discussions, it was
revealed that banks in most cases impose conditionalities on remittance companies in
providing indirect access to the domestic payments system infrastructure. This in turn has also
led to higher costs to the customers.

Recommendations

110. As stated elsewhere, BoJ should take a comprehensive overview of its regulatory
framework for the appointment of sub-agents and design a coordinated approach. The
current regulatory framework for licensing of sub-agents is quite onerous and time consuming.
The BoJ is encouraged to achieve the objectives of safety and efficiency by prescribing policy
guidelines to be followed by the remittance companies, and devolve the responsibility of
appointing agents as per the prescribed policy framework on to the primary agents.

High priority/short-term

111. The BoJ is encouraged to revisit its regulations to be in line with the General
Principles for Remittances. As stated in the General Principles of Remittances (CPSS and

23
     http://www.boj.org.jm/pdf/remittance_guidelines.pdf
24
  The average percentage costs of sending a US $ 200 remittance to Jamaica is higher than the global
average percentage cost of 8.36%. The average percentage costs are higher in respect of Canada to
Jamaica corridor at 10.83% and in the UK to Jamaica corridor at 12.83%. In the case of USA to
Jamaica corridor the average percentage cost trends a bit lower than the global average at 7.65%.
(Source: Remittance Prices Worldwide, issue nO.9, March 2014, Payment Systems Development
Group, World Bank).
                                                34



World Bank, 2007)25 the relatively small values involved in remittance transfers mean
that it is unlikely that these would pose a systemic risk. However, it is necessary to
acknowledge that remittance companies face the possibility of financial, legal, operational,
fraud and reputational risks. Accordingly, General Principle 5 recognizes that remittance
services should be supported by appropriate governance and risk management practices. Such
governance and risk management practices need to be proportionate for the size and type of a
remittance service provider’s (RSP) business and the level of risks can improve the safety and
soundness of remittance services and help protect consumers.

High priority/short-term

112. The BoJ may explicitly ban exclusivity arrangements. As stated elsewhere above,
exclusivity arrangements stifle market competitiveness and lead to de facto monopolies.
Exclusivity conditions can pose particular difficulties, especially where an exclusivity clause
would mean that an agent retail outlet would be able only provide a single remittance service.
This is particularly important in receiving countries if a local market such as a small village
has only one potential agent (e.g. the local shop) so that there is only one remittance service
available if an exclusivity condition is allowed to be in operation and result in higher remittance
costs.

High priority/short-term

113. The BoJ should consider carrying out a study weighing the costs and benefits of
allowing remittance companies to be direct participants in the domestic payments system
infrastructure. The study should take into account the conditions that banks may impose on
non-bank RSPs in providing indirect access to the domestic payments system infrastructure,
which in some cases could result in higher costs and confer undue advantages to the direct
participants.

High priority/short-term

114. There is a need to have in place policy measures by the BoJ to target the remittance
proceeds to be deposited in bank accounts as a first step towards financial inclusion.

Medium priority/medium term
      H. Payment system oversight

115. The Payment Clearing and Settlement Act,26 2010 provides explicit oversight
powers to the BoJ on all payment systems operating in Jamaica. The Act is quite elaborate
in defining the powers of the BoJ to regulate clearing and settlement systems, prevents judicial
stay of decisions taken under the Act, creation of a National Payments System Council,


25
     http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss76.htm
26
     http://www.boj.org.jm/pdf/PCSA%20ACT.pdf
                                                      35



prescribes offences and penalties and provides the BoJ with the powers to issue guidelines and
regulations.

116. The objective of the oversight function as stated in the Payments System Oversight
Policy27 document is to ensure the safety and efficiency of the national payment system
in Jamaica, through: (i) preventing or controlling systemic risk; (ii) fostering fair access to the
payments systems for market participants; (iii) promoting competition in the payment services
market; (iv) protecting consumer interest; and (v) fostering co-operation with other regulators.
The above objectives are sought to be achieved through an explicit commitment to comply
with and adhere to international standards such as the Principles for Financial Market
Infrastructures and the General Principles for international remittance services. In accordance
with the above objectives, the oversight policy document outlines the scope, approach, guiding
principles and standards, and the tools of oversight.

117. The scope of oversight covers all existing payment, clearing and settlement systems
operating in Jamaica and the payment channels and instruments that are offered via
these systems28. These include systems owned and operated by the BoJ and other entities.

118. BoJ has adopted a risk based approach for conducting oversight and has identified
the necessary tool-kit for the same. It has accordingly classified systems as in order of
potential risk and systemic importance as: (i) Systemically Important Payments systems
(SIPS); (ii) Systemically Important Retail Payment Systems (SIRPS); (iii) Prominently
Important Retail Payment Systems; and (iv) Other systems, the disruption of which could
undermine public confidence in the entire payment system. The oversight tool-kit amongst
others includes: (i) data collection and analysis on all system activities; (ii) on-site inspections;
(iii) periodic assessment of systems against international standards; (iv) collaboration with all
stakeholders; (v) cooperation with other regulators; (v) inducing change through remedial
measures; and (vi) imposing sanctions where necessary.

119. In line with the above approach, and to aid in transparency, the BoJ policy
guidelines are available in the public domain on its website. The policy guidelines pertain
to: (i) the JamClear-RTGS access policy rules29 (July, 2012); (ii) JamClear-CSD Participant
rules30 (February, 2011); and (iii) the Guidelines for Retail electronic payment services31
(permitting non-bank service providers to provide payment services - February, 2013).

120. The Financial Services Commission (FSC) is an omnibus regulator for the
securities, insurance and private pension industry. The FSC draws its powers to regulate
the corporate securities market from the Securities Act and the FSC Act. Through powers

27
   http://www.boj.org.jm/pdf/Payments_System_Oversight_Policy.pdf
28
   The systems include: (i) JamClear-RTGS; (ii) JamClear-CSD; (iii) ACH; (iv) Multilink; and (v) all non-cash
payment systems, services and instruments that are offered in Jamaica.
29
   http://www.boj.org.jm/pdf/JamClear_RTGS_Access_Policy.pdf
30
   http://www.boj.org.jm/pdf/CSD_rules.pdf
31
   http://www.boj.org.jm/uploads/news/guidelines_for_electronic_retail_payments_services_-
_1_february_2013.pdf
                                                      36



derived from the Securities Act, the FSC regulates the stock market, the JSE and the JCSD. In
addition, the FSC oversees the licensing, registration, capital adequacy and conduct of
securities dealers, investment advisors, securities dealers representatives, investment advisors
representatives, mutual funds and unit trusts. The FSC is also designated under the statute to
handle all customer grievances related to the securities, insurance and pension industries. The
FSC is a member of IOSCO and is committed to implement the international standards
“Objectives and Principles of Securities Regulation” (Principles). 32

121. The FSC’s governance structure consists of a Board of Commissioners with a
Chairman, and up to 9 other Commissioners. The Commissioners, who are appointed by
the Minister of Finance, choose one amongst themselves as an Executive Director. The
Executive Director is the only full time Commissioner and he is responsible for managing the
activities of the Commission.

Recommendations

122. Given its commitment to comply with international standards, the BoJ should
undertake a self-assessment of the FMIs owned and operated by it as laid down in the
PFMIs. The BoJ should use the Assessment Methodology33 for the self-assessment and
publish the same as indicated in Principle 23 of the PFMIs.

High priority/medium term

123. In order to foster and transparency and competition in the market, BoJ is
encouraged to compile a database of the fees and charges being charged by payment
service providers (both banks and non-banks) and make it available in the public domain.
Illustratively, the database could contain charges for various payment services such as cheque
collection; ATM usage fees (own bank ATM and other bank ATM); fees for direct credits and
debits; etc.

High priority/short-term

124. As indicated elsewhere, the BoJ should establish a Working Group on Retail
Payments under the NPSC, with representation of all relevant stakeholders including the
Government, to develop a strategic Action Plan for promoting electronic retail payments
and aiding financial inclusion.
High priority/short-term

125. BoJ is encouraged to undertake a review of the adequacy of the human resources
engaged in the discharge of the oversight function. The review would help BoJ in assessing
the resources with a view to fulfilling its oversight mandate as laid down in the Payment

32
   The FSC is also a member of IOPS and IAIS, the international standard setting organisations for Pension
Supervisors and Insurance Supervisors, respectively.
33
   http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss106.htm
                                               37



Clearing and Settlement Act, 2010. This would also help in furthering its objective of ensuring
a safe and efficient national payment system in Jamaica as outlined in the Oversight Policy
document and enable it to effectively exercise its mandate.

Medium priority/short-term

126. FSC may obtain a legal opinion as to whether the JCSD could continue to function
as a SSS or CCP under any relevant contractual arrangement recognized under the law,
with relevant risk management provisions, pending amendments to the Securities Act.
As indicated elsewhere, the FSC has licensed the JCSD as a central securities depository in
terms of Section 59 of the Securities Act. In addition to its role as a central securities
depository, the JCSD also functions as SSS and a CCP.

High priority/short-term

127. FSC should mandate the JSCD to undertake an individual self-assessment as a
CSD, as a SSS and as a CCP using the Assessment Methodology34 for the self-assessment
and publish the same as indicated in Principle 23 of the PFMIs. The self-assessment should
be reviewed by the FSC and suitable remedial measures in furthering prudent and effective
risk management guidelines should be prescribed with a defined time frame for compliance by
the JCSD.

High priority/short-term

128. The FSC is encouraged to undertake a comprehensive legal review of the various
provisions under the Securities Act, to provide a robust legal basis for the safe and
efficient functioning of the securities market, as laid down in Principle 1 of the principles
for Financial market Infrastructures. Illustratively, while a central counterparty is defined and
recognized under the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act, it is not under the Securities Act.

129. The FSC should mandate the JCSD to obtain a legal opinion and place it in the
public domain clarifying the details of beneficial ownership and segregation of securities
held in its custody, in view of the conflicting claims made on its website. This would serve
customer interests and aid in transparency.

High priority/short-term

130. The FSC may implement the recommendations of the IMF technical assistance
mission with regard to the interim arrangements for protecting investor rights under a
Trust.



34
     http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss106.htm
                                              38



High priority/short-term

   I. Cooperation with stakeholders and other relevant authorities

131. The National Payments System Council (NPSC) has been in existence since 2006
and spearheaded the payment systems reform in Jamaica. It acquired a legal basis with
the enactment of the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act in 2010. The NPSC has
spearheaded and guided the implementation of the reforms and modernization of the payment
and settlement systems in Jamaica comprising among other initiatives the JamClear-RTGS,
JamClear-CSD, ACH and the drafting of the PSC Act. The NPSC with the Governor of the
BoJ is currently constituted as a statutory body under Section 23 of the Payment Clearing and
Settlement Act, 2010. The NPSC meets on a quarterly basis.

132. The membership of the NPSC comprises various stakeholders such as banks,
building societies, credit unions, securities dealers, the FSC, the JSE, the ACH operator, the
Bankers Association, and the Ministry of Finance. The Office of Utility Regulation (OUR),
the regulator for telecom companies is an invitee to the NPSC. Remittance companies however
are not members of the NPSC.

133. The NPSC constitutes Working Groups on various issues related to payment and
settlement systems. However, there has been no dedicated Working Group constituted for
retail payments and the financial inclusion aspects with specific reference to the role that
payment systems can play in enhancing financial inclusion.

134. The BoJ and the FSC cooperate with each other through mutual information and
sharing of expertise. For example, the BoJ is actively involved in the discussions regarding
establishing a trust arrangement for retail repos which is an instrument under the supervision
of the FSC. It has also been gathered that a Memorandum of Understanding has been executed
between the BoJ and the FSC.

Recommendations

135. Given the significant role played by remittance companies in the remittances
market, the BoJ is encouraged to bring on board remittance companies as members of
the NPSC. At a later stage, the membership of the NPSC could be extended to Custodian
Account Service providers authorized by BoJ to provide payment services. Such a broad basing
of membership of the NPSC will help in evolving a more holistic strategy in the development
of retail electronic payments and encourage the optimal usage of the domestic payments
infrastructure in this regard.

High priority/short-term

136. The BoJ should establish a Working Group on Retail Payments under aegis of the
NPSC, with representation of all relevant stakeholders including the Government, to
develop a strategic Action Plan. The plan should have definite time lines of implementation
                                                       39



for the greater usage of retail electronic payment products in a safe and efficient manner at
affordable prices to foster financial inclusion.

High priority/medium-term

IV.      CREDIT REPORTING SYSTEMS

     A. Overview

137. Credit to the private sector in Jamaica is mostly provided by 6 commercial banks,
3 merchant banks, 3 building societies, 37 credit unions and a large number of more than
10035 microfinance institutions.36 While commercial banks, merchant banks and building
societies that take deposit from the public are regulated by the BoJ, there is an array of
additional institutions that operate in the form of companies registered at the Companies Office
Registrar and that provide credit to consumers and micro small and medium enterprises
(MSMEs). In addition, many appliances and other consumer goods are financed by hire-
purchase companies that offer such products, in particular two retailers broadly established in
the country. Most of the commercial lending is provided by the largest banks in the country,
while all banks compete in the retail segment (credit and loans facilitated to consumers, sole
traders and micro enterprises) with credit unions, microfinance institutions, retailers and
money lenders. In terms of lending to SMEs, most of the lending is either provided through
secured loans or based on the credit history of the main owner of the SME. The market
perceives the availability of information for the evaluation of SMEs as available but not easily
accessible and very costly.

138. The credit reporting system in Jamaica is composed of three credit bureaus.
CreditInfo Jamaica (CIJ) is participated by Creditinfo Group and Coalesce Credit Solutions, a
local credit solutions company, CRIF is participated by CRIF Italy and Neal & Massey a
conglomerate from Trinidad &Tobago, both licensed in 2012. In addition, a third credit bureau,
Credit Information Services, was licensed in 2014, but has not yet started operations. There is
no credit registry in Jamaica, although BoJ has plans to develop a comprehensive financial
information data collection system for prudential oversight purposes. Finally, there is no
commercial credit reporting system in the country offering financial information on lending
between companies. Two credit bureaus started operations in 2013 and, although they offered
credit reports, data gathering from key creditors still presents a challenge. Figure 1 depicts the
information flow in Jamaica based on signed contracts between service providers and CIPs and
service providers and third party data providers. In total, credit information contained in the
credit bureaus represents 6.2% of the population in Jamaica37.

139. There are a number of additional data sources that are relevant to the evaluation
of the credit behavior of consumers in Jamaica. In particular, the Company Office of
35
   20 microfinance institutions have already requested an exemption to the Ministry of Finance to participate in
the Credit Bureaus.
36
    As of December 2014. There is also a development bank.
37
   This calculation is based on total population of 2.7 million using data facilitated by BoJ on April 2014.
                                                 40



Jamaica (CoJ) contains information regarding: (i) the name of companies; (ii) sector of activity;
(iii)status and legal establishment; (iv) main shareholders, and; (v) years of activity. The future
Collateral Registry at the CoJ can provide relevant information on the type of collateral, value
of the collateral and date of notice as well as number of searches that could be offered to the
CIPS through the Credit Bureaus in an efficient manner. Also, information from Jamaica
Public Service on payment pattern of their 600,000 consumers, including: (i) amount and (ii)
date of payment on a monthly basis in addition to identification information is a relevant source
of data to credit bureaus. The National Water Commission also holds information on 450,000
consumers which, with some additional data cleansing to their databases, could be very useful
to lenders. The tax authorities hold information on the tax registration number that serves to
validate the TRNs provided to the credit bureaus by the CIPs. Finally, information from
telecommunication service providers are also potential sources of data to the credit bureaus.

140. Figure 2 shows the flow of information amidst the various providers of credit
information and the users of that information. Usually, the users are also the source of the
information, i.e. creditors share their portfolio information in order to receive back that
information processed and filtered to determine their credit granting strategies, or to monitor
their portfolio quality. Credit reporting service providers are in charge of adding value to
information collected through the development of scoring and forecasting tools to improve the
degree of prediction of the information, thus helping the decision of users in granting new loans
or following up the current borrowers’ portfolio.

Figure 2 Credit information flow in Jamaica

   Data Providers                      Service Providers             Products           Users


  Banks (5)
  Building Societies (3)
  Merchant Banks (2)                                                Credit report
                                                           (-/+)
  Credit Unions (7)
  Micro-lenders (5)                     CRIF
  Hire Purchase (0)                                                      Credit
                                        (2012)                          Scoring
  Insurance companies (2)
  Telecoms (0)
  Utilities (0)                                                                        Consumers
  Others (2)                                                                          Hire-Purchase
                                        CoJ                                           Micro-lenders
  Banks (7)                                                                           Credit Unions
  Building Societies (3)                                                                  Banks
  Merchant Banks ()                                                                      Retailers
  Credit Unions (7)
  Micro-lenders (10)                                       (-/+)      Credit report
  Hire Purchase (0)                      Creditinfo
  Insurance companies (0)                 Jamaica
  Telecoms (0)                                                        Affordability
                                           (2012)
  Utilities (0)
  Others (2)
        Source: Author’s elaboration based on mission findings, July 2014
                                                       41




141. The main legal aspects of credit reporting activities in Jamaica are covered under
the Credit Reporting Act (2010). The BoJ issues regulation on certain rules contained in the
CRA that require further elaboration (e.g. January 2014 Consumer Disclosure Order),38 while
the legal framework is complemented by general laws including The Bank of Jamaica Act of
1960, The Banking Act of 1992, The Financial Institutions Act of 1992, the Building Societies
Act of 1997, the Bank of Jamaica Building Societies Regulations of1995, the Co-operatives
Societies Act of 1950 , the Money Lending Act of 1938, and the Companies Act. The Banking
Services Act was adopted in 201439 to make new provisions with regard to the supervision of
banks, merchant banks, and building societies. While there is no specific law on consumer
protection for financial services, the Consumer Protection Act of 2005 covers general
consumer protection issues, and the CRA provides for several consumer protection
mechanisms in the sharing of credit information40. There is a Data Protection Bill currently
under discussion to be adopted in Jamaica in the near future. A Microcredit Act is also under
development. The current legal framework is prescriptive and often requires additional
regulation to adjust to the nature of credit reporting activities in Jamaica 41. In addition,
conventional arrangements between bureaus and CIPs for data supply and data access and also
data access agreements are signed between service providers and third party data suppliers.
These are also part of the legal and regulatory framework for credit reporting. Finally, service
level agreements are signed with vendors supporting the system, developing the software and
maintaining the hardware for each system.

142. The BoJ is the only overseer of the credit reporting system. The BoJ, in exercising
its oversight function, has a dual approach based on: (i) conducting oversight activities, and;
(ii) acting as a catalyst for the development of credit bureaus and commercial credit reporting
companies. These approaches are not mutually exclusive, rather complement each other.
Therefore, actions undertaken by the BoJ carefully balance these two approaches. No strategy
policy document for credit reporting systems has been developed and no policy objectives to
oversee credit reporting systems have been disclosed.

     B. Legal and regulatory framework and consumer protection

143. The Credit Reporting Act was issued in 2010 with the objective of providing a legal
framework for the operations of credit bureaus. The scope of the Act is limited to the


38
   BoJ regulations with respect to the Credit Reporting Act are subject to affirmative resolution by Parliament.
39
   The Banking Services Act repealed the Banking Act and the Financial Institutions Act, and amended the Bank
of Jamaica Act and the Building Societies Act.
40
   The current laws allow credit bureaus to charge a fee to the consumer for accessing reports more than once a
year, but the amount of the fee is not mentioned in the laws or further notices. In addition, consumers have a
deadline to submit a complaint to the supervisory authority from the time of the response from the credit bureau
regarding the complaint. However, there are no deadlines for credit bureaus or CIPs to respond to consumers
(please see section 16 of the Credit Reporting Act, 2010). Finally, complaints should be done in person creating
additional burden to consumers.
41
   For example, if new data providers with relevant and reliable data were to participate in any credit bureau, an
additional Notice issued by the Minister would be required.
                                                       42



establishment and operation of credit bureaus, while there is no mention in the Act of the
establishment and functioning of a credit registry or commercial credit reporting system.

144. The Act covers the main aspects of credit reporting including: (i) entry criteria to
CRSPs and licensing regime; (ii) limits to data collection and further processing and
distribution; (iii) types of data providers; (iv) rules regarding data disclosure; (v) provisions
related to location to store data both in Jamaica and in other jurisdictions; (vi) data retention;
(vii) consumers rights, and; (viii) offences. While the Act is comprehensive in terms of aspects
covered related to credit bureaus, there are certain areas that require further attention. For
example, the fact that credit information providers (CIPs) are listed in an exhaustive manner
leads to the intervention of the Ministry of Finance to enable the participation of CIPs not listed
in the law.

145. The Act is complemented by the Credit Reporting Regulations42 issued by the
Minister of Finance and directions issued by BoJ, and other laws which have an impact
on CRS and contractual arrangements between CRSPs and CIPs. Each credit bureau and
CIPs sign bilateral agreements for data supply and data access. Further, data access agreements
are also signed between service providers and third party data suppliers. Finally, service level
agreements are signed with vendors supporting the system, developing the software and
maintaining the hardware for each system. While there is no specific law on financial consumer
protection and no data protection legislation, a Data Protection Bill is currently under
discussion and will be adopted in the near future. A new law, the Banking Services Act,
adopted in 2014 also replaced several financial sector laws. The current legal framework is
prescriptive and often requires additional regulation to adjust to the nature of credit reporting
activities in Jamaica. Other laws that impact the development of CRS include:

              a. BoJ Act, which establishes the power of the BoJ to influence the volume and
                 conditions to supply credit (see article 5). The BoJ also has the power to request
                 any type of information from merchant banks and specified financial
                 institutions.
              b. The Banking Services Act of 2014, which consolidated the Banking Act of
                 1992, the Financial Institutions Act of 1992, and the Building Societies Act.
              c. Money Lender Act, 1996 as regards to CIPs.
              d. The Cooperatives Societies Act, 1976 as regards to CIPs and the role of the
                 DCFS.
              e. Data Protection bill, which might impact the current data sharing framework
                 for credit reporting.

146. Conflicting rules in the Credit Reporting Act call for the review of the consumer
consent process. Section 8.6 of the Act establishes that data credit information is considered
reliable if: a) it is accurate in all material aspects; b) it is presented in a fair and balanced
manner, and; c) it does not include the personal information of any consumer unless the
consumer consents to the inclusion in writing attached to the information. On the other hand,

42
     Please see The Credit Reporting Regulation Resolution 2010, published in January 14, 2011
                                                 43



under section 8.10 b) of the Act, there is a provision on the need to notify consumers about the
sharing of consumer’s information with credit bureaus (notification). This situation shows the
case for a conflict of rules between section 8.6.c and section 8.10.b impeding the correct
implementation of the consumer consent. GP1 of the General Principles for Credit Reporting
establishes than only reliable information should be included in a CIP. However, section 8.6
c) defines reliable information the one that includes the consent of the consumer when it relates
to personal information. In practice, the clauses developed by the CIPs only relate to the
“disclosure” of credit information from credit bureaus to the CIPs, while they include a
“notification” clause for sharing data with credit bureaus. Section 8 allows CIPs to provide
transactional information on loans and credits to credit bureaus provided that information is
reliable, accurate, presented in a fair and balanced manner and consumer has consented to this
disclosure.

147. The international framework on privacy and data protection is clear regarding the
need for notification and the need for consumer consent prior to data collection .
Moreover, in common law countries, unless the law clearly establishes that data will be
collected by credit bureaus and consumers have no choice to oppose to such data collection,
consumer consent is obtained to collect such data and share it with credit bureaus and CIPs.
Providers collecting data from the consumers should request their consent to collect such data
and further disclose it with credit bureaus. In the consent clauses all relevant information
regarding further data disclosure and procedures to exercise consumers’ rights should be
explained. On the contrary, notification is frequently used to inform consumers that certain
data items have been included in a database, informing them also about the consumer’s rights,
name of the credit reporting service provider and purposes for such data use.

148. The legal and regulatory framework for credit reporting covers basic concepts of
consumer protection including: (i) conditions for data disclosure; (ii) permissible purposes;
(iii) right of consumers to access their data; (iv) right of a free credit report per year, (v) right
to challenge data, and; (vi) dispute resolution mechanism at the BoJ. In addition, there are
several regulations that have been issued to further develop the Credit Reporting Act. In
particular: regulations on licensing issued by the Minister of Finance in 2010, regulations on
consumer protection as it relates to consumers’ credit reports and Notice given by the MoF
enabling additional CIPs to participate in the CRS. In addition, MFIs are governed under the
Money Lending Act (MLA) of 2004. The BoJ is currently reforming the legal framework for
credit unions. This situation has an impact on the enforcement of rules established under the
Credit Reporting Act to CIPs that are not regulated by BoJ.

149. It is premature to assess the effectiveness of the new consumer protection
framework for credit reporting. Credit bureaus are currently fine-tuning consumer
protection units and procedures, protocols with CIPs are being designed and the BoJ dispute
resolution unit is now under development. The law allows consumers to request a copy of
their credit reports and receive a response in not later than 14 days, however it is not clear if
this process requires consumers to request such copy in person or if additional choices such as
internet access or other method is available for consumers provided sufficient identification is
proved.
                                                44




Recommendations

150. Authorities should take into consideration the development of adequate
regulations, guidelines, and other regulatory instruments to ensure adequate
implementation of the Credit Reporting Act. In particular, guidelines on data quality
requirements and consumer protection aspects would benefit the CRS as a whole.

151. Authorities should closely monitor the data submission and data access procedures
and current practices in both credit bureaus. Although both credit bureaus report to being
issuing credit reports and holding a large number of records in their databases (close to 300,000
records), large banks are not currently participating in the CRS and nor are many credit
information providers. Also, credit reports requested to the credit bureaus and CIPs relate to
data from samples and not to actual reports pulled at the time of the request. Authorities should
carefully monitor the development of the credit bureaus while allowing them time to start their
operations. The BoJ could conduct a post-operation on-site examination of both credit bureaus
and CIPs that are currently participating with the goal of identifying potential gaps and
activating corrective measures to the provision of credit information to the market.

152. The development of a comprehensive consumer protection framework is necessary.
While the consumer protection framework is fully developed, there are some practices
observed in the market (e.g. consumers requesting credit reports before applying for a loan)
that require immediate attention. These practices can lead to unintended consequences such
as: (i) consumers bearing the cost of the credit reports; (ii) existence of “free riders” that will
use credit reports without providing their data to any credit bureau; (iii) credit market
distortion. Since the essence of credit bureaus is the “reciprocity principle”, this practice would
create unfair situations on some lenders. In addition, the adoption of a standardized consumer
consent clause could also provide additional confidence to the CRS. In the short term
authorities should;
    a. Instruct credit bureaus to stop this practice and limit testing to a limited period of time
         subject to certain criteria (not using the credit reports for making credit decisions until
         they submit the data).
    b. Instruct credit bureau to publish information regarding consumers’ rights in their
         website, including the dispute resolution mechanism.
    c. Include an area in the site of the Central Bank regarding the consumers’ rights for the
         credit registry and a link to credit bureaus for consumers’ complaints.
    d. Consider an awareness campaign on consumer protection issues related to credit
         reporting. Consumers should understand the benefits of building a good credit history
         and the implications of requesting several credit reports to be used for lending.
    e. Enable on-line system for consumers to access their own reports provided sufficient
         authentication mechanisms are in place or other consumer friendly means;
    f. Keep record of the consumers’ enquiries regarding the consumers’ own data;
    g. Publish relevant information regarding this process in the BoJ website;
    h. Include a standard consumer consent clause in the credit and loan applications from all
         CIPs.
                                                               45



153. The consumer protection framework should be enhanced in coordination with the
overall framework for consumer protection in financial services. This framework should
take into consideration that a level of coordination between CIPs, users and credit bureaus is
required as well as the designated authority for dispute resolution. Figure 3 below depicts a
consumer dispute resolution framework for credit reporting. Authorities should pay attention
to existing consumer consent clauses and consider the establishment of a standard consent
clause that would serve on both the collection of data and further disclosure of information.

Figure 3: Example of a consumer dispute resolution framework

                                                 Between 15-30 days
                                                                               Search in
                                                       Open file                           No
     Consumer              CRS                                                 the CRS
                                                                                           Hit


                                                   Investigate                      Hit
                                 Source             with data
                                confirms                                                   Notify the
                                                     source
                                                               bE                          consumer
                                                          Source
                                                          corrects
                                                            data


                                                                                             Close
                                     Notify the consumer                    OK                File
        Close                            Notify users                    Consumer
         File
                                            Consumer
                                             not OK



      Mediation
                              Alternative
                               Dispute                 Judicial system
     Conciliation             Resolution

Source: World Bank General Principles for Credit Reporting, 2011

     C. Credit reporting service providers

154. There is no credit registry in Jamaica. The authorities are currently working on the
development of a comprehensive financial reporting system, for prudential supervision
purposes only, it is not clear whether this development will include a credit registry or not.

155. There are three43 credit bureaus licensed in Jamaica. Creditinfo is participated by
Creditinfo (80 percent) and Coeslesce (20 percent) and has been operating since 2013. CRIF
is participated by Illuminat Jamaica Limited – owned by Neal & Massey ITC Group Ltd. – (51
percent) and CRIF S.p.A. of Italy (49 percent), and also started operations in 2013. The third
credit bureau, Credit Information Services, has not yet started operations as of December 2014.
The two credit bureaus have implemented procedures and routines to ensure the security and
integrity of their services and databases. Both bureaus perform daily backups and can ensure

43
  A third credit bureau “Credit Information Services Limited” was licensed during the elaboration of this
technical note in August 2014, although by December 2014 was still not active.
                                                      46



business continuity with remote alternate processing sites located in Jamaica and outside
Jamaica for both Creditinfo and CRIF. Both credit bureaus have partnered with local firms and
are registered under the company law of Jamaica.

156. The reports produced by the credit bureaus are focused on mostly on credit data,
although they also collect some information from court judgments. The credit bureaus do
not collect information on bounced cheques, or data from collateral registries yet. Currently
the only two services offered are credit reports and scoring. The cost of the credit report ranges
between approximately US$7 and US$17 depending on the credit bureau and the volume of
queries and number of pages of the report. Thanks to the sharing of positive and negative data,
both credit bureaus can offer value added services on top of the credit reports. They offer
generic credit scoring models and plan on offering additional services once they have sufficient
data in the system both historic and comprehensive from all relevant CIPs.

157. Credit reports analyzed contain sufficient and comprehensive credit information,
although this is not necessarily relevant or easily available in Jamaica44. While both credit
reports contain different fields of information and data is presented differently in the reports,
the common data items included in the reports are:
     a) identification of the consumer (e.g. name, address, previous addresses, date of birth,
        TRN, telephone number, other identification documents and name of company in case
        of sole traders) which allow for merge and match methodology to effectively identify
        consumers. However, some of the data requested by the credit bureaus is not
        systematically collected by the CIPs (e.g. date of birth, name at birth).
     b) credit information: (i) type of loan; (ii) role of consumer; (iii) number of installments;
        (iv) total amount of loan; (vi) amount of monthly installments; (vii) maturity date;
        (viii) date of last payment; (ix) outstanding amount; (x) currency; (xi) date of the
        contract.
     c) previous loan applications that is captured by the credit bureau through the previous
        searches of issuing credit reports. This information is shown in the report as rejected
        or active based on the status of the loan (e.g. became active).
     d) historical data back to 3 years (November 2011).
     e) analytics.

One of the reports includes credit score while the other provides an affordability analysis. Both
reports allow for the inclusion of information on collateral, employment data, and additional
identification data. Data on one of the credit reports is presented in the currency of the loan
while the other one is presented in USD. No information on income or name of the creditor is
included in the credit reports analyzed.

158. Information providers do not participate in the ownership structure or decision
making body of either credit bureau. This is important to avoid potential conflicts of interest

44
  This analysis is based on “sample” credit reports obtained from each credit bureau. A more detailed analysis
using data from a real credit report would show data inconsistencies, data inaccuracy, gaps in data submission
and potential errors in data processing. This exercise needs also to be complemented with a similar exercise on
the data format or data structure from each credit bureau.
                                               47



or deceptive commercial practices that favor some users – those that have an interest in the
bureau – against the rest of the information providers; particularly regarding the ability to
access the credit bureau database. The experience in other countries has shown the important
role authorities can play in preventing the occurrence of this situation.

159. Main CIPs have signed agreements to submit data and access data with one or two
of the licensed credit bureaus. While the main focus of both credit bureaus is to secure key
credit providers (largest banks) and they have designed different strategies to achieve this
objective in the retail sector, information from merchants (i.e .Corts) is perceived as unique
and very relevant for consumer lending. However, this information is not available to the
market due to the lack of appetite from retailers to participate in the CRS.

160. Several CIPS have reported that data quality requirements set forth in the Credit
Reporting Act is an impediment to their immediate participation to the CRS. The Act sets
up specific data quality requirements and various CIPs have expressed their concerns in their
ability to meet these requirements.

Recommendations

161. A modern credit-based economy requires access to complete, accurate, and reliable
information concerning borrowers’ payment history. Credit reporting addresses a
fundamental problem of credit markets: asymmetric information between borrowers and
lenders that leads to adverse selection and moral hazard. The heart of a credit report is the
record it provides of a consumer or firm’s payment history. Since one of the best predictors of
future behavior is past behavior, data on how a potential borrower has met obligations in the
past enable lenders to more accurately evaluate credit risk, erasing adverse selection problems.

162. An effective credit information system can be integral to the operation of modern
financial systems, improving the efficiency of financial institutions by reducing loan
processing costs as well as the time required to process loan applications; it could also
eliminate the need to make physical inspections. Lenders may also use credit data to monitor
their existing portfolios, identify potential problems, and develop and sell new products, thus
contributing to their profitability to more accurate pricing and targeting.

163. Credit information systems also make it possible to empirically assess, in the form
of credit scoring tools, which factors are most predictive, permitting finely tuned credit
decisions. As a result, creditors can more intelligently assess consumer and business lending
decisions, thus promoting the extension of credit and economic development in the countries
in which they operate.

164. The reputation of credit reporting firms is a crucial factor to gain trust and
confidence from the consumers and creditors. Key elements to consider in this regard are:
quality of the information; extensive coverage (e.g. financial institutions, retail sector, public
registries, utilities, positive and negative data) to present a complete picture of the person or
firm’s debt situation; consumer protection and rights; clear circumscription of permissible uses
                                                48



of information, and; permanent measures to safeguard information contained in the credit
information system.

165. The degree of concentration of credit grantors and the quality of the infrastructure
(i.e. public good) that is necessary for running a credit business are two key determinants
of the degree and type of competition in the marketplace. In those cases in which
concentration is high and infrastructure quality is low and participants’ access to this
infrastructure is uneven and unfair, players will tend to compete more on the basis of the partial
infrastructure each of them has deployed rather than through price and quality. Lastly but
equally important, competition between credit reporting firms promotes and encourages many
positive aspects, such as quantity and quality of information, services, products, price
reduction, etc. Nevertheless, negative aspects can also arise if there no appropriate regulations
are in place.

166. From this perspective, a well-functioning credit reporting system can help in
providing a more level playing field for smaller banks and other credit providers by
reducing the information advantage some institutions have over their existing clients and
by giving quick, reliable, and affordable access to credit histories. Reliable information in
these registries lowers costs and improves the efficiency of the system as a whole. Furthermore,
when credit reporting systems include information from a wide variety of lenders (both
commercial banks and other types of lenders such as leasing firms, finance companies,
retailers) further competitive pressures are brought to bear as consumers can effectively seek
finance from a variety of outlets and providers. The availability of bureau scores (credit scores
based exclusively upon credit bureau data) can also provide another element of increased
competition in financial service markets – if the scores have sufficient predictive power to
enable small and less sophisticated lenders who would not otherwise have been able to develop
such tools to use them as a key part of their credit evaluation procedures.

167. In order for these benefits to materialize, however, several other conditions must
be fulfilled as well. These include fair access to credit reporting services, appropriate
governance structure for the private credit reporting firm(s), appropriate regulation, and an
oversight function that aims at improving the overall information infrastructure (i.e. not only
the services provided by credit reporting firms) that facilitates credit decisions.

168. Although both credit bureaus are offering similar products and services to the
market, efforts should be made to compete on services and product quality instead of
competing on data between the two existing credit bureaus. The CRS in Jamaica is recent
and credit bureaus are still collecting first time data from key relevant creditors. However there
is a strong competition from both bureaus on obtaining key data on an exclusivity basis.

169. Authorities should adopt measures to encourage credit bureaus to compete in
services and not in data and should review the current information sharing arrangements
to ensure the absence of anti- competitive practices among certain creditors. Accessing
credit information is considered a necessary tool to improve credit decision making.
Authorities should devote efforts to establish a framework were all participants supply data
                                                49



and access information under equitable terms. Credit bureau practices such as: (i) development
of significantly different credit information data structures and (ii) potential adoption of
exclusivity data supply agreements might lead to data fragmentation due to the level of effort
required to the CIPs by each credit bureau. Although banks and financial institutions are not
prohibited to participate in both credit bureaus in practice they are required a greater level of
effort than expected to provide data to both. This fact couples with the existing competition
between the two credit bureaus to gather data from CIPs presents serious risks to the
development of an effective credit reporting system in the country.

     D. Other public databases

170. There are certain Government agencies that hold relevant information for CRS
purposes. In particular, the CoJ holds information regarding: (i) the name of companies; (ii)
sector of activity; (iii) status and legal establishment; (iv) main shareholders, and; (v) years of
activity. The future collateral registry at the CoJ can provide relevant information on the type
of collateral, value of the collateral, and date of notice as well as number of searches that could
be offered to the CIPs through the credit bureaus in an efficient manner. This information is
electronically available and there is no legal impediment to access this information by CRSPs.

171. Other databases include information on the payment behavior of consumers
regarding utilities services. Information from the Jamaica Public Service on payment pattern
of their 600,000 consumers including amount and date of payment on a monthly basis, in
addition to identification information, is a relevant source of data to credit bureaus. The
National Water Commission also holds information on 450,000 consumers which, with some
additional data cleaning to their databases, could be very useful to lenders. The tax authorities
hold information on the tax registration number that serves to validate the TRNs provided to
the credit bureaus by the CIPs. As of August 2014, the Jamaica Public Service, the National
Water Commission, and persons licensed by the Telecommunications Act,were designated to
be credit information providers.

172. Finally, information from telecommunication service providers on their payment
behavior can also benefit the completeness of the credit history of consumers –provided
that the data is accurate. Telecommunication companies, particularly those that provide
mobile phone services, cover a large percentage of the population. The payment history
collected through the billing records of those consumers under post-paid services are also
potential sources of data to the credit bureaus. In Jamaica, no telecommunication company is
currently providing data to any of the two existing credit bureaus. Reasons for this include: (i)
the Credit Reporting Act does not specifically include telecommunication companies as CIPs;
(ii) telecommunications service providers45 have no sufficient incentives to participate in a
CRS; (iii) most of the service is provided under pre-paid model. Frequently these service
providers hold very accurate data on identification of individuals enabling debt collection.


45
  The inclusion of telecommunication service providers is currently under the consideration
of the MoF.
                                                50



173. Credit bureaus are currently seeking additional sources of data from CIPS and
Government agencies. While at this stage of development the main focus is the gathering of
credit information from CIPS, credit bureaus are also seeking ways to incorporate information
from Government agencies which is not always available, easily accessible or cost efficient.

Recommendations

174. Although the Jamaica Public Service, the National Water Commission, and persons
licensed by the Telecommunications Act, have been designated to be credit information
providers, the information might require additional data cleaning and updates. Sources
could be put into these institutions to ensure adequate levels of data accuracy before the data
is included in any credit bureau. In addition, the Council could take on board the evaluation of
the necessary measures from legal or regulatory challenges to data collection or data
automation processes.

175. The recently established collateral registry can also serve as an additional source of
data to the credit bureaus. Authorities should use this instrument to monitor trends in terms
of type of collateral used for secured lending. While this information is not currently being
exploited by the Companies Office Registrar, this is available in the system and could be
further used by the authorities. This information is of particular interest for banks and other
lenders to evaluate the creditworthiness of SMEs.

176. Credit Bureaus should seek reliable and cost efficient methods to access
information from the Company Office of Jamaica regarding SMEs.

  E. Oversight and cooperation

177. The BoJ is the overseer of the CRS in Jamaica. The Credit Reporting Act recognizes
the role of the BoJ as the supervisory authority to CRS. Despite the efforts undertaken by the
BoJ to support the establishment and development of credit bureaus, there is no strategic vision
on CRS in Jamaica. This role might require additional resources to fulfill their responsibilities.
The BoJ currently conducts this role through the supervision unit. However, there are plans to
develop a dedicated unit for CRS. In this context additional training on CRS aspects would be
welcomed.

178. The BoJ is currently enhancing the oversight framework and the instruments and
tools to exercise their authority. The BoJ takes a dual approach to CRS: (i) it supports the
development of credit bureaus, and (ii) it oversees the safe, reliable and efficient CRS.

179. There are different public sector authorities that have some sort of legal power or
interest over the CRS. However, there is no collaborative and formal agreement among
the authorities; each of the authorities works in an isolated fashion focusing on their own
jurisdiction. The Ministry of Finance is charged with the issuing of licenses to CRSPs, the
BoJ is designed as the supervisory authority, the Fair Trading Commission looks at aspects
related to competition, the Ministry of Industry, Investment and Commerce (Department of
                                               51



Cooperatives), the Financial Services Commission and the Consumer Affairs Commission
have responsibility over general consumer protection aspects.

Recommendations

180. There is no strategic vision for the CRS as a whole, enabling coordination with all
stakeholders, which is an important step to continue the development of the credit
reporting system. The strategic vision must identify an accepted set of longer term objectives
and a credible action plan to achieve them. It also has to take into consideration tree important
pillars: i) the full implementation of the supervision of the credit bureaus; ii) the oversight of
the CRS, and; iii) cooperation among all participants.

181. The implementation of an oversight function sharpening the policy objectives and
publicly disclosing such objectives could enhance the current role of the BoJ in
supporting the development of the CRS. With regard to policy objectives, the mission
suggests that the BoJ broaden the scope beyond traditional main objectives like efficiency and
reliability of credit reporting systems to a wider set of issues, including ensuring an adequate
balance between competition and cooperation in the credit reporting market. To achieve this
goal, the oversight function should consider aspects related to consumers’ rights compliance,
financial stability, security measures, data quality, anti-competitive practices, fair conditions
to participants, efficiency of systems, use of data, entry and exit criteria, management of risk,
governance and ownership, and access to public databases. Instruments of oversight range
from moral suasion to on-site inspections, from regulation to cooperation, from sanctions to
the direct provision of credit reporting services.

182. In implementing its policy objectives, the BoJ should apply consistent policy
requirements and standards in order to avoid competitive distortions between
comparable systems in the country. Credit bureaus play a relevant role in the stability and
efficiency of the financial sector and in the economy as a whole and therefore their role should
be taken into consideration in a Policy Document.

183. Authorities should consider the creation of a “Credit Information Task
Force/Council” to identify the needs of credit information and establish goals. This Task
Force/Council will benefit from the participation of relevant stakeholders in the credit market
representing both public and private sector and integrating the views of consumers, creditors,
regulators and credit information providers. The BoJ, as the primary overseer of the credit
reporting system and respected authority in Jamaica, could act as the coordinator of those
actions and a dialogue facilitator.
                                                     52



Box 1 Credit Reporting Systems Task Force – Terms of Reference

Objectives
The Credit Reporting Systems Task Force aims to support the achievement of sound and efficient credit
reporting systems in Trinidad and Tobago. It can also serve as a forum for cooperation with other neighbor
countries facilitating cross-border systems.
Main Tasks
 The Task Force works to facilitate the necessary cooperation between all market participants and
    regulators in the credit reporting area.
 The Task Force promotes common initiatives towards the implementation of the credit reporting
    system infrastructure. These initiatives should not impede, and should in fact foster, healthy
    competition among market participants.
 The Task Force plays a key role in preparing strategic documents for the overall credit reporting
    system in the country.
 The Task Force plays a key role in monitoring the implementation of credit reporting system reforms.
 The Task Force plays a key role in facilitating the sharing of information on economic and business
    requirements.
 The Task Force helps to identify the impact of different options on participants business and daily
    operations and on end-user interests.
 The Task Force plays a key role in endorsing the priority and the schedule of individual projects to be
    launched, financed and implemented.
 The Task Force promotes standardization of procedures and systems.
 The Task Force is responsible for promoting knowledge and education of credit reporting system issues
    in the country. To this end, the Task Force uses any means it might find appropriate (workshops,
    seminars, web pages, newsletter, etc.).
 The Task Force seeks to promote cooperation among all institutions active in credit reporting system
    within the region and at the international level.
Methodology
 The Task Force prepares ad hoc reports on credit reporting issues. The reports would not have
    prescriptive nature. However, they would serve as a reference for the ongoing reforms in the country.
 The Task Force establishes ad hoc working groups on credit reporting systems matters. Working
    groups may or may not be composed of the totality of the institutions represented in the Task Force.
 The Task Force reports on its activities to the Top Management of the constituting institutions on an
    annual basis.
Representation and Organizational Structure
 The Task Force gives representation to all the stakeholders of credit reporting systems. These include:
    the Central Bank (BoJ), the Ministry of Finance, The Financial Services Commission (FSC), the Fair
    Trading Commission (FTC) other agencies responsible for relevant public registries (CoJ, Ministry of
    Justice), the Telecommunications Authority, The Office of Utilities, the credit bureaus, the Bankers
    Association, the Credit Union League, the Micro- finance Association, and other relevant CIPs.
 The BoJ serves as the secretariat of the Task Force.
 Appointed representatives of the stakeholders are senior managers with an involvement in credit
    reporting system matters. They report directly to the top management of their respective institutions.
 The Task Force is comprised of an appropriate number of experts. The composition of the Task Force
    should be consistent with the objective of having effective discussion in the meetings.
 The Task Force has an internal governance structure with a chairperson and deputy(s), an executive
    body, formal rules to determine the terms and conditions for the appointment of the executive
    positions, and formal rules to govern the activity of the executive body.
 In the early stage of its life, the Task Force might seek, if necessary, assistance from other national and
    international entities highly experienced in managing credit reporting system.
                                               53



184. The BoJ should establish additional measures to ensure that banks and other
financial institutions are effectively providing the entire credit and loan portfolio to the
credit bureaus on a systematic basis. Cross-checking existing information on each bank
with the information provided to the credit bureau could be an option for the consideration of
the BoJ. Even balancing the need to develop a credit reporting system at the earliest, an on-site
examination process with the objective of understanding the current data included in the
system, errors, credit reports provided, costs and benefits, security measures and other
operational risks could allow authorities to adopt the necessary measures to address identified
market failures.
                                                54



      ANNEX 1: WORLD BANK GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR CREDIT REPORTING

The General Principles
The General Principles aim at the                Legal and Regulatory Environment
following public policy objectives for credit    General Principle 4: The overall legal and
reporting systems: Credit reporting              regulatory framework for credit reporting
systems should effectively support the           should be clear, predictable, non-
sound and fair extension of credit in an         discriminatory,      proportionate      and
economy as the foundation for robust and         supportive of data subject and consumer
competitive credit markets. To this end,         rights. The legal and regulatory
credit reporting systems should be safe and      framework should include effective
efficient, and fully supportive of data          judicial or extrajudicial dispute resolution
subject and consumer rights.                     mechanisms.

Data                                             Governance and Risk Management
General Principle 1: Credit reporting            General Principle 3: The governance
systems should have relevant, accurate,          arrangements of credit reporting service
timely and sufficient data—including             providers and data providers should
positive— collected on a systematic basis        ensure accountability, transparency and
from all reliable, appropriate and               effectiveness in managing the risks
available sources, and should retain this        associated with the business and fair
information for a sufficient amount of           access to the information by users.
time.
                                                 Cross-Border Data Flows
Data Processing: Security and Efficiency         General Principle 5: Cross-border credit
General Principle 2: Credit reporting            data transfers should be facilitated, where
systems should have rigorous standards of        appropriate, provided that adequate
security and reliability, and be efficient.      requirements are in place.
Roles of Key Players

Role A: Data providers should report Role D: Users should make proper use of
accurate, timely and complete data to the information available from credit
credit reporting service providers, on an reporting service providers.
equitable basis.
                                              Role E: Data subjects should provide
Role B: Other data sources, in particular truthful and accurate information to data
public records agencies, should facilitate providers and other data sources.
access to their databases to credit
reporting service providers.                  Role F: Authorities should promote a
                                              credit reporting system that is efficient
Role C: Credit reporting service providers and effective in satisfying the needs of the
should ensure that data processing is various participants, and supportive of
secure and provide high quality and data subject/consumer rights and of the
efficient services. All users having either a
                                              55



lending function or a supervisory role development of a fair and competitive
should be able to access these services credit market.
under equitable conditions.
Recommendations for Effective Oversight

Recommendation A: Credit reporting             Recommendation D: Central banks,
systems should be subject to appropriate       financial supervisors, and other relevant
and effective regulation and oversight by      authorities should adopt, where relevant,
a central bank, a financial supervisor, or     the General Principles for credit reporting
other relevant authorities. It is important    systems and related roles, and apply them
that one or more authorities exercise the      consistently.
function as primary overseer.
                                               Recommendation E: Central banks,
Recommendation B: Central banks,               financial supervisors, and other relevant
financial supervisors, and other relevant      authorities,    both     domestic     and
authorities should have the powers and         international, should cooperate with each
resources to carry out effectively their       other, as appropriate, in promoting the
responsibilities   in   regulating    and      safety and efficiency of credit reporting
overseeing credit reporting systems.           systems.

Recommendation C: Central banks,
financial supervisors, and other relevant
authorities should clearly define and
disclose their regulatory and oversight
objectives, roles and major regulations
and policies with respect to credit
reporting systems.
