                                                                                                                                                         96393
SHAPING HEALTHIER SOCIETIES AND BUILDING
HIGHER PERFORMING HEALTH SYSTEMS IN THE
            GCC COUNTRIES
 The Health, Nutrition, Population (HNP) Global Practice
                                                                           trends
                                                       fatalities   within collaboration
                                                        outcomes
                                  public mortality
                                            average
                                                                          facilities
                                                                                        strong
                                                                                                 societies


                                                efficiency   six           payment
                                                Bank road NCDs note                                  solutions



                                                 policy Country                                      Challenges

                                       across
                                                             injuries                    expenditure chronic
                                           Practice                                    obesity                     shows
                                Countries
                                  prevalence         Figure
                                                       RTI
                                                                                                 developing
                                                                                       effectively
                                                                                                                   policies


                                                                                                             long-term

                                   diabetes disease
                                  support           include
                                                                                                             high perspective

                                                                                                     Saudi



       countries
                    status
            non-communicable
                                                         system
                                            care
                                                                                management                                   similar
                                                                                                                         sustainability

                           world                                                factors                             important


                                                                                  focus




                                                             Health
                                                                                                                   GCC
                           delivery                                         growing                                Optical


                  hospitals            Oman
            consequences
                                        performing

                  challenges      Qatar                                                improvements

                                      systems
                                                   practitioners options

                                                                                                        per
                                                                                                                                          productivity

                decades
                  years                                                                               Council
                                                      adequate
                                                                                              traffic
                                                             NCD Kuwait
                                                                           workforce
                             immunization

                           high-income

                    percent
                work
                                                                     also
                                                                                                             around
                                        insurance including country                                               levels
                                    primary financing                                                             populations
                      Ministry
                                 level development
                                                                                private                           particularly


                                   performance
                            among life
                                                             service Arabia
                                                                     activities                                                 points
                                                                 percentage
                                                sector

 health
                                                                                                                             HNP
                             global                                                                     MENA                     premature

                                                                                                        social financial
                                                                                                                   areas
                            protection million                              share
                                                                                        World
                                                                                                                              strengthening
                             patients society                                                                                 OECD
                                             dynamics



                                                                                                     GCC
                                                                                        fiscal
                                                                                        UAE




                              income population quality spending
                                 rates
                              expectancy
                                      working
                                                   services
                                            risk major diseases                                                   capita
                                                       burden child states
                                                                                                                 economic

                                                           Source Bahrain
                                                                            higher    largest
                                                                    nutrition  measured




                                                               APRIL, 2015
           SHAPING HEALTHIER SOCIETIES AND BUILDING
    HIGHER PERFORMING HEALTH SYSTEMS IN THE GCC COUNTRIES


           The Health, Nutrition, Population (HNP) Global Practice




                                APRIL, 2015




                                                                      
 
Vice Presidents: Keith Hansen and Nena Stoiljkovic
            Senior Director: Tim Evans
           Practice Manager: Enis Barış
          Task Team Leader: Firas Raad

                                                     2
                                                          
                                                                  Table of Contents

 
Acknowledgments......................................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................... 5
GCC Country Context................................................................................................................................... 5
Health Sector Trends and Challenges in the GCC Countries ....................................................................... 6
The Escalating Crisis of Non-Communicable Diseases and Injuries............................................................ 9
Obesity, Diabetes and Road Traffic Injuries: Is the GCC a High-Income Outlier?.................................... 11
Health Service Delivery and Health Financing Challenges ........................................................................ 12
World Bank Health Engagement in GCC Countries................................................................................... 14
Summary Observations and Outlook .......................................................................................................... 15
 




                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                      
                                          Acknowledgments
 

This policy note was prepared by the HNP Global Practice in close collaboration with the GCC Country
Management Unit of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. The author, Firas Raad (Senior
Health Specialist), would like to thank Nadir Mohammed (GCC Country Director), Enis Barış (HNP
Practice Manager) and Hana Brixi (GCC Program Leader) for their guidance and strong support during the
process of producing the note.

The author is also indebted to the formal peer reviewers, Nicole Klingen (HNP Practice Manager) and Hana
Brixi (GCC Program Leader) for their constructive comments and to other reviewers who provided valuable
inputs including Nadir Mohammed, Enis Barış, Jamal Al-Kibbi (GCC Program Manager), Raj Nallari
(GCC Country Economist), Sami Ben Daamech (Senior Operations Officer, Kuwait Country Office), and
Ece Ozcelik (HNP Junior Professional Associate). Acknowledgements are also due to Ece Ozcelik and
Adam Broadfoot (Business Process Officer) who were extremely helpful with the final design and printing
of the policy note.




                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                           
                                                                   Introduction

This policy note summarizes the central health sector trends and challenges in the Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC) countries of the Middle East and North Africa region (MENA). These countries are Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Oman and Qatar. The note also provides an
overview of the GCC country context, discussing the commonalities between the six member states, and
the major areas of engagement by the Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Global Practice of the World
Bank in support of the health sector reform priorities of these countries. The areas of engagement focus on
three main clusters of work: (i) developing multi-layered solutions for improving non-communicable
disease and road safety outcomes; (ii) health system strengthening; and (iii) integrating health policy
solutions within the wider institutional and policy frameworks in the GCC countries.

The note builds on an earlier HNP regional strategy prepared by the World Bank in 2013 focusing on
the concepts of fairness and accountability. The strategy highlighted the importance of improvements in
health system performance in MENA countries from an equity, accountability and fiscal sustainability
perspective. The framework of the strategy covers equity in health status, financial protection and
responsiveness, and the accountability of populations, payers and health service providers interacting within
the health system. The fiscal sustainability of MENA health systems in the face of mounting budgetary
pressures during a period of general instability and economic slowdown is also a major component of the
regional strategy.


                                                               GCC Country Context

The six high-income countries of the GCC are dissimilar in terms of land territory, populations and per-
income capital levels yet similar in other important political, economic and social respects. Saudi Arabia,
the largest country in the Arabian Peninsula, has a land mass of 2.15 million square kilometers and a
population of 28 million people whereas Bahrain has a land territory of 750 square kilometers and a
population of around 1.2 million people. In between, Oman, the UAE, Qatar, and Kuwait have land areas
ranging from 300,000 to 11,600 square kilometers and populations varying from 9.4 million to 2.2 million
persons. In terms of gross national income levels estimated using purchasing power parity, Qatar leads the
GCC countries and the world with a per capita income level of US$ 128,530 followed by Kuwait and Saudi
Arabia with per capita income levels of US$ 88,170 and US$ 53,640. Bahrain has the lowest per capita
income level of US$ 35,760 among the GCC countries.1

These differences aside, there are four important commonalities across the six countries:

      Rich endowments of natural resources - The GCC countries possess around 33 percent of the proven
       oil reserves in the world. Saudi Arabia, alone, has around 18 percent of global oil reserves. In term of
       natural gas, 17 percent of proven gas reserves are found in the four GCC countries of Qatar, Saudi
       Arabia, Kuwait and Oman.2
      Generous subsidy and welfare policies – With an abundance of natural resources, the GCC countries
       have established generous subsidy and welfare policies covering a range of sectors including energy,
       education, health, housing and social protection. The welfare policies in particular are reinforced by
       constitutional and legal provisions in all six countries stipulating the ‘obligation’ of the state to provide
       access to essential services including health care services.
      Large populations of expatriate workers – The labor markets in the GCC countries include a
       proportionately large number of expatriate workers consisting mainly of young males. The majority of
                                                            
1
    Source: World Bank Development Indicators, 2013 and 2014.
2
    Sources: US Energy Information Administration, 2014, OPEC, 2013 

                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                       
                                  these expatriate residents work in the energy, construction, services and domestic household sectors.
                                  The numbers of expatriate workers range from 30-80 percent of the total resident population within
                                  each GCC state.
                                 Common cultural, religious and social heritage – The GCC countries share a common cultural,
                                  religious and social heritage. The Arabic language, Islam and tribalism are the defining cultural,
                                  religious and social characteristics of the societies in the GCC countries.

The close societal bonds, common historical experience and shared space on the Arabian Peninsula
prompted the six countries to form an alliance in 1981 and to establish the ‘Gulf Cooperation Council’
(GCC). The objectives of the GCC are to deepen relations and strengthen cooperation between the member
states at all levels, particularly in the economic, social and infrastructure sector. Over the past twelve years,
the GCC worked on creating a customs union and common market for goods, services and labor. Since
2009, efforts by some member states have been exerted towards establishing a monetary union.


                                                  Health Sector Trends and Challenges in the GCC Countries

The vast investments by the GCC countries over several decades in health service infrastructure have
yielded impressive improvements in overall health status outcomes3. The health systems established by
the GCC states focused on fulfilling the core public health functions of childhood immunization, food
safety, environmental health and essential child and maternal health services. Figure I below shows the
trends in under-five mortality rates between the GCC states, the MENA region as a whole, all developing
countries and all high-income countries. In 1960, child mortality rates in the GCC countries were similar
to those in MENA and those in the low and middle income countries; and were around three times higher
than the average child mortality rate in the high-income countries. Over five decades, child mortality in the
GCC countries declined rapidly down to a level almost equaling the average rate in high-income countries.


                                          Figure I: Trends in Child Mortality from 1960-2013 by Groups of Countries
                                                                                                                                              250
    Child Deaths per 1.000 Live




                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                                              150
              Births




                                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                              0
                                      1960          1970          1980           1990        2000              2010               2013

                                                      GCC      All High Income    MENA     Low and Middle Income

Source: World Bank Development Indicators, 2014.



Similar improvements in health status outcomes related to infant, maternal and adult health are observed
across all six GCC countries. Average life expectancy from birth in the GCC countries increased from 62
years in 1970 to around 77 years in 2012 – an increase of 24 percent in four decades. In 1970, as shown in
Figure II below, life expectancy in the GCC countries approximated the global average and was slightly
below the average for upper-middle income countries. By 2012, it well-surpassed the upper-middle income
country average and was only slightly behind the average for high-income countries. Between the GCC
countries, there was also variation in life expectancy during 1970-1990 with Oman and Saudi Arabia
                                                            
3
      Note: The health status outcomes reported in the following sections are for GCC nationals only and do not include expatriate workers.

                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                        
lagging significantly behind the other GCC countries – as shown in Figure III. This gap in health status
narrowed substantially over the latter two decades.

                                            Figure II                                               Figure III
                                  Life Expectancy by Regions4 1970-2012               Life Expectancy by GCC Country 1970-2012
                                  85                                                                               85

                                  80                                                                               80
     Life Expectancy from Birth




                                                                                      Life Expectancy from Birth
                                  75                                                                               75

                                  70                                                                               70

                                  65                                                                               65

                                  60                                                                               60

                                  55                                                                               55

                                  50                                                                               50

                                  45                                                                               45

                                  40                                                                               40
                                        1970    1980    1990     2000     2012                                           1970     1980   1990   2000    2012

                                  GCC    MENA    LI    LMI     UMI   HI   Global                                        BH   KW     OM    SA    QA     UAE
                                                                                                                                                                
Source: WHO, WDI 2014                                                              Source: WHO, WDI 2014



One GCC country, in particular, made exceptional improvements in health system performance during
the period from 1970-2000. The Sultanate of Oman was ranked among the top ten performers in the world
by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2000 for its accomplishments in improving the health system
performance outcomes of health status, financial protection, and responsiveness. In 1970, Oman had only
2 hospitals and 13 physicians on staff; and a life expectancy at birth of around 50 years. Over five decades,
life expectancy improved by almost 80 percent - a remarkable achievement reflecting an abiding
commitment by the Omani Government towards improving the human development conditions of the
population.

These substantial improvements in health status in recent decades stemmed from the development of an
extensive health service infrastructure by the public sector. The GCC states early on adopted a traditional
‘national health service’ model under which health facilities providing services to the general population
were largely owned and administered by the public sector. Within the public sector, large health sector
networks emerged under the Ministries of Health, Defense, Interior and other public entities.

Over time, parallel health services emerged in the private sector particularly in the area of outpatient
care. The introduction of mandatory health insurance initiatives after 2000 in several GCC countries
ushered in an era of rapid expansion in private care facilities. The private sector share of health
infrastructure capacity and service utilization is now substantial in most GCC countries. In Abu Dhabi, 31
percent of hospital beds and 93 percent of primary care centers and clinics are now in the private sector.5
In Saudi Arabia, 23 percent of all hospital beds in the country are owned by the private sector.6

                                                            
4
  Note: LI: lower income countries; LMI: lower-middle income countries; UMI: Upper-middle income countries; HI: High-income countries.
The Y-axes in both graphs begin at 40 to reveal the in-between differences in life expectancy from birth more clearly.
5
  Source: Health Authority of Abu Dhabi (HAAD), 2012.
6
  Source: Ministry of Health, Saudi Arabia, 2014.

                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                    
The advent of mandatory health insurance schemes in the GCC countries has driven up expenditure on
private health insurance as a share of total private health spending. In Qatar, spending on private
insurance as a percentage of total private health expenditures increased from 7 percent in 1995 to 47.8
percent in 2012. In Saudi Arabia, the percentage increased from 27.7 percentage to 45.3 percent during the
same time period – and a similar increase was observed in Bahrain.7

Within the framework of the GCC, an Executive Board for the Health Ministers’ Council was established
in 1991 to strengthen the harmonization of health policy agendas between the six member states.8 The
Executive Board has focused on promoting cooperation in the areas of infectious disease control, health
promotion, emergency medical services, organ donation and transplantation. On the financing side, the
Board also launched an initiative for the bulk purchasing of drugs generating substantial efficiency gains
for the individual states.

Notwithstanding significant historical achievements in recent decades, health status outcomes in the
GCC countries still lag behind the outcomes of countries with comparable per capita income and health
expenditure levels. As Figure IV shows below in the case of life expectancy, all six GCC countries perform
below average relative to countries with similar per capita income levels – but slightly above average
relative to per capita health expenditure levels. Kuwait performs below average relative to both indicators,
particularly with respect to GDP per capita.


                                                                      Figure IV: Life Expectancy Relative to Health Expenditure and GDP per Capita, 2012
        Life Expectancy Relative to Health Expenditure per Capita 
                                                                     Below average




                                                                                                                 USA

                                                                                                         NLD CAN             KWT
                                                                                                                      UAE QAT
                                                                                                  FRA               BHRKSA
                                                                                                JOR   UKTUR
                                                                                                KOR     SGP       OMN
                                                                                                       MYS
                                                                     Above average




                                                                                            LBN




                                                                                     Above average                              Below average
                                                                                               Life Expectancy Relative to GDP per Capita

    Source: World Bank, WHO, IMF 2014



                                                            
7
    Source: World Bank, WDI 2015.
8
    Note: Yemen joined as the seventh member of the Health Ministers’ Council in 2003

                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                                                                                                                
In terms of the impoverishing effects of catastrophic health expenditures, either due to sudden illness or
long-term chronic diseases, the GCC states afford their resident populations a relatively broad level of
financial protection. Out-of-pocket (OOP) health spending as a percentage of total health spending is below
21 percent in all six GCC states while it is much higher in other countries in MENA and other regions of
the world. As Figure V shows below, average OOP health spending in the GGC as a percentage of GDP is
15 percent – two percentage points lower than OECD average and 23 percentage points below the MENA
average. OOP spending below the 20 percent threshold set by WHO indicates a relatively good level of
financial protection from the unpredictable costs of treating human illnesses.


                             Figure V: Out-of-Pocket Health Spending as a % of Total Health Expenditure, 2012
       OOP Health Spending
         as a % of THE




                                                                                              60
                                                                                                         39                     38
                                                                                     28
                               16     16        12             20     9       19                                    15                     17
                             Bahrain Kuwait Oman               UAE   Qatar   Saudi Jordan   Egypt Lebanon GCC                MENA OECD
                                                                             Arabia
    Source: WHO health financing indicators, 2012.

 

                                     The Escalating Crisis of Non-Communicable Diseases and Injuries

Among the most pressing health system challenges facing countries around the world including the GCC
countries is the escalating crisis of non-communicable diseases (NDCs) and injuries. After tackling and
controlling infectious diseases over the past half century through immunization services, public health
surveillance and essential health services, countries are now grappling with the rising burden of chronic
conditions and injuries – and their risk factors. Globally, the five major types of non-communicable diseases
and injuries are cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and road traffic
injuries and the major adult risk factors for non-communicable diseases are obesity, physical inactivity,
tobacco use, alcohol consumption, and raised blood pressure9.

The mounting tide of non-communicable diseases and injuries in the GCC countries will not only place
upward pressure on health financing but will also affect economic productivity due to the growing rates
of premature mortality and morbidity among the working population. The changing patterns of disease
burden in MENA including the GCC countries have largely mirrored global trends over the last 20 years,
especially those in Europe and North America. These changes, combined with population aging, will
necessarily dial up the pressure on health spending as the share of NCD disease burden continues to grow.
NCDs are projected to account for 81 percent of all deaths in MENA and 87 percent of all deaths in the
GCC countries by 2030.10 Premature deaths due to NCDs among the working population are particularly
high in the GCC countries as Figure VI shows below.




                                                            
9
  Note: Raised blood pressure is also often viewed as a ‘risk marker’ -- rather than a ‘risk factor’ -- such as in the case of hypercholesterolemia
whose own risk factors include obesity, smoking and physical inactivity.
10
   WHO, 2014.

                                                                                                                                                      9
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                       Figure VI: Under 60 NCD Deaths as a Share of all NCD Deaths, 2013
                                                60
      NCD Deaths Under 60 Years as a % of all



                                                50


                                                40
                  NCD Deaths




                                                30


                                                20


                                                10


                                                 0
                                                     Japan Denmark   US   Tunisia   Mexico Ecuador   Oman   Bahrain   Saudi    Kuwait   Qatar   UAE
                                                                                                                      Arabia
Source: Economic Intelligence Unit, 2014, ‘Health Outcomes and Cost: A 166 Country Comparison.



The share of NCD deaths among individuals aged 60 years or younger out of total NCD deaths in the
GCC countries is the highest in the world. Figure VI above shows the estimates for several OECD
countries including Japan, Denmark and the United States with figures below 15 percent. On the other side
of the graph are the six GCC countries all equal to and above the 40 percent level. The problem in Qatar
and the UAE is exceptionally acute with the percentages reaching above the 50 percent level. This high
level of premature mortality among the working age population has non-negligible implications for labor
force productivity. The high rate of premature NCD mortality in the GCC countries stems from both
unhealthy lifestyles and perhaps inappropriate treatment options to manage NCDs and their complications.

There are also noticeable gender differentials in premature NCD mortality rates under the age of 70 in
the GCC countries – with males dying much earlier than females. The largest differential is in Qatar
(21.8 percentage points) and the lowest differential is in Kuwait (10.1 percentage point). Oman is closer to
Qatar with 16.9 percent points and Bahrain and Saudi Arabia are closer to Kuwait with 12.7 and 11.9
percentage points respectively.11

The leading contributors to disease burden in GCC countries are a mix of non-communicable diseases
and road safety injuries. Mental health disorders, diabetes, low back pain, road injuries and heart disease
were the largest contributors to the burden of disease in the GCC countries in 2010 as measured by the
composite measure of disability adjusted-life years (DALYs) lost.12 Mental health disorders are ranked as
the highest contributors to disease burden in Bahrain, Qatar and the UAE whereas road injuries are the top
contributors in Saudi Arabia and Oman. In Kuwait, the non-communicable disease with the largest impact
is heart disease.13 Explanations for the major contribution of mental health disorders to disease burden in
these high-income countries include changing household, gender, and social dynamics in the GCC
countries.

                                                            
11
   Source: WHO 2010 ‘Global Status Report on NCDs’.
12
   Note: Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) quantify both premature mortality (years of life lost) and disability (years lived with a disability)
within a population.
13
   Source: Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation, Global Burden of Disease GCC country profiles, 2010

                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                         
The major NCD risk factors in all GCC countries were obesity, dietary risks, high fasting blood sugar,
high-blood pressure and physical inactivity. The number one risk factor in all GCC countries in 2010 was
clearly obesity (high body-mass index). Around 8-12 percent of all DALYs in the GCC countries were
attributable to the risks associated with obesity. Dietary risks were the second largest contributor to disease
burden in Oman, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the UAE while high fasting blood sugar levels were the second
largest contributor in Bahrain and Qatar. Physical inactivity was also among the top five risk factors in the
GCC countries while tobacco use was among the top 15 risk factors.14


                 Obesity, Diabetes and Road Traffic Injuries: Is the GCC a High-Income Outlier?

Are the GCC countries a global outlier among high-income countries around the world with respect to
obesity, diabetes and road traffic injuries? Current epidemiological evidence indicates that indeed the
GCC countries do much worse than other high-income countries. The prevalence rates of obesity and
diabetes in GCC countries are the highest in all high-income countries and second highest among all
countries of the world. Only the lower-income Pacific island nations of Polynesia (e.g. Tonga, Samoa, Fiji)
have higher rates of obesity and diabetes. Similarly, average death rates from road-traffic accidents are
markedly higher in the GCC countries than the average rates among the high income countries of the world.


                                                                  Figures VII, VIII and IX

     Adult Obesity Prevalence (2013)                           Adult Diabetes Prevalence (2012)          Road Traffic Death Rates (2013)


       OECD                        21.8                          OECD            6.9                     OECD            7.7
        GCC                               33.2                     GCC                  16.5               GCC                      18.5

       Oman                        22                            Oman             8.2                   Bahrain            10.5

     Bahrain                              32.6                    Qatar                 16.3               UAE                 12.7

        UAE                               33.7                  Bahrain                  17.5              Qatar               14

        Qatar                             33.1                   Kuwait                  17.9            Kuwait                  16.5

           SA                              35.2                    UAE                       19              SA                         24.8

      Kuwait                                     42.8                SA                      20.5         Oman                             30.4

                  0          20           40         60                   0     10      20        30               0            20             40

Source: WHO Indicators, 2014                                   Source: WDF, 2014. OECD Report 2013     Source: WHO Indicators, 2014



Figures VII, VIII and IX illustrate these differences in graphic form. The average prevalence of adult
obesity among individuals aged 20-79 years in the GCC in 2013, as shown in Figure VII, was 33.2 percent
whereas in the OECD it was 21.8 percent - around 12 percentage points lower. A similar gap is noticed in
Figure VIII. The prevalence of adult diabetes in the GCC countries in 2012 ranged from 8.2 percent in
Oman to a high of 20.5 percent in Saudi Arabia – and the average adult prevalence of diabetes was around
16.5 percent. The OECD average of diabetes prevalence was 6.9 percent.15 The death rates from road traffic
accidents, measured as the number of road traffic fatalities per 100,000 population, ranged well above the
high-income country average of 7.7 fatalities per 100,000 persons – as indicated in Figure IX. It is worth
noting that Oman is an ‘outlier within the outliers’ in all three graphs. Its indicators for obesity and diabetes
are comparable to the OECD figures yet its indicator for road traffic fatalities is significantly higher than
                                                            
14
     Ibid.  
15
     OECD Health at a Glance, 2013

                                                                                                                                                    11
                                                                                                                                                       
most of its neighboring GCC countries. The impressive achievements in combatting obesity and diabetes
in Oman stem from decades of significant investments in primary care and health promotion activities. The
less impressive road safety outcomes, as indicated by 2012 data, are likely the result of risky behaviors
among the youth and possible under-investments in required emergency medical services.

These alarming trends warrant strong and sustained policy actions by the GCC countries. Obesity affects
other important NCD risk factors (i.e. hypertension, cholesterol) and is a major risk factor for heart disease,
diabetes and certain types of cancer (e.g. breast, colon, and kidney). Diabetes, if uncontrolled, leads to
major complications including kidney failure, eye damage, foot damage and the onset of cardiovascular
disease. Mental health diseases, similarly, have significant social and economic consequences for GCC
societies. NCDs and road traffic injuries will have an increasingly greater impact on the GCC states and
their societies in the absence of effective prevention and management strategies. These trends will continue
to: (i) drive cost escalation in the health sector and (ii) lower workforce productivity in the labor market.


                                        Health Service Delivery and Health Financing Challenges

The health service delivery systems in the GCC countries are facing a common set of pressures and
challenges. First, the rising tide of non-communicable diseases is pressuring GCC health systems to alter
their ‘care model’ by shifting more NCD prevention and management services down to the level of primary
care practitioners. Under such a model, at-risk patients can be more efficiently screened for NCD risk
factors and chronic disease patients (i.e. hypertensive, diabetic patients) can be more effectively managed.
Chronic disease management requires continuous monitoring by primary care practitioners of NCD
patients. In recognition of this challenge, Bahrain is currently contemplating the strengthening of its NCD
services within its 27 primary health care centers.

Second, growing numbers of NCD and road traffic injury (RTI) patients are exposing weaknesses in the
management and planning of health services in GCC countries. NCD patients, particularly among the
elderly, and RTI patients needing long-term rehabilitative care often have extended and unwarranted
lengths of stay in acute-care public hospitals. This problem stems from inadequate clinical management
systems and from ‘social pressures’ for keeping long-term chronic patients in acute care settings. Another
part of the problem is the shortage of adequate health facilities providing post-acute care services such as
rehabilitative care, long-term nursing care, hospice and home-based services which exacerbates the bed
management challenges of the public sector hospitals. A study in Saudi Arabia surveying physicians in
Riyadh indicated that 86 percent of respondents from public hospitals believed that inappropriate
hospitalization including extended lengths of stay occurred either ‘sometimes’ (69.6 percent) or ‘always’
(16.4 percent).16

Third, GCC health service delivery systems operating under centralized civil service and public financial
management rules often lack adequate incentive structures to drive better health system performance.
Managers in public sector facilities have neither full management information (due to weak e-health
systems) nor do they have sufficient authority to manage their staff effectively (i.e. recruit, dismiss or
promote). Centralized line-item budgeting procedures restrict management innovation and the pursuit of
efficiency gains. These ‘governance’ problems are prompting the public sector to think about ways to
provide greater autonomy to public sector health facilities. In recent years, both Saudi Arabia and Bahrain
have considered delinking their public sector hospitals from the Ministry of Health system and creating
autonomous entities.


                                                            
16
  Al-Omar, BA, 2006, Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal, ‘Factors Affecting Inappropriate Hospitalization in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia:
Physicians’ Perspectives’, Volume 12.

                                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                          
Fourth, quality and appropriateness of care represents an important challenge to GCC health officials.
The fragmented health service delivery networks in the public and private sector and the absence of
effective national quality of care programs in the GCC countries do not create an appropriate eco-system
for continuous quality improvement in health care services. The GCC countries need to harmonize quality
of care standards across their numerous health service networks and develop national systems for
monitoring and reporting quality of care outcomes. In Saudi Arabia, the Saudi Health Council is working
to harmonize clinical coding standards across all of the six large healthcare subsystems in the country
(Ministry of Health, Ministry of Defense, National Guard, Ministry of Interior, university sector, private
sector). In Bahrain, the Government recently established the National Health Regulatory Authority (NHRA)
to independently monitor the quality of clinical practice in the health sector.

On the health financing side, similarly, there are several important challenges confronting the GCC
health systems. First and foremost, there is the question of long-term fiscal sustainability. Although macro-
level spending on health is relatively low compared to countries of similar income levels (total health
spending is below 5 percent of GDP in all GCC countries), there are three important factors prompting
concern: (i) a fiscal base largely reliant on hydrocarbon revenues as opposed to tax revenues; (ii) increasing
cost escalation arising from greater demand because of population dynamics, changing patterns of disease
and the continuous introduction of high-cost medicines and health technologies; and (iii) a social contract,
as reflected in different constitutional provisions, between state and society stipulating the obligations of
the state to ensure access to healthcare services.

Second, there is ample room for improvements in the efficiency of spending by GCC health systems. In
most GCC health systems, an excessively large portion of health spending covers higher-cost secondary
and tertiary care services rather than targeting lower-cost prevention, promotion and primary care services.
In Kuwait, according to National Health Accounts data, the Ministry of Health spent more on expensive
overseas treatment (14 percent of the MOH budget) in 2010-2011 than it did on primary health care services
(8 percent).17 In 2012, around 21,658 UAE nationals visited 5 private hospitals in Thailand with an average
spend of around (Thai Bhat) 24,000 per outpatient service and (Thai Bhat) 350,000 per inpatient
admission.18

Third, there has been insufficient innovation in developing new provider payment systems in the GCC
countries. In recent decades, many health systems around the world have migrated from traditional line-
item budgeting, salaried-based payments, and fee-for-service schemes to new forms of payment systems.
This transition occurred during 1970-2000 because of growing empirical evidence in the health economics
literature that different types of payment systems have differentiated effects on the practice of medicine –
and therefore on the fulfillment of different health system performance goals (i.e. efficiency, equity, and
quality). Some of the newer provider payment systems include global budgets for public hospitals,
capitated payments for primary care services, prospective payments systems based on diagnosis-related
groupings (DRG) for hospitals service and pay-for-performance schemes. Each payment system has its
advantages and disadvantages in terms of its health system consequences. With the introduction of new
mandatory health insurance initiatives, some GCC health systems have begun to experiment with the
development of new payment systems including global budgeting and capitation for primary care services.




                                                            
17
  Source: Kuwaiti Ministry of Health, National Health Accounts Report, 2014.
18
  Source: Noree, T. 2012, ‘Medical Tourism in Thailand’, presentation. Note: The 2012 mid-year THB per 1 USD currency exchange rate was
36.1.

                                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                                         
                                              World Bank Health Engagement in GCC Countries

The World Bank uses its global experience, sectoral expertise and country context knowledge to provide
GCC countries with a ‘one-stop’ window for advisory services covering policy development and
implementation support. It also organizes knowledge-sharing events for the GCC countries focusing on
global best practices across a wide array of sectors. The World Bank health engagement in GCC countries
currently focuses on three clusters of research and technical assistance activities as shown below.


1. Developing Multi-Layered Solutions for Improving NCD and Road Safety Outcomes

       Within this cluster, the World Bank draws on the work of its Health Global Practice in Latin America,
       the Caribbean, Eastern and Central Europe and East Asia and the Pacific19 to focus on the following
       activities:

                     Analyzing the economic burden of NCDs and road traffic injuries (RTIs)
                     Examining the cost-effectiveness of multi-sectoral solutions to address the growing epidemic
                      of NCDs and RTIs
                     Assessing the supply-side readiness of GCC health systems to respond to future demand for
                      health services stemming from NCDs and RTIs
                     Providing global best practice evidence for ways to address major NCD risk factors
                     Designing pay-for-performance schemes for enhanced NCD screening programs
                     Assessing the quality of NCD health care services

2. Health System Strengthening

       Under this cluster, World Bank activities focus on the following work:

                     Developing and independently assessing health strategies and benchmarking health system
                      performance
                     Analyzing health financing systems, expenditure trends, reform options and providing
                      implementation support (activities include public expenditure reviews, institutionalizing
                      health accounts, analyzing health insurance options, designing new payment systems,
                      supporting the development of ‘health technology assessment’ capacity)
                     Strengthening the rationalization of health service delivery (activities include health sector
                      ‘masterplanning’, developing options for addressing dual practice by physicians)
                     Analyzing opportunities to increase private sector participation in health service delivery
                     Examining options to improve health care quality and accreditation systems




                                                            
19
   Note: Examples of recent World Bank NCD publications include: (i) ‘Toward a Healthy and Harmonious Life in China: Stemming the Rising
Tide of Non-Communicable Diseases’; (ii) The Economic Implications of Non-Communicable Disease for India; (iii) Addressing the Challenge
of Non-Communicable Diseases in Brazil; (iv) Promoting Health Living in Latin America and the Caribbean: Governance of Multi-sectoral
Activities to Prevent Risk Factors for Non Communicable Diseases; and (v) Supply-side Readiness for Universal Health Coverage: Addressing the
Depth of Coverage for Non-Communicable Diseases in Indonesia
 

                                                                                                                                         14
                                                                                                                                            
3. Integrating Health Policy Solutions within Wider Institutional and Policy Frameworks

   The work under this component would focus on the following activities:

           Analyzing how improved governance arrangements can enhance health system performance
            (e.g. how civil service and public financial management rules affect reforms in health service
            delivery such as provider payment or hospital autonomy reforms)
           Leveraging sectoral linkages to improve health status outcomes (e.g. developing integrated
            strategies between the health, transport, education, agriculture and urban sectors to address
            NCDs and RTIs)
           Supporting the development of regulatory frameworks in important areas of the health sector
            (food, drugs and medical devices) within and across the GCC countries
           Analyzing options and developing solutions for greater GCC regional health collaboration
            (e.g. streamlining the portability of health insurance coverage, harmonizing regulations
            governing physician licensing, accreditation standards, and pharmaceutical policies)



                                  Summary Observations and Outlook

The World Bank Group is well-positioned to support GCC countries with comprehensive health policy
advisory services. Its international mandate, broad policy experience, in-depth technical expertise, local
country presence and multi-service platform enable it to provide these services covering the areas of policy
analysis and implementation support. Two of its own institutions - the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC)) - work together
to catalyze private sector participation and investments in the health sector. With its strong connections to
Ministries of Finance and development organizations around the world, it also has the institutional networks
to leverage the totality of global experience in support of priority health policy reforms in the GCC
countries.




                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                             
