                                       Approach Paper
                            Clustered Country Program Evaluation
                                       For Small States

                                           March 31, 2015
                                      (Amended February 22, 2016)

I. Background and Context
1.       For many years, the World Bank Group (WBG) has deployed particular efforts to
help small states, a major segment of its country client base, address their unique
development challenges. Depending on the precise identifier, 1 small states constitute a quarter
or more of WBG client countries. Over at least the past two decades, development partners,
including the WBG, have made special efforts to help small states address their development
challenges, even as an analytical and policy literature on the subject has burgeoned. While these
development challenges are manifold and often country-specific, two stylized facts—closely
linked to the intrinsic characteristics of small states—encapsulate challenges that are peculiar to
most, if not all, small states. The first is that small states’ GDP growth is subject to greater
volatility than that of larger states (with consequential adverse impacts on the poor and
vulnerable, whose means of coping with shocks are limited), reflecting inter alia small states’
greater susceptibility to terms of trade and weather-related shocks and to contagion, and pointing
to the need to increase resilience. The second stylized fact is that over roughly the past 25 years
small states have posted weaker economic growth relative to larger states (with emerging
adverse impacts on social well-being), probably reflecting such drivers as diseconomies of small
scale. Depending on the specific country, consequences have included limited fiscal space, high
indebtedness, and lack of financial depth. This points to the need to improve competitiveness in
order to foster sustainable growth. The WBG has emerged as one of the leaders among
development partners in recognizing and responding to small states’ special needs. It now
deploys a panoply of specific provisions and initiatives to serve this client segment, ranging from
its organization of the Small States Forum (SSF), a grouping for dialogue on development issues
facing small countries that convenes annually during of the IMF-World Bank Annual Meetings,
to IDA’s “small island economies exception”, a provision that allows several small states to
access funding on concessional terms despite exceeding IDA’s operational per-capita income
cutoff. During 1998-2000, the Bank partnered with the Commonwealth Secretariat and others on
the Small States Task Force, which produced a pioneering report analyzing the challenges faced




1
  As discussed further below, the most widely used and accepted identifier of a small state is a population of fewer
than 1.5 million inhabitants. However, other identifiers, including membership of the Bank-facilitated Small States
Forum (which includes several countries exceeding the population threshold but exhibiting small-state-like
characteristics), have also been used.



                                                         1
by small states in a globalizing economy and proposing elements of a strategy to guide their
development and support from partners. 2
2.      This “clustered” country program evaluation (CCPE) marks IEG’s first in-depth
assessment of the relevance and effectiveness of WBG support during FY06-FY15 in
helping selected small states improve their resilience and their competitiveness. This second
pilot CCPE, focusing on selected small states (the first, soon to be completed, focused on
“resource-rich” countries) will provide an opportunity to deepen and refine the clustered
approach in IEG’s country program evaluation work. This CCPE exercise will comprise two
regional/country program evaluations (R/CPEs), covering the WBG programs in: (i) the six
independent Organization of Eastern Caribbean (OECS) countries; 3 and (ii) Samoa and Tonga,
coupled with regional aspects of the WBG program in several other Pacific island countries. 4 It
will also include more selective assessments of WBG support to selected African small states, 5
as well an overall synthesis of evaluation findings. The choice of CCPE focus countries is not
intended to be a representative sample of the population of small states served by the Bank
Group; nor is the CCPE exercise intended to compare or benchmark the performance of the
focus countries against one another. The CCPE’s principal value added will be its unprecedented
in-depth look at the extent to which Bank Group support has helped several of its small state
clients improve: (a) their resilience in order to reduce their—greater, compared with larger
states—vulnerability to shocks, both physical and economic; and (b) their competitiveness in
order to foster sustainable long-term growth. While at least two strands of previous IEG
evaluation work have touched specifically on small states, its focus has not specifically been on
systematically assessing how WBG support has helped to make progress under these two broad
development goals or “pillars”. 6,7
3.     Regardless of clustering, IEG’s country program evaluations use a well-established
methodological mold that distinguishes them from a thematic or corporate evaluation on
small states. As explained further in Sections III and IV as well as in Attachment 4, IEG’s

2
 Formerly known as the British Commonwealth, the Commonwealth of Nations is an inter-governmental organization
of 53 member states, including several small states. The Commonwealth Secretariat/World Bank (2000) Task Force
Report on Small States quickly became, and has remained, a classic reference in the field.
3
 The OECS also comprises three dependent territories of the United Kingdom—Montserrat (full member) and
Anguilla and the British Virgin Islands (associate members).
4
  The rationale underlying the—purposive—selection of these three (sets of) countries is set out in Section III below.
The value of clustering country program evaluation work relates to the usefulness of comparing, contrasting, and
cross-fertilizing lessons and recommendations, as well as to potentially broadening their applicability and scope. For
a thorough discussion of the benefits of clustering, see “Approach Paper for the CCPE on Resource-Rich Developing
Countries: The Cases of Bolivia, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and Zambia”, IEG, February 2014.
5
    The African small states include Mauritius, Seychelles, Cabo Verde, Djibouti.
6
 One strand of IEG work has consisted of Country Assistance Evaluations (CAEs), now known as CPEs, on certain
small states, most recently Timor Leste (2010) The second synthesized disparate evaluation findings at the project and
program level, drawing lessons for WBG engagement in small states—notably on improving project and program
outcomes, addressing capacity constraints, and improving coordination and procedures among development partners.
7
    Previous IEG evaluations of WBG support to small states are discussed at greater length later in this section.



                                                             2
R/CPEs follow a well-established methodology: they assess (and rate) the extent to which WBG
support has (efficiently) met its relevant objectives at the country or—in cases where WBG
support is delivered under a regional partnership strategy—regional program level. In so doing,
they employ the strategic objectives and outcomes specified in the relevant Bank Group strategy
document(s). In contrast, a thematic or corporate evaluation covering small states would provide
an assessment of how effectively the WBG has supported this client segment as a whole at the
overall institutional level. 8 The R/CPEs to be undertaken in this evaluation will closely follow
IEG’s established methodology, although a common framework based on the two pillars of
increasing resilience and improving competitiveness will be used across the R/CPEs for
reporting on evaluation findings in order to facilitate comparisons and identification of common
patterns and lessons across country programs. 9 The R/CPEs will also look into the relevance and
effectiveness of specific provisions, instruments, and programs that the WBG has made
available—in some cases exclusively—to the small states client segment. 10 Finally, the R/CPEs
to be undertaken will involve both regional and single-country approaches. In the case of the
OECS countries, a single RPE will cover the WBG programs in all six countries. Reflecting
WBG Management’s own approach of preparing and executing a single strategy for the six
independent countries, the assessment will be conducted against the OECS regional partnership
strategy (RPS) results matrices, which include both regional and country-specific objectives and
outcomes. The case of the Pacific island countries, where WBG Management has used both
single-country and regional strategies during the FY06-15 evaluation period, is more complex,
and will involve a hybrid between a single-country CPE—on the WBG programs in Samoa and
Tonga—and an RPE covering the WBG program in the nine Pacific island countries as a whole,
focusing on areas where the WBG has consistently adopted a regional platform for its
operational work. Lastly, the selective assessments of the WBG programs in the African small
states will be single-country, based on single-country strategies.
A BRIEF PROFILE OF SMALL STATES

4.     The definition of a small state can vary, but is most commonly based on population.
The definition of a small state has been based on a number of alternative measures, including
population, surface area, and GDP. However, the literature and development partners—including
the WBG, the IMF, and the Commonwealth—have most often used a population of less than 1.5
million inhabitants as the identifier of small states. Forty-nine World Bank member countries
make up the membership of the Small States Forum (SSF), a grouping that convenes annually at



8
 In addition, evaluation work at the country program level is conducted in sufficient depth so as to enable generation
of meaningful program-specific lessons and recommendations, while also fostering accountability at that level,
whereas such considerations are not typically the focus of thematic or corporate evaluations.
9
 As will become clear subsequently, a correspondence between individual country strategies’ results matrices and the
proposed common reporting framework is straightforwardly established. For instance, as discussed in Section III, it is
virtually an exact match in the case of the OECS countries.
10
   In this respect, the CCPE will look into certain issues that typically fall more within the purview of a thematic or
corporate evaluation.



                                                          3
the IMF-World Bank Annual Meetings (Table 1). 11 Of these, seven—Botswana, Gabon, the
Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Jamaica, Lesotho, and Namibia—share many of the characteristics of,
and often self-identify as, small states despite having a population above 1.5 million in 2013.
Table 1. Small States Forum Member States
 Antigua & Barbuda             Equatorial Guinea     Malta                    St. Kitts and Nevis
 The Bahamas                   Estonia               Marshall Islands         St. Lucia
 Bahrain                       Fiji                  Mauritius                St. Vincent & the Grenadines
 Barbados                      Gabon                 Micronesia, Fed. Sts.    Suriname
 Belize                        Gambia, The           Montenegro               Swaziland
 Bhutan                        Grenada               Namibia                  Timor-Leste
 Botswana                      Guinea-Bissau         Palau                    Tonga
 Brunei Darussalam             Guyana                Qatar                    Trinidad and Tobago
 Cabo Verde                    Iceland               Samoa                    Tuvalu
 Comoros                       Jamaica               San Marino               Vanuatu
 Cyprus                        Kiribati              São Tomé & Principe
 Djibouti                      Lesotho               Seychelles
 Dominica                      Maldives              Solomon Islands
Source: Small States Forum website


5.      Grouping together small states masks their significant diversity. Small states are
geographically dispersed, although most are located in the Caribbean, the Pacific, and Africa
(including the Indian Ocean). Of the non-island economies, many are reasonably well integrated
with neighboring countries, and thus do not face the same constraints as the island economies. 12
In terms of population, small countries range from microstates of around 50,000 inhabitants,
such as the Federation of St. Kitts & Nevis, to larger states, such as Trinidad & Tobago, with
populations close to 1.5 million. In terms of geography, small states likewise vary significantly.
Many are island or widely dispersed multi-island countries, while some are landlocked. For
example, many Pacific island states consist of multitudes of very small, widely scattered islands.
At the high end, Kiribati comprises 33 islands spread over 3.5 million square kilometers of
ocean—an area about the size of the Indian subcontinent. And small states range from advanced
market economies and high-income, fuel-exporting countries to low-income economies. Finally,
their World Bank borrower status varies significantly. In terms of IDA eligibility, 20 small states
of fewer than 1.5 million inhabitants currently qualify. Thirteen of these countries—with a per-
capita GNI level on average four times the IDA operational cutoff (and in some cases as high as
six times the operational cutoff)—have access to IDA funds under the small island economies
exception. Certain other small states, such as Mauritius, are IBRD-only borrowers, while still
others, such as the Bahamas, are non-borrowers (see Attachment 3).




11
     Countries listed in italics are high-income.
12
     An exception is Bhutan, which shares some island-like characteristics.



                                                            4
SMALL STATE-SPECIFIC CHARACTERISTICS AND CHALLENGES

6.      Small states typically exhibit certain intrinsic characteristics. While small states are
clearly a heterogeneous group and differ widely in terms of needs, they are nevertheless thought
to share a number of intrinsic characteristics, which often translate directly into development
challenges. Fixed costs in the public or private sector can be very high in relation to the small
scale at which these countries operate, implying high unit costs). Small states also face fixed
costs for commercial and financial sector transactions (similarly very high in relation to typical
transaction volumes in their economies). They are often located in areas that imply high trade
costs as well as particular vulnerability to natural disasters, including especial susceptibility to
the adverse effects of climate change. 13
7.      Small size also appears to be associated with specific economic traits and challenges.
These translate into economic traits affecting the fiscal accounts (higher public spending and
public sector wage bills in relation to GDP), output and trade (a focus on the production of a few
goods and services that are not scale-intensive and concentration of exports on a few goods and
services, leading to higher exposure to terms of trade shocks and contagion from partner country
downturns), labor markets (limited opportunity for employment, especially the use of specialized
expertise, entailing higher outmigration rates), and the monetary and financial sectors (with some
exceptions, lower financial depth and more concentrated banking sectors). They also tend to
have limited institutional capacity, owing to the very small absolute (though not relative) size of
their public sectors. In particular, as emphasized earlier, greater exposure to economic and
physical shocks leads to greater volatility of growth in small states compared with larger states,
and repeated shocks, coupled with the inherent stresses on public finances and limited borrowing
opportunities, have led to a buildup of significant debt levels in several small states. Table 2
summarizes these interconnected characteristics and challenges, which Attachment 1 discusses in
greater detail.

Table 2. The Multi-faceted Challenges Confronting Small States
 Intrinsic Characteristics
   •     Size: small (population < 1.5 million)                •    Location: often remote; frequently in
                                                                    areas with natural beauty but
                                                                    particularly exposed to natural
                                                                    disasters and effects of climate change
 Implications
   •    Diseconomies of small scale in the                     •    High trade costs
   production of both public and private goods                 •    Susceptibility to catastrophic weather-
   and services                                                     and climate related events
   •    Greater social cohesion

 Resulting Macroeconomic and Structural Features



13
  On small states’ intrinsic characteristics and their implications, see in particular IMF (2013), one of the most recent
and comprehensive integrative papers on the subject of small states.



                                                           5
      •   Low diversification of domestic                      •   Stress on limited natural resources
          production                                           •   Frequent physical shocks of large
      •   Low productivity                                         magnitude; in extreme cases, long-
      •   Low institutional capacity                               term existential threats
      •   Limited financial depth; limited public
          and private sector borrowing
          opportunities
      •   High public spending ratios and limited
          supply of public goods and services
      •   Trade openness
      •   High susceptibility to terms of trade
          shocks and contagion from trading
          partner downturns
      •   Limited employment opportunities,
          especially for specialized skills and
          high outmigration rates

                                •       High indebtedness and limited fiscal space
                                    •    Disproportionate reliance on foreign aid
                                          • High variability in growth rates


8.      Partly as a result of small states’ characteristics and their implications, there is some
evidence that small states’ economic performance has in recent years lagged that of their
larger comparators. Analysis covering the period 1990-2010 reveals a considerable growth
shortfall—some 1.4 percentage points per year—for small states relative to larger states. 14 In
particular, over the period 2000-10, small states appear to have posted significantly weaker
growth performance than larger states (Figure 1). 15 After setbacks during and following the
2008-09 global economic crisis, economic growth in small states has generally resumed, but
remains weaker than pre-crisis levels, reflecting in part many small states’ limited ability to
diversify economic structures and re-orient economic activity toward new markets and sectors.
In 2013, for instance, a third of small states posted negative GDP growth rates. Depending on the
country, both macroeconomic factors (such as the high and increasing levels of public debt in the
OECS countries) and structural factors (weak competitiveness, in certain cases aggravated by an
erosion of trade preferences and/or high rates of outmigration) may have contributed to the
weakening of small states’ performance.




14
   In contrast to these findings, longer-term analysis (1980-2010) suggests that growth rates and income levels for
small states and their larger counterparts are broadly comparable (IMF, 2013).
15
  The sample size is too small to allow reliable regression analysis and significance tests over the more recent period
2000-10. Nevertheless, Figure 1 depicts the slowing of average growth of per-capita GDP in small states relative to
their larger counterparts over that period.



                                                           6
 Figure 1. Growth is Slowing in Small Relative to Larger States
                                                     GDP Per-capita Growth
                                                           (in percent, median)
                                  3.5

                                   3        Small States                          Non-Small States

                                  2.5

                                   2

                                  1.5

                                   1

                                  0.5

                                   0
                                          1990-99          2000-11          1990-99           2000-11


Source: WEO and IMF staff estimates

9.      In terms of social conditions, poverty remains a serious challenge for many small
states. Despite many small states’ relatively good absolute standing on poverty and social
indicators, the high exposure to economic shocks and disasters contributes to keeping the
substantial portion of the population that is poor and vulnerable—and less able to cope with
adverse shocks—at risk of falling into deeper poverty. In some island countries, notably in the
Pacific, the high prevalence of poverty is linked in part to an uneven distribution of income—this
is notably the case in multi-island states where the bulk of activity is concentrated in the capital
city, with more remote islands lagging far behind. But volatility also contributes to propagating
and reinforcing income inequality, notably by raising the share of households that cannot afford
to invest in human capital. Figure 2 shows poverty rates for selected countries where data is
available.


 Figure 2. Poverty Rates in Selected Small States
               70                                                                                                          61.7   63
               60
                                                                                                                    49.9
               50                                                                               41.3    41.9   43
                                                                                35.2   37.7
               40
                                                         28.8   28.8     30.2
           %




                                                    27
               30                  21.8   22.7
                    18.3   19.3
               20
               10
                0




Source: Extract from World Bank 2013 (WP1306 – Chart 6)), WDI, country strategies




                                                                     7
10.    In a number of small states, the weaker growth performance of recent years appears
to have compromised progress on social indicators. For instance, the Human Development
Index (HDI) improved less for small states than for larger states over the period 2000-10 (IMF,
2013). Similarly, a number of small states remain off track with respect to several of the MDGs,
notably the infant mortality rate (which has fallen much more in larger than in smaller states) and
on improved sanitation.


 Figure 3. Small States’ Progress toward attaining the MDGs by 2015



                                                          2
                                           4
                           7                                                                                7              7               8
                                                          8
           14
                                                                         16
                                           10
                                                          1                                                                6
                                                          1                                22
                          12                                                                                                               10
                                           1                                                                14             2
            3                                                                                                              2
                                           3
            1
            1                                                            6                                                                 2
            2              1
                           2                              17                                                                               1
                           1                                             2                                  4              12              3
                                           11
            8                                                            1                 5
                           6                                                                                1
                                                                         4                                  1                              5
                                                                                           1                2
                                                                                           1




        Target Met   Sufficient Progress   Insufficient Progress   Moderately Off Target        Seriously Off Target   Insufficient Data



                          Source: Global Monitoring Report database (2013). Based on data for 29 small states.




LITERATURE AND PREVIOUS EVALUATIONS RELEVANT TO SMALL STATES

11.     Many parts of the literature have queried whether and how size matters for
economic success. Findings have confirmed that in many cases the intrinsic characteristics of
small states have had macroeconomic spillovers that have adversely impacted economic
performance. Certain studies show that smaller countries tend to have (relatively speaking) larger
governments, making for higher-cost provision of public goods (Alesina and Wacziarg, 1998). 16
The well-established endogenous growth literature has emphasized the benefits of scale owing to
positive externalities in the accumulation of capital and the transmission of knowledge (Romer,
1986). Other studies have underlined that larger size enhances growth by raising the intensity of

16
   The share of government spending in GDP decreases with population, reflecting economies of scale in the
production of public goods and services.



                                                                   8
product market competition (Aghion and Howitt, 1998; Aghion et al., 2002). Another branch of
the literature has focused on the role of trade costs. Higher trade costs combined with
diseconomies of small scale can impede remote small states from generating acceptable income
levels through trade and specialization. As a result, these economies are likely to become less
attractive for commercial activities as globalization proceeds and trade preferences are eroded
(Winters and Martins, 2004). Other studies have underlined that the erosion of trade preferences
may affect smaller countries with high dependence and concentration on a few commodities,
such as sugar and bananas (Alexandraki and Lankes, 2004; Mlachila and Cashin, 2007). Some
authors have related lower growth performance in small states to the negative impact of their
higher rates of outmigration and brain drain (Schiff and Wang, 2012). Yet other studies have
suggested that small states can overcome their size-disadvantage through higher levels of
openness, education and financial development (Alesina et al., 2005), or by following
appropriate policies to overcome their disadvantage and exploit their advantages (Favaro and
Peretz, 2008). Small size may even confer certain advantages, such as social cohesion
(Attachment I).
12.     The literature suggests that one of small states’ most serious problems is the high
volatility that they face, and that managing volatility facilitates development. Small states’
greater openness and concentration of their exports in a few goods and services results in greater
vulnerability to external shocks, notably in prices and trading partner country demand for
exports, including tourism. Meilak (2008), for instance, finds that the volatility of growth is
higher in countries that experience high export concentration. Natural disasters and the impact of
climate change also give rise to considerable macroeconomic variability. All told, the literature
suggests that volatility has an adverse impact on growth, income distribution, and poverty.
Studies also point to higher output volatility in countries that are isolated, remote, or
geographically dispersed (Malik and Temple, 2008; Rose and Spiegel, 2008). In terms of
addressing risk, the 2014 World Development Report on Risk and Opportunity argued that risk
management can be a powerful instrument for development. A strong risk management strategy
would include a combination of actions for better preparation against volatility—including
gaining knowledge, acquiring protection (including obtaining insurance) to reduce the
probability and size of losses, and acting to cope with risks once they materialize. Benefit-cost
analysis across a number of areas suggests that risk preparation is often beneficial in averting
costs, sometimes overwhelmingly so. For example, improving weather forecasting and public
communication systems to provide earlier warning of natural disasters can yield estimated
benefits amounting to 4 to 36 times the size of costs (Hallegatte, 2012).
13.    Previous IEG evaluation work points inter alia to the importance of taking account
of capacity limitations, notably in project design and in development partner (including
WBG) practices. In a synthesis of evaluation findings based on a review of existing evaluative
evidence for a number of small states, 17 IEG noted that WBG support to small states generally
performed below average on both the country and project levels. Unsatisfactory project
performance was typically a product of overly ambitious and flawed project designs, lack of
stakeholder participation, underestimation of governance-related and social constraints,

17
     “Small States: Making the Most of Development Assistance”, IEG, 2006.



                                                         9
inadequate human resources and institutional capacity, and complex and uncoordinated
development partner procedures and requirements. The synthesis also suggested a prospective
“honest broker” role for the WBG in helping to foster regional approaches, as well as a need for
greater tailoring of existing WBG business processes and practices to fit the special
characteristics of small states and reduce costs to the countries.
14.     IEG work also points to the need for judicious use of regional approaches as well as
for interventions that are better tailored to small states. A 2005 evaluation of World Bank
assistance to five borrowing countries in the Pacific suggested that the Bank had pushed a
regional approach beyond the limits of effectiveness—geographical proximity and similarity of
development constraints had proved to be an insufficient basis for a common WBG strategy for
all Pacific Member Countries. 18 In addition, a lack of close coordination with other development
partners and the failure to harmonize procedures was found to be burdening the limited
administrative capacities of the countries. The evaluation suggested a need for close coordination
among development partners at the policy and strategy level and concerted efforts to place the
countries at the center of aid coordination. A 2007 IEG evaluation of WBG support to middle-
income countries found that the Bank’s engagement in the middle-income small states was only
modest and less relevant than in other middle income countries. 19 The Bank faced relatively high
unit costs to prepare and supervise operations, and its lending was low and infrequent. The
evaluation suggested that the small uptake of Bank finance, combined with the limited scale of
knowledge services being delivered, pointed to an absence of appropriate tailoring of services to
the small states client group.
15.      IEG’s recent evaluation of WBG support to Fragile and Conflict States (FCS) also
has relevance to small states. Many of the issues raised in the FCS evaluation, notably on the
need for WBG support to be underpinned by an understanding of, and to address, the drivers of
fragility and conflict, will likely also be relevant to the small states context. In many respects, the
WBG and other development partners have interpreted smallness as a form of fragility.
Recently-established provisions by the Bank for the use of simplified procedures in investment
projects, for instance, have applied equally to FCS and small states. Similarly, Bank efforts to
enhance its capacity to engage in FCS through significant increases in administrative budgets
and in-country staff resources may hold lessons for its engagement in small states.
16.     Evaluation findings relating to WBG support for environmental resilience in small
states point notably to increasing attention to risk management. A 2006 IEG evaluation
found that the Bank’s attitude to disasters had been reactive and tactical, rather than proactive
and strategic. 20 However, by 2012 an IEG evaluation on climate change adaptation found that
there had been a clear shift towards risk reduction in Bank-financed disaster operations,
including greater mainstreaming of disaster risk reduction elements into projects not dedicated


18
     Evaluation of World Bank Assistance to Pacific Member Countries, 1991-2002, IEG, 2005.
19
     Development Results in Middle Income Countries, IEG, 2007.
20
  Hazards of Nature, Risks to Development: An IEG Evaluation of World Bank Assistance for Natural Disasters, IEG,
2006.



                                                        10
primarily to disasters. 21 The evaluation noted that the WBG has helped to support innovative
financial risk management products for disasters, including the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
Insurance Facility, though it also noted that this had not yet been replicated elsewhere and that
countries remained financially vulnerable to major disasters. While Bank analytic work has often
noted that increased exposure rather than climate change was the main driver of increased
vulnerability to natural disasters, and thus recommended land use planning and zoning to reduce
exposure, the evaluation found few examples where this was being carried out. The evaluation
also noted that country strategies and projects that support climate change adaptation have
focused mostly on current climate variability and adaptation deficits rather than attempting to
anticipate future climate change, even in countries facing severe threats from future climate
change. 22 In addition, the evaluation noted the need for: better monitoring and evaluation
systems to assess the impact of projects that aim to build resilience; greater collection and
sharing of hydro-meteorological data; and judicious and policy-relevant use of climate modeling.
And the evaluation underscored the need for improved WBG guidance on how to consider and
integrate climate risks in climate-sensitive areas and investments. Finally, a 2008 IEG evaluation
noted the importance of focusing on traditional environmental and natural resource management
issues in addition to climate change and disaster risk management. It identified the need to
continue to address environment and resource management issues in country strategies and
programs, to improve coordination across sectors and across WBG institutions, and to assess
environmental impacts. 23
17.     IEG evaluation findings concerning partnerships at the regional and global levels
are relevant to small states, where partnerships take on particular importance. At the
regional level, a 2007 evaluation found that most WBG-supported regional programs were
relevant but not closely linked to its country programs. 24 Regional programs were often
dominated by development partners, and program activities were executed by regional entities
with weak links to national institutions. The evaluation also found that WBG performance in
regional programs has been most effective in traditional areas of comparative advantage. WBG
incentives and capacities, which are geared to country programs, are sub-optimal for the support
of regional programs. The evaluation also noted that the WBG appeared to be underutilizing its
CAS processes to assist countries in identifying regional interdependencies and in assessing the
benefits and costs of taking regional approaches. Some of the key program features that had
proven vital for regional program success were: strong country commitment to regional
cooperation; scope of objectives matching national and regional institutional capacities; clear
delineation and coordination of the roles of national and regional institutions, and well-designed

21
     Adapting to Climate Change: Assessing the World Bank Group Experience, IEG, 2012.
22
  Case studies on explicit climate change adaptation projects in the Caribbean and in Kiribati noted that while these
were successful in building-up national or regional capacity for analysis and planning, they were hampered by
spreading resources and capacity too thinly across multiple topics and locations, and they discovered that planning
and execution need to occur in tandem to maintain political and popular support.
23
     Environmental Sustainability, An Evaluation of World Bank Group Support, IEG, 2008.
24
   The Development Potential of Regional Programs: An evaluation of World Bank Support of Multi-country
Operations, IEG, 2007.



                                                         11
regional governance bodies. At the global level, evaluation work found that the Global Facility
for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), a global partnership program located in the
Bank, has established strong ties with the Bank’s country operations supporting its regional
operations to expand country-level technical assistance activities in disaster risk reduction and
climate change adaptation, including in small states. 25 The evaluation found significant evidence
of possible GFDRR impact in terms of improving attention to disasters in WBG country
strategies. It also noted that the GFDRR needs to continue to deliver support at the national and
local levels, where nearly all DRR action takes place, as well as to support global and regional
public goods (such as global knowledge and regional coordination).
18.    IEG Evaluation work on building institutional capacity, a particular weakness in
small states, may also hold useful lessons. Findings from a 2006 OED report on capacity
building in Africa found a need for attention to four areas: (i) addressing the fragmentation of
most institutional capacity building support; (ii) strengthening sector-specific capacity building
approaches; (iii) fuller and more effective utilization of tools and instruments 26; and (iv)
customizing adequate quality assurance of institutional capacity building initiatives.

ATTENTION TO PARTNERSHIPS, CAPACITY, AND GENDER ISSUES

19.     Partnerships play a particularly significant role in the delivery of WBG support to
small states. Multi-donor trust funds (MDTFs) and other partnership modalities, which allow the
WBG to extend and scale up its support beyond the traditional country support instruments, take
on particular cogency in small states 27. Partnerships can help address specific challenges. For
instance, the Climate Investment Funds (CIFs), GEF, and GFDRR, as well as specific regional
programs such as the Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility (PRIF), help scale up WBG support
to the OECS and the Pacific island states through technical assistance and investments in the
areas of adaptation to climate change, disaster risk management, and infrastructure development.
Partnerships also help develop and pilot innovative approaches to development challenges facing
the countries. For example, the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF), an
insurance mechanism developed by the WBG and funded by bilateral donors, is a multi-country
risk pool that uses parametric policies backed by both traditional and capital markets, now
replicated in the Pacific islands through the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance Pilot. Networks,

25
     Review of the GFDRR, IEG, 2012.
26
   “The Bank’s traditional tools—technical assistance and training—have often proved ineffective in helping to
build sustained public sector capacity. The Bank is not fully utilizing all its available instruments to improve public
sector performance. Economic and sector work does not contribute to public sector capacity building as much as it is
expected to, or could. Programmatic lending has so far been used more effectively to enhance strategic planning
than to build sustainable capacity to manage sectors and deliver services. The World Bank Institute has not yet
completed its transformation from individual training to capacity building.” (Capacity Building in Africa 2006 OED
report, Executive summary p. viii)
27
   For the purposes of this evaluation, a partnership refers to an arrangement—typically involving dedicated funding
and common objectives for collective action—between two or more legally autonomous entities. Partnerships may be
collaborative, transactional, and/or networking in nature, they may have global, regional, or single-country focus, and
the sharing of accountability for results may vary.



                                                         12
some regional, facilitate knowledge sharing in various policy areas. The Small States Forum,
organized by the World Bank, fosters the exchange of good practices among senior small state
policy-makers while promoting increased integration of small state interests into the policies and
programs of the international community. 28 Finally, many partnerships serve as mechanisms for
WBG to coordinate with other development partners of small states (most intensively for the
SIDS), including the UNDP, the EU, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.

20.     The CCPE will mainstream attention to the full range of partnerships and MDTFs
used by the WBG to support the countries’ development. In so doing, the evaluation will
respond to the WBG Strategy’s emphasis on “global engagements” and help further IEG’s
programmatic objectives of deepening the evidence base on what works and promoting learning
and potential course corrections in the area of partnerships. While an exhaustive evaluation of
individual partnership programs and MDTFs is not envisioned (although existing evaluations
will be drawn upon to the extent possible), the CCPE will assess how partnerships and MDTFs
have supported the WBG’s goals and mission in the selected small states, and how the WBG has
performed in its partnering functions. The full spectrum of Bank and IFC partnerships, both
global and regional—ranging from formal programs to loose coordination mechanisms among
development partners and relations with major trust fund donors—will be considered.
21.     The CCPE will also examine whether and how the WBG has addressed institutional
capacity limitations and gender issues in its delivery of support to the selected small states.
Findings in both the general and the evaluation-specific literature on small states point repeatedly
to the cogency of institutional capacity limitations, and to the need to take adequate account of
them in designing and delivering support to small states. Consequently, the issue of institutional
capacity limitations, how it has impacted on the effectiveness of WBG support, and how such
support has endeavored to address institutional capacity, will figure as a cross-cutting theme
throughout the CCPE. In addition, while findings from previous evaluations and the general
literature do not point to gender issues as being a small-state-specific problem, the CCPE will
nevertheless devote attention to these issues, examining in particular to what extent the selected
small states’ development challenges take on gender dimensions in relation to the WBG’s larger
country clients, and to what extent and how WBG support has focused on, and endeavored to
address, such dimensions.
WBG SUPPORT FOR SMALL STATES

22.     Delivery of support to small states confronts challenges. Bank Group teams face
particular challenges in planning and executing assistance programs in small countries. These
include the need: (i) to respond to complex multi-sectoral development issues with limited
budgets and staff; 29 (ii) to deal with severe institutional capacity limitations; and (iii) to ensure
cost-effectiveness of lending operations where overall project size is small.

28
   Another partnership program, the Caribbean Growth Forum (CGF), facilitates public-private dialogue around
issues central to private sector development and growth in the region.
29
   While the evaluation will endeavor to bring out any issues on staff incentives that emerge strongly from the
analysis, a detailed analysis of staff incentives is beyond the scope of the CCPE.



                                                         13
23.     Several WBG initiatives, provisions, and/or instruments are aimed at addressing
small states’ unique development challenges. In recognition of their vulnerability to economic
shocks and natural disasters, thirteen small states are currently granted access to IDA funding
(despite having GNI per-capita levels above the IDA operational cutoff) under the “small islands
economies’ exception”, a provision that has been in place since 1995. Moreover, under IDA-16
the terms of IDA funding for countries under the small island economies exception were changed
from blend to regular IDA credit terms, which resulted in longer maturities and grace periods as
well as suppression of interest. Provision has also been made to enable small states to leverage
significantly more financing from the Bank’s budgets regional programs (at the VPU level)
compared to larger IDA clients. In addition, the minimum base allocation per country under
IDA’s Performance Based Allocation (PBA) system has gradually increased from SDR1.1
million per year under IDA-14 to SDR3 million per year under IDA-16 and to SDR4 million per
year under IDA-17, giving many small states—which, by virtue of their size, have allocations
that are not far above the minimum—proportionally larger allotments. Besides the traditional
lending and advisory support, a number of innovative financing instruments have also been
deployed to support small states in the area of sovereign risk management. Examples include
weather derivatives against drought risks, call options to help cap the price of maize imports,
regional risk pooling schemes and other approaches to leverage concessional funds for
adaptation to climate change and mitigation of the impact of natural disasters. Attachment 2
provides a more detailed discussion of the specific initiatives and instruments from which small
states benefit.
24.     Using these as well as more general support modalities, the WBG has provided
small states with significant lending and analytical support. During the period FY05-14, the
World Bank made US$2.5 billion in new commitments, and disbursed US$1.8 billion, to small
states. Eighty-three percent of the commitments and 95 percent of the disbursements during this
period were from IDA/IBRD funds. 30 Bank lending to small states for regional projects
comprised an additional 37 commitments totaling US$202 million, directed primarily to the
small states in the Pacific and the Caribbean. Among other things, the support to regional
projects sought to promote telecommunications and ICT development, strengthen labor markets,
and provide catastrophe risk insurance to mitigate the effects of natural disasters. The sectoral
composition of new lending commitments to small states during FY05-14 is dominated by
economic policy, energy and mining and transport. Bank assistance to small states through
analytical and advisory activities (AAA) likewise had a high proportion of products covering
economic policy but also covered a wide range of other areas, including: expanding and
improving service delivery for health and education; enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency
of public spending; and fostering an improved investment climate and private sector
development.
25.     IFC involvement in small states over FY05-14 included the provision of technical
and advisory services as well as investments, while MIGA had very small engagement. To at
least 25 of the 34 small states, IFC provided advisory services in the areas of sustainable
business, the investment climate, access to finance, and Public-Private Partnership (PPP)

30
     The remainder came from Trust-Funded activities.



                                                        14
transactions. The IFC investment portfolio included at least 50 investment operations in 21 small
states amounting to about US$630 million. The main sectors of focus for IFC investments in
small states were finance and insurance, accommodation and tourism, and information
technology, which together accounted for about 70 percent of total investments. The small states
with the largest share of IFC investments included Trinidad & Tobago, Maldives, and
Montenegro. Attachment 2 presents and discusses the WBG portfolio in small states over the
period 2005-14 in greater detail. Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
involvement in small states has been very small, comprising just one active and one proposed
MIGA guarantee over the evaluation period. One is the $427 million Doraleh Container
Terminal S.A.R.L. in Djibouti; the other is an $82.9 million proposed HBD Ecotourism
Development project in Sao Tome.

II. Purpose, Objectives, and Audience
26.       The purpose of this evaluation relates closely to the two objectives in IEG’s results
framework. First, in terms of “what works”, the evaluation will seek to deepen evidence about
the results of WBG programs and activities—including financing operations and analytical,
advisory, and technical assistance work—in selected small states, notably their relevance and
effectiveness in terms of helping to increase resilience and to improve competitiveness—in
enhancing growth, social inclusiveness and well-being, and sustainability, against the backdrop
of the WBG’s interim target of 9 percent extreme poverty and progress on shared prosperity by
2020. The assessment of relevance and effectiveness will extend to the many partnership
arrangements in which the WBG has been involved, notably in the Caribbean and Pacific
regions, as well as to addressing institutional capacity and gender issues. Second, the evaluation
will seek to facilitate real-time learning on the effectiveness of the various forms and aspects of
WBG support to the selected small states (in terms of helping this client segment tackle key
development challenges), thereby informing the design of future strategies and results-
/evidenced-based operations. While the emphasis of the evaluation will be on learning, as a
CCPE it will nevertheless retain some focus on accountability at the country or regional program
level. 31
27.     The CCPE is expected to be of interest and use to WBG and other development
practitioners as well as to policy-makers. The intended audience for the CCPE consists
primarily of the relevant Bank Group practitioners. This includes practitioners at the operational
country program level as well as among the global practices (notably in environment and natural
resources; macroeconomics and fiscal management; trade and competitiveness; transport and
ICT; and rural development and resilience), certain cross-cutting solutions practices (notably in
climate change and fragility) and the broader corporate level (notably OPCS, which houses the
coordination function for the WBG’s work on small states). Nevertheless, CCPE findings are
also likely to be of interest to other development practitioners, both in-country and among

31
  One distinction between country program-level evaluations (whether clustered or not) and corporate-/thematic-level
evaluations is that the former help foster some accountability at the country program level, whereas this is typically
not the focus of the latter.



                                                         15
development partners, both bilateral and multilateral. At the policy level, WBG shareholders,
including the Board of Executive Directors, may have interest in CCPE findings, given their
traditional interest in, and support for, special provisions and initiatives to address the challenges
facing small states. Similarly, policy-makers in the small states themselves—as well as in
countries with populations exceeding the strict 1.5 million threshold but sharing many of the
smallness-related characteristics and challenges—may find CCPE findings useful. In order to
gauge interest among potential audiences and ensure that interested parties have access to CCPE
findings, it is envisioned that IEG would use mechanisms for knowledge-sharing, such as the
Small States Forum and the Caribbean Growth Forum, to publicize and facilitate debate around
CCPE findings (Section VI).


III. Evaluation Questions and Coverage/Scope
COVERAGE AND SELECTION CRITERIA

28.     Three initial criteria—population, income level, and World Bank borrower status—
narrowed down the pool of small states from which the CPE countries were selected. The
pool from which WBG country programs were chosen for CPEs was restricted to the group of
countries meeting the following criteria: 32 (i) a population of less than 1.5 million in 2013; 33 (ii)
a low- or middle-income classification; 34 and (iii) active IDA and/or IBRD borrower status. 35
This gives a pool of 30 low- and middle-income small states with fewer than 1.5 million
inhabitants that are active Bank borrowers. 36 While small, they nevertheless account for a
significant percentage of current IDA/IBRD client countries. (Attachment 3 provides the list of
small states together with a tabulation of these and other criteria by region.)
29.    The CPE countries were then purposively selected from this pool based on several
considerations. The pool displays considerable diversity with respect to location, geography and
income levels. Three criteria were used to select the focus countries:
          Criterion 1: Representation of the three main regions where small states are clustered
           (Caribbean, Pacific, and Africa including the Indian Ocean).
          Criterion 2: Representation of different geographical types.


32
   A WBG country program is defined to include all regional operations and other multi-country activities benefiting
the country in question.
33
     This excludes Gabon, Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, and Jamaica.
34
  This excludes Bahrain, Brunei Darussalam, Cyprus, Estonia, Iceland, Malta, Qatar, and San Marino, Equatorial
Guinea, The Bahamas, Barbados, and Trinidad and Tobago. Note that St Kitts and Nevis and Antigua and Barbuda
were retained as they are part of the OECS.
35
     This excludes the Bahamas and Barbados.
36
  An exception arises with Antigua & Barbuda and St. Kitts & Nevis, which are retained in the pool in spite of being
high-income countries. The anomaly arises because the countries are members of the OECS, which the Bank Group
serves through a regional partnership strategy.



                                                        16
      Criterion 3: Representation of a range of income levels (within the middle-income
       classification, where small states are concentrated)
Three additional criteria were then used to filter the focus country selection:
    Criterion 4: Exclusion of country programs that have been covered by IEG evaluations in
       the past few years. 37
    Criterion 5: A significant Bank lending program (at least 15 operations during the
       evaluation period) and analytical work
    Criterion 6: Representation of at least one program in which the Bank Group has taken a
       regional approach (an added bonus of selecting a cluster of countries that the WBG has
       served regionally is that it also helps increase the evaluation’s country coverage).
30.      Based on these criteria, the WBG programs serving the six OECS countries and the
Pacific islands (with a specific focus on Samoa and Tonga), respectively, were selected for
R/CPEs, while the WBG programs in several African small states were identified for a
more selective assessment 38. The WBG and other international organizations recognized small
states (both islands and other small states) as a country group that require tailored support given
their unique challenges. For this reason, country selection includes examples both of islands and
non-island states to capture the different challenges that they face. Subject to the available
resource envelope, the possibility of looking at WBG support to one or more additional non-
island small states will be considered in the course of CCPE preparation. Attachment 5 provides
a profile of the OECS countries, Samoa, as well as selected African small states—Cabo Verde,
Djibouti, Mauritius, and the Seychelles.


EVALUATION FRAMEWORK AND RESULTS CHAIN

31.    In light of their clustering and planned synthesis, a common framework will
underpin the approach and evaluation questions across the country or regional programs.
Country or region specific strategic objectives notwithstanding, given the planned distillation of
evaluation findings across the program evaluations, there is a premium on assuring some degree
of comparability and aggregation potential across them. As a result, while each country or

37
  For example, Timor-Leste was excluded on the grounds that IEG reviewed the WBG program there in a 2010 CPE.
Similarly, in light of IEG’s 2013 evaluation of WBG support to Fragile and Conflict States, both the Solomon Islands
(which served as a case study in that evaluation) and Comoros (which did not) were excluded.
38
   The selected small states encompass: (1) three regions—Africa, East Asia and Pacific, and Latin America and the
Caribbean; (2) some geographical diversity, with mostly island countries but also one coastal country (the only
landlocked small state with a significant work program, Bhutan, had initially been considered for a full CPE but in
the course of the review process its characteristics were judged too sui generis to yield many lessons applicable to
other small states); (3) lower- to upper-middle income status—the pool includes only one small state with low-
income status, Comoros, which was not included in our selection as it is a fragile state (see criterion 4). In addition,
(4) there is little recent IEG evaluation work at the overall program level on the selected countries. IEG last assessed
the WBG Pacific islands and OECS programs over ten years ago; (5) all selected countries display a significant
work program (see Table 3), both in terms of financing commitments and number of operations and of analytical
work; (6) the CPE for the OECS and in part the Pacific islands will be approached regionally.


                                                          17
regional strategy will have its specificities in terms of strategic objectives or pillars and results
sought which the evaluation will take full account of, these will be mapped to a common but
flexible two-pillar taxonomy—with an underlying results chain linking inputs, outputs,
outcomes, and long-term goals—developed for the purposes of the evaluation. 39 The two
organizing strategic objectives or “pillars” under this taxonomy are: (i) building greater
resilience to economic and natural-hazard-related shocks and enhancing sustainability; and (ii)
enhancing competitiveness in order to foster strengthened and sustained growth and job creation
(see Figure 5). Governance in the public and private sectors is a cross-cutting issue that will be
addressed under each sub-objective. In particular, many aspects of public sector governance will
be addressed under the heading of fiscal and public debt sustainability.
32.     The program evaluation exercises will also devote particular attention to specific
WBG provisions, instruments, and initiatives serving small states, as well as to WBG
partnerships and support for gender and capacity building. Each of the program evaluations
will look into and assess the effectiveness of the small state-specific corporate instruments,
programs, and initiatives that the Bank Group has developed over the years. Have these
instruments, programs, and initiatives helped the Bank Group achieve its relevant objectives,
efficiently, in extending support to small states? Given limited capacity, close coordination with
other development partners and adopting measures to place the countries at the center of aid
coordination is essential. Hence, the CPEs will also pay particularly close attention to how
effectively the WBG has used partnerships in providing support to, and in meeting development
objectives in, small states. They will also examine the extent to which WBG support has focused
on gender aspects of the countries’ development. Finally, given the particular relevance of
capacity limitations to the challenges confronting small states, the program evaluations will pay
close attention to the extent to which WBG programs have addressed capacity limitations and
focused on capacity development, and to how effective such efforts have been.
33.     A results chain encompassing the structural interdependence of the challenges
confronting small states will underpin the evaluation questions. One of the most telling
difficulties to which these challenges give rise is volatility, which in the long run impedes
growth, increases poverty, and worsens income inequality. Hence, one immediate priority for
small states is to build resilience. The framework’s first pillar will assess the relevance and
efficacy of the WBG program in helping to: (i) tailor macroeconomic policies to provide greater
resilience to macroeconomic shocks and restore fiscal and public debt sustainability; (ii) enhance
resilience against natural disasters and climate change; and (iii) protect and improve human
capital through human development and social protection policies, notably by strengthening the
population’s ability to cope with shocks. In addition, small states have by and large not shared
the improved economic growth performance of larger countries in recent years. Given that small
states’ poorer growth performance relates in part to the high volatility of their growth, policy
measures to improve resilience through sound economic and human development policies and to

39
  The common framework was developed based on a review of applicable CPSs in the focus countries. Of course,
not all country programs need display activities under every one of the sub-objectives of the 2 pillars as set out
below. When assessing the overall Bank Group strategy over FY05-14 in each country case, the team will review
the appropriateness of the choices made as to what areas to cover (selectivity).



                                                        18
enhance capacity to adapt to and mitigate environmental shocks would contribute to better
growth performance. But this alone will not suffice. Small states can also take a number of steps
to overcome their size limitations and improve competitiveness to foster more sustainable and
inclusive growth, which would require careful attention to structural inefficiencies. The second
pillar will assess the relevance and efficacy of WBG support in helping to foster more
sustainable and inclusive growth through: (i) trade and exchange rate policies to help small states
adapt to the changing global environment; (ii) reforms to improve the overall business climate to
enable small states to take advantage of new opportunities from globalization; (iii) reforms to
strengthen the financial sector; (iv) reforms to improve the delivery of infrastructure services;
and (v) tailored measures for leading or high-potential sectors.


 Figure 5. Results Chain of Activities to Address Small States’ Challenges

   Long-term Goals     •Eradicate extreme poverty and foster shared prosperity in small states.


                       •Build greater resilience to economic and natural-hazard shocks and enhance
      Outcomes          sustainability
                       •Enhance competitiveness for strengthened and sustained growth and job creation

                       •Improved macroeconomic policies that provide greater resilience to shocks
                       •Improved fiscal and debt sustainability
                       •Improved public finance management to help manage shocks
                       •Improved capacity for disaster and climate change preparedness and mitigation
                       •Greater financial sector soundness and deepening
                       •Structural reforms to enhance competitiveness, including improved legal and
       Outputs          regulatory frameworks for private business; strengthened physical and virtual
                        connectivity (infrastructure/ICT); increased linkage of local companies to
                        multinational corporations, global value chains, export markets
                       •Improved public service delivery and institutional capacity
                       •Regional integration and/or cooperation mechanisms to improve resilience and
                        competitiveness
                       •Improved development and protection of human capital
                       •Regional, sector and country strategies and programs (lending,-AAA, TFs)
        Inputs         •Partnership with relevant entities (global, regional, country)

 Source: IEG Staff


EVALUATION QUESTIONS

34.     This section presents a set of standard questions for each sub-objective under the
two pillars. Given the heterogeneity in Bank interventions in supporting these objectives, a
series of specific questions have been developed that would be used for reporting on evaluation
outcomes under each sub-objective, depending on Bank interventions in the three (sets of)
countries. It is important to emphasize the questions will vary in terms of their immediate


                                                    19
relevance to the particular country or group of countries concerned. For example, while issues of
restoring fiscal and debt sustainability hold particular cogency for the OECS countries, they may
have less immediate relevance to the Pacific island states. In addressing the various questions,
the R/CPEs would also review whether WBG support encountered tensions between regional and
country approaches and tried to set incentives for the former. In addition, the evaluation will pay
due attention to the efficacy of cross-sectoral collaboration, which is particularly important in the
context of small states given the limited overall resources. For example, in assessing support for
improving outcomes and fostering prevention in the health sector, the evaluation will ask
whether and how effectively the Bank supported not only measures to support the supply side
but also initiatives to strengthen the demand side through community-based interventions (e.g.,
linked to social protection programs).

35.   Pillar 1: The over-arching question concerns the relevance and effectiveness of the
WBG programs under review in helping the countries build macroeconomic,
environmental, and social resilience.

36.     Area 1.1. Was the WBG relevant and successful in helping the countries tailor their
macroeconomic policies to achieving greater resilience to macroeconomic shocks as well as
to restoring fiscal and public debt sustainability?

37.      Unsustainable fiscal policies correlate with volatility. A number of the countries,
notably in the OECS, are currently pursuing unsustainable fiscal policies that contribute to
instability. In addition, natural disasters and other exogenous shocks have had a devastating
fiscal impact, prompting the countries to borrow and thereby build up sizeable public debt
stocks. As a result, roughly half of small states in general, including many of the OECS
countries, are currently facing high debt ratios, which further subdues their growth performance
and impedes their ability to respond to future natural disasters and shocks. High debt also
restricts their fiscal space for countercyclical spending, resulting in higher borrowing costs
because of the higher risk perceived by markets. In addition, there is evidence that countries with
high debt levels experienced deeper contractions during and following the 2008-09 global
economic crisis than low debt countries.

38.     Has the WBG helped promote more sustainable fiscal management? The Bank has
recently rolled out a comprehensive debt framework in the OECS countries to address the
interdependent structural causes of high debt, low growth, and natural disasters, structured
around four building blocks: (i) private-sector led growth (discussed under pillar 2 below); (ii)
fiscal management; (iii) resilience to natural disasters (discussed under area 1.2 below); and (iv)
debt resolution. With respect to fiscal management, the WBG together with the IMF and other
partners are supporting reforms to improve fiscal sustainability. 40 To what extent did such
engagement endeavor to prevent and/or manage unsustainable fiscal policies and concomitant
debt build-up? This section will also assess efforts to strengthen public sector governance and

40
  Remittances policies also impact the macroeconomic framework but will be reviewed under the social
resilience sub-objectives.


                                                 20
performance, and to reduce the impact of the public sector (including state-owned enterprises
(SOEs) and quasi-fiscal risks) on the limited fiscal space. 41

39.      Was WBG support for debt management relevant and effective? The WBG is also
providing support to several small states to improve their debt management, frequently a subject
of discussion during the Small States Forum. One framework that the WBG has deployed is the
Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA), which shows that small states tend to
perform significantly worse than other developing countries in debt management, in part due to
institutional capacity constraints. The R/CPEs will assess the usefulness of this diagnostic tool as
a guide to governments in the formulation of debt management strategies and risk assessments.

40.    The questions stated in the table below will aim at assessing the role of the Bank in trying
to prevent/manage high debt and bad fiscal policies

     Supporting Macroeconomic Resilience:
 •   How effective was the WB in its interventions in assisting small states in designing and implementing policies and
     institutions promoting macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability in a context characterized by recurrent shocks
     (e.g. Commodity price fluctuations, environmental shocks)?
 •   To what extent did the WB program reflect small states’ exposure to high commodity price volatility? How timely was the
     Bank’s policy advice in light of volatility of the countries’ circumstances? Was the program sufficiently flexible to promptly
     reflect the changes in the macroeconomic environment?
 •   Did the Bank program contribute to improving the effectiveness of government expenditure, to supporting more efficient
     tax systems, to improving debt management and restoring debt sustainability, and more generally to improving public
     sector governance and performance?


41.     Area 1.2. How effective has WBG support been in helping to enhance small states’
resilience through better disaster risk management, climate change adaptation, and more
sustainable use of resources?

42.      Has WBG support helped reduce vulnerability to natural disasters? Small island
developing states (SIDS) face the highest vulnerability to natural disasters. Half of the 25
countries with average annual natural disaster-related losses exceeding 1 percent of GDP are
SIDS (United Nations and World Bank, 2010). Moreover, natural disasters are more likely to
affect the most vulnerable members of society, especially women and the poor (IEG, 2012). The
WBG has made reducing vulnerability a central part of its strategies for dealing with many small
states, as well as a core area of interest for IDA. The R/CPEs will examine the WBG’s record in
helping the countries in question reduce their vulnerability to natural disasters.

43.     Has WBG support helped build resilience to the effects of climate change? Many
small states and especially island countries face high vulnerability to the effects of climate
change. Much of this will come from increases in natural disaster hazards—more intense
cyclones and more frequent floods. But there are additional threats posed by climate change,
going beyond disaster risk management. Changes in precipitation patterns and loss of snow mass
41
   As with other subjects, coverage of this issue will be determined by the extent to which the Bank Group has been,
or should have been, involved in this area.



                                                                21
may increase water stress and the need for storage, or may dramatically change the economics of
hydropower. Infrastructure may need to be designed differently to cope with a changing climate.
And sea level rise means that coastal areas face higher exposure to a range of disasters; in
extreme cases, some low-lying island states face existential threats. The CPEs will assess the
extent to which the WBG is helping countries to build resilience to climate and grapple with
climate threats.

44.      Has WBG support fostered better environmental and natural resource management
policies? Many small states face particular challenges in other areas of environmental
sustainability and natural resource management. As a result of their remoteness and isolation,
they may be particularly reliant on local resources, especially for water supply. Natural resources
such as fisheries constitute a large portion of the economy for many of the island and coastal
states 42, and face a number of governance challenges. Tourism activities are also reliant on
natural resources, and consequently on effective environmental regulation and management.
Hence, the report will assess whether the countries and the Bank have paid enough attention to
the sustainable use of natural resources. The CPEs will assess the extent to which WBG support
has helped strengthen environmental policy and natural resource management and governance.

      Supporting Environmental Resilience
 Disaster risk management:
       Has the Bank worked effectively to increase country capacity to respond to and cope with natural disasters?
       Have Bank interventions helped to reduce the risk from future disasters as well as supporting disaster response? For
           example, has the Bank helped countries to reduce disaster exposure through land use planning, zoning, or other
           interventions?
       Has the Bank worked effectively to help countries manage their financial and economic exposure to natural disasters
           through financial instruments? Are these efforts cost-effective?
       What progress is being made on efforts to adopt regional approaches?
       What role have partnerships particularly with the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery had?
 Climate change
      Are strategies and operations designed to help countries adapt to future climate change in addition to current climate
          variability?
      How do explicit climate change adaptation operations compare to mainstreaming approaches?
      Are physical investments being designed in a way that is sensitive to climate risks?
      How is climate and hydro-meteorological information being collected and used – is climate information operationally
          useful? How is resilience being measured in climate change adaptation operations, especially given monitoring and
          evaluation capacity constraints in small states?
 Environmental sustainability and natural resource management
      Do changes in environmental policies lead to improved environmental outcomes?
      Have environmental protection efforts contributed to economic growth and poverty alleviation?
      How were safeguards and analysis of potential environmental and social impacts carried out in Bank Group operations?


45.    Area 1.3. How relevant and effective has WBG support been in improving the
countries’ social resilience through better education quality and enhanced labor force
employability, improved health policy, and more effective social protection systems?


42
  Shared resources like ocean fish stocks offer a major source of production, and therefore revenues to households
and countries, and food security, as well as tourism revenues.



                                                              22
46.      How relevant and effective has WBG support been in helping the countries build up
and retain skills, strengthening their overall capacity? Many small states face special
challenges in building up and retaining human capital. Public employment policies (especially
high wages) and outward migration (“the brain drain”) may limit the availability of skills to the
domestic private sector. “Dutch disease” as a result of large inflows from remittances and
primary exports may drive up wages, weakening private sector competitiveness. Unemployment,
particularly among youth, is much higher on average than in larger countries at similar income
levels, indicating a mismatch between the skills produced by the education system and those
demanded by the economy. Labor market policies must thus focus on both supply of and demand
for labor, especially for skills critical to key sectors.

47.     How relevant and effective has WBG support been in helping the countries
strengthen health policies and systems to protect and enhance human capital? Some small
states have made good progress towards health MDGs, but a number of small states remain off
track with respect to infant and under-5 child mortality as well as maternal mortality (see Figure
3). Adolescent fertility rates have remained high. Child malnutrition is one of the main human
development challenges and is both a consequence and a driver of poverty in some small states.
The incidence of non-communicable diseases and chronic conditions has increased rapidly. They
require costlier treatment and account for a growing portion of health spending, thereby posing
an increased fiscal risk for small states. Most small states do not have the fiscal capacity to invest
in higher-cost specialist care; access to such services thus depends on regional collaboration.

48.     Was WBG support relevant and effective in helping small states shape social
protection policies to increase social resilience? Given the limited capacity and elevated
vulnerability of most small states, a critical challenge is the delivery of social services and the
provision of counter-cyclical support to adversely affected populations (e.g., through cash
transfers). The CPEs will review the numerous safety net programs, social insurance schemes,
and labor market interventions that the countries have put in place to address the needs of the
vulnerable. In particular, they will assess whether the Bank helped countries design and
implement efficient social safety net programs that show responsiveness to shocks and help
protect the households from their negative consequences. The CPEs will also review how
remittances may have enabled income diversification, thereby contributing to improved social
resilience.




                                                  23
     Supporting Socioeconomic Resilience
 Education
    How relevant and effective has WBG support been in helping small states tailor their human development policies to
     improve the states’ overall capacity? Has the WBG facilitated global mobilization of talent by small states?
    How effectively has the WBG assisted governments in establishing education, training, and public employment policies
     consonant with private-sector-led growth?
 Health
  How relevant and effective has WBG support been in helping the countries in strengthening health policies and
     systems to protect and enhance human capital?
  How has the WBG assisted governments in prevention?
  Has the WBG helped in identifying and managing cost drivers, and in reaping economies of scale from regional
     collaboration in addressing specific health care needs such as specialized care?
  How has the WBG assisted governments in establishing sustainable financing of the health sector?
 Social Protection
 •   Was the Bank Group successful (relevant and effective) in helping small states shape social protection policies so as
     to increase social resilience?
 •   Has the WBG helped the countries design and implement effective and efficient social safety net programs that
     respond to their unique challenges? Did these systems show responsiveness to shocks, protecting households against
     them?
 •   How effective were labor market policies—including wage subsidies, training programs, job search assistance, self-
     employment assistance and unemployment benefits—to support employment, facilitate transition into labor markets
     (particularly for youth), and protect job losers? Did the WBG dialogue on labor market policies follow the MILES 43
     framework? Did the dialogue encompass a focus on migration and remittances?



49.      Pillar 2: The overarching evaluation question concerns the relevance and
effectiveness of WBG programs in helping the countries promote sustainable and inclusive
growth through trade and exchange policies, a business-friendly environment, financial
sector regulation, delivery of infrastructure services, and support to competitive
industries 44. It is important to recognize a certain element of arbitrariness regarding under which
pillar the various areas are considered. For example, while education quality and skills is a
critical determinant of long-term growth, this aspect of education policies has been subsumed
under the first pillar, given that education contributes equally to building social resilience.
Similarly, while remittances can be considered a potential component of income growth and
source of income diversification, this aspect of remittances has been subsumed under the social
resilience area of pillar 1. In addition to the questions set out under this pillar, the question of
whether the WBG has supported development of a viable growth strategy will also be examined.
This will include looking at possible cases where sustainable growth cannot realistically be part
43
  MILES stands for Macroeonomic policies, Investment climate, Labor regulation and policies,
Education, and Safety nets.
44
   Although there is no intrinsic reason why CPSs/CPFs cannot account for IFC and MIGA activity, even
if this is done through global programs, historically CPSs may not adequately account for IFC and MIGA
activity. The R/CPEs will therefore look at all actual IFC and MIGA operations, as well as consider areas
where such operations are absent despite the potential for them.



                                                            24
of the development solution. To what extent has the WBG engaged client countries on migration
and remittances in seeking development solutions? Finally, jobs and employment, a major
challenge in small states, is one of the most critical elements in the growth strategies of these
countries. The evaluation will focus on the extent to which the Bank Group has endeavored to
support employment generation—gender-disaggregated to the extent possible—throughout the
various sections under pillar 2.

50.      Area 2.1. How relevant and effective has WBG support (in conjunction with the
IMF) been in assisting the countries to manage their trade and exchange rate policies?
Several small states, including the OECS countries, use a pegged or tightly managed exchange
rate to limit volatility, which can also have direct implications for the competitiveness of
domestic industry. While devaluation can, in some cases, be highly beneficial for
competitiveness, any benefits must be balanced against potentially adverse effects on income and
wealth. 45 A key question is to what extent WBG engagement has encouraged such balanced and
integrated policies. In general, openness to foreign trade (including low protection) is important
to domestic industries integrating into regional and global value chains and achieving scale
economies not available by serving local markets alone. Balancing the opportunity presented by
linking the economy to global markets with the vulnerabilities this creates to shifts in global
demand and prices poses a critical policy challenge. In some cases, regional cooperation may
overcome some diseconomies of small scale. Facilitating efficient trade through appropriate
investments in infrastructure (or creating a conducive environment for private investment) is also
important to reduce transaction costs. In some cases, regional cooperation can help. Finally,
governments face challenges in removing bottlenecks to flexible private sector responses to price
signals and relative price changes.

51.     Area 2.2. Has the WBG—through advisory, investment, lending, and/or policy
dialogue work—provided relevant and effective support to small states in promoting an
appropriate legal and regulatory framework for market-led growth? The literature suggests
that, given the need for access to global markets, small economies generally need a higher degree
of openness and responsiveness to international markets than do larger states, where businesses
can achieve economies of scale through domestic markets. This requires a high degree of
resource mobility and competitiveness, which relies not only on a liberal trade regime, but also:
(i) low transactions costs in starting, operating and closing a business; and (ii) effectively and
efficiently regulated input and factor markets. Promoting openness, facilitating resource
mobility, encouraging inward investment, and enhancing competitiveness all depend on a legal
and regulatory environment that facilitates efficient transactions. IFC advisory services, World
Bank AAA, policy dialogue, and both policy and investment lending operations have focused on
strengthening conditions for private sector activities and employment creation.



45
  In order to succeed, devaluations require policy credibility of the state, and need to be accompanied by: (a) measures
to discipline wages; (b) structural reforms to remove bottlenecks to investment and ensure a flexible private sector
response to price signals; and (c) appropriate social safety net policies to protect the poor from the resulting impact
on prices.



                                                          25
52.      Area 2.3. Has WBG support been relevant and effective in helping to build deeper
and more competitive, yet stable and sound, financial sectors that can contribute to
economic growth? An efficient financial sector can provide vital services in mobilizing and
intermediating finance in support of economic growth. Yet financial sectors in small states are
often shallow and/or uncompetitive and inefficient. Financial sector development must always
proceed with an eye towards risk, as financial sectors can serve as transmission mechanisms of
global shocks or sources of domestic ones. Further, weakly regulated financial sectors can
become (international) havens for tax evasion or money laundering, generating strong negative
externalities globally. Balancing prudent regulation with the need to broaden and deepen the
sectors requires sound analysis and strategy, good advice and capacity-building, and use of good
practices to promote competition in service of a stable and competitive system providing a full
range of financial services. Regional financial organizations (such as the Eastern Caribbean
Securities Regulatory Commission) and initiatives (such as the IFC-backed Pacific Microfinance
Initiative) may be able to help overcome the inability to realize scale economies and high
transaction costs of small-volume financial markets.

53.     Area 2.4. Has the WBG support been relevant and effective in helping to mobilize
public and private resources to provide the basic infrastructure (including ICT) needed to
underpin economic development, overcome geographic isolation, and increase resilience
against environmental and weather-related risks? In infrastructure, the countries face both the
challenge of providing basic services to their populations and that of connectivity to the global
economy. Although the limited surface area of the countries may afford an advantage in
providing infrastructure coverage, their limited scale and resources as well as (in many cases)
their physical isolation can pose critical challenges. In addition, policies to support the public
sector/SOEs in the provision of goods and services have often led to inefficiency and weak
regulation, and discouraged private sector participation in the broader economic activities.
Furthermore, while technological advances in ICT and transport hold the hope of ending the
effective isolation of more remote economies, this requires sound policy and regulatory
frameworks, investments (whether public or private) and the human capacity to both operate and
take advantage of such systems. Where geography and politics allow, regional approaches (such
as IFC support for investments in regional airline and ICT services in the Pacific and the World
Bank’s Telecommunications and ICT Development Project for Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts &
Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines) can sometimes overcome some of the
limitations of smallness.

54.    Area 2.5. Finally, has WBG support for leading or high-potential sectors been
relevant and efficient in building competitive, globally or regionally integrated industries?
While most WBG support to the private sector focuses on enabling conditions, some—such as
World Bank support to agricultural competitiveness in Samoa—is targeted to specific sectors.

55.    Taking into account heterogeneity in country support to achieve this objective, a set of
more specific questions, detailed below, could be pursued under this pillar.




                                               26
 Pillar 2 : Fostering sustainable and inclusive growth

 Trade and Exchange Rate Policies
  Did Bank support balanced and integrated exchange rate management policies?
  Has it supported appropriate infrastructural investments to facilitate trade and remove critical bottlenecks for key
     sectors?
  Did Bank Group interventions contribute to advancing the small states’ capacity to specialize in goods and services,
     building on resource abundance or high value-added niches?
  How did these interventions impacted employment generation?
 Business Friendly-Environment
  Was Bank Group support well adapted to small states’ context and did it contribute to strengthening conditions for
    private sector activities and employment creation?
  Financial Sector
  Has the array of WBG support (from country to regional initiatives) provided a coherent, balanced, and well-tailored
     approach for small states—balancing the need for prudent regulation with the need to broaden and deepen the sector
     with competitive institutions providing a full range of financial services?
  Did country strategies effectively balance the need to serve long-term development with the need to insure against
     shocks?
  Did the institutions of the WBG coordinate well with each other and with other key players in this domain?
    How have Bank interventions impacted employment generation?
  Infrastructure
  Do the diverse WBG interventions including those targeting SOEs, taken together, comprise a coherent and successful
      strategy for small states?
  Did these interventions including those targeting SOEs, contribute to improving the connectivity of the small states in
      question (transport, ICT)?
  Did these interventions including those targeting SOEs, contribute to lowering electricity prices and diversifying energy
      supply?
  Did Bank interventions including those targeting SOEs, help in strengthening the overall regulatory environment?
  How have Bank interventions in infrastructure impacted employment generation?
  Competitive Industries
  Did WBG efforts to strengthen key sectors (such extractive industries, fisheries, agribusiness, tourism and
    manufacturing) yield growth and jobs?
  Were Bank Group interventions targeted to specific sectors purely opportunistic, or strategic in integrating with national
    or regional development strategies?
  Were these interventions effective in promoting increases in exports or domestic market share?
  Do such sectors generate important linkages and jobs?


56.     Other—cross-cutting—evaluation questions will examine how the WBG has used
partnerships, including MDTFs, and how it has endeavored to address gender aspects and
capacity limitations, in providing its support to the countries. What are some specific
achievements of partnerships and MDTFs in the countries covered by this evaluation and how do
they align with the development needs of the countries (as reflected in country/regional
assistance strategies)? Has the WBG used partnerships and MDTFs in a manner that is congruent
with its objectives and business needs, and enhanced its ability to assist clients? Has the WBG
performed well in the many partnering roles that it performs (host, convener, trustee,
implementing agency, chair, and so on)? Has the WBG collaborated effectively with partner


                                                              27
agencies? Were teams working in small states able to manage their various trust funds as a pot of
funds? 46 Regarding gender, did the WBG recognize gender issues and impacts in country
strategy documents and track any gender-specific outcomes in its results frameworks for the
small countries? Did the Bank undertake any gender-focused analytical work? Have Bank
programs been effective in identifying and achieving gender-based outcomes related to human
development, economic empowerment, and voice and participation in the countries? Did Bank
country and regional partnerships focus and have an impact on gender issues (e.g., through
collaboration with ministries, participation in multi-stakeholder initiatives, and analysis of
gender dimensions)? Finally, regarding institutional capacity limitations (see Box 1), to what
extent did country/regional strategies diagnose and focus on these aspects? To what extent did
capacity limitations “drag down” portfolio quality in the selected countries? How did WBG
programs endeavor to address these limitations? What instruments and design features 47 did the
WBG use, and with what results?




46
     The transaction cost of identifying, applying for, implementing, and reporting on TFs usually differs for every TF.
47
  The CCPE will look at models used to address capacity constraints and help implement Bank-supported projects
in the countries. For instance, the experience of both Grenada and St. Lucia, which rely heavily on PMUs to
coordinate the implementation of Bank-supported projects, may hold lessons for other countries.



                                                            28
     Box 1. Building Institutional Capacity

     Recognizing that building institutional capacity is a long-term process requiring a systemic
     approach, demand for improved public sector performance, and supply of well-structured
     organizations with appropriately skilled personnel, the R/CPEs will assess the extent to which:

             Capacity building approaches are customized to country conditions: Have R/CPSs
     identified public sector capacity building as a core objective? If this is the case, have the areas
     selected in which to help build capacity resulted from an adequate evaluative assessment1/ of
     capacity needs to prioritize needs, ranging from the most immediate binding constraints to long
     term capacity requirements? Has this resulted in an appropriate sequencing of measures aimed at
     institutional or organizational change as well as individual skill building?
             Capacity building approaches are customized to sector characteristics and have benefited
     from adequate quality assurance at the design stage, both for lending and analytical work:
     Challenges across sectors vary. Hence the R/CPEs will assess whether the design of capacity-
     building initiatives was relevant, taking into account for example the mode of service delivery in
     the targeted sector (e.g., decentralization of service provision).
             Supported activities contributed to building sustained capacity: Have activities with major
     capacity building aims (ranging from sectorwide programs and budget support operations to more
     traditional tools such as technical assistance and training) helped build sustained public sector
     capacity? The team will also review the impact of projects that embed capacity building activities
     where capacity development may not have featured as an explicit objective.

     1/ the OECD-DAC methodology guidelines for example suggest that “the best fit approach to capacity development calls
     for a systematic effort to think through what might work in the particular circumstances. This can be done by ensuring
     that adequate attention is given to both individual and organizational issues and to the enabling environment for capacity
     development at each stage in a process consisting of four main steps or recurrent tasks as follows […]” (i)
     Understanding the international and country contexts, (ii) Identifying and supporting sources of country-owned change,
     (iii) in delivering support, (in particular reaching agreement on the specific capacity development outcomes), and (iv)
     Learning from experience and sharing lessons.


METHODOLOGY FOR REGIONAL AND COUNTRY PROGRAM EVALUATIONS

57.     In order to answer these evaluative questions, the team will largely follow IEG’s
CPE methodology. Country program evaluation exercises focus on the over-arching question of
to what extent WBG support has achieved its relevant objectives, efficiently, over the evaluation
period. Relevant sub-questions then address the relevance of the objectives and of the modalities
for achieving them; whether individual activities, notably project or development policy loans,
have attained their specific objectives; how effectively the various activities have come together
as an overall program; how the portfolio has performed; and so on. A parallel and related—but
distinct—overall question concerns how the WBG has performed in planning and delivering its
support. Other questions typically addressed include program impact (irrespective of objectives),
including unanticipated effects. The framework of reference for the evaluation work under a CPE
typically derives from the country-specific WBG strategy document(s) and the results
framework(s) that it (they) embodies(y)—which in each case has a customized structure of broad
strategic objectives, often referred to as “pillars”. Attachment 4 contains a summary of IEG’s




                                                             29
country program evaluation methodology. The paragraphs below describe how this methodology
is adapted at the regional level for the Caribbean and Pacific countries.
58.      The OECS countries will be covered through a regional program evaluation. The six
Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) independent member countries—Antigua and
Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the
Grenadines—have been consistently served by the WBG through a regional partnership strategy
since 1995. Hence, a regional approach to the OECS program evaluation is consistent with the
regional purview of WBG partnership strategies for the OECS for the past three strategy cycles.
It also reflects the relatively high level of integration and cooperation among the countries, such
as their shared currency and central bank. The proposed methodology for the OECS regional
program evaluation includes an assessment of the various aspects of collaboration among
countries 48 in particular the various integration or cooperation initiatives (e.g., on
macro/trade/HD/environment/private and financial sector issues). Hence, the report will cover
regional operations and AAA, but will also include an assessment of Bank engagement with and
leveraging of regional institutions. In practice, the assessment will be conducted against the
OECS regional partnership strategies’ results matrices, which include both regional and country-
specific objectives and outcomes, and the CPE methodology is easily adapted to the regional
level in the case of the OECS countries. In addition, a correspondence between the regional
strategy results matrices and the proposed common reporting framework is straightforwardly
established (see Table 3).
Table 3. Regional Strategies in OECS over FY06-FY19
     Pillar #     OECS RPS FY06-09      OECS RPS FY10-14           OECS RPS FY15-19
                  Stimulating Growth    Enhancing
                  and                   Competitiveness and
     Pillar 1 :                                                    Competitiveness
                  Improving             Stimulating
                  Competitiveness       Sustainable Growth
                  Reducing                                         Public Sector
     Pillar 2 :                         Building Resilience
                  Vulnerability                                    Modernization

     Pillar 3                                                      Resilience


59.     The Pacific Island Program will be covered through a hybrid approach combining a
selective assessment of the regional program and an in-depth assessment of the WBG
programs in Samoa and Tonga. The decision to adopt a hybrid approach to the evaluation of
the Pacific Islands program reflects the WBG’s strategic approach in the region. The Pacific
island countries were served by the WBG through a Pacific islands regional strategy beginning in
May 2000. However, since 2009, the Bank has been under pressure to give more visibility to
countries and a set of individual country strategies have been prepared for Kiribati, Marshall
Islands, Samoa, Micronesia, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, reflecting a decision to focus WBG
strategy at the country level. Despite this, however, the WBG has consistently adopted a regional

48
     To the extent that these were identified and supported by the Bank Group.



                                                              30
platform for its operational work and is preparing a new regional strategy for FY16. WBG
programs are designed on a regional basis through a “platform approach”, whereby critical areas
of intervention (e.g., ICT, aviation, fisheries, or disaster response) are selected and projects
(within a horizontal APL construct) developed that meet the needs of a significant number of
islands. A particular sector is selected for its relevance to the region as a whole, and individual
operations are then undertaken as a package at the country level with modest variations reflecting
country realities. Thus, for example, if the Bank Group assigns priority to fisheries, then similar
projects are undertaken in each island in the region for which fisheries is judged to be a high-
potential sector. There are two regional institutions, the Pacific Island Forum and the Pacific
Community, which take a regional view of programs and administer some economic activities on
a regional basis.
60.     The program evaluation in this case will assess the regional program, at the same time
drilling down into the cases of Samoa and Tonga to assess its relevance at the individual Pacific
island country level. Given this approach, the evaluation questions are firstly: Is the WBG
adopting a strategy that is relevant and effective for the long-term development of the region as a
whole? And is this strategy making an effective contribution to the individual countries in the
region? To address these questions, the evaluation team will review both the earlier regional and
later country strategies, and the team will visit and consult with the regional institutions. At the
country level, the focus of the evaluation will be on Samoa and Tonga where the Bank has
significant programs. Desk work and short visits (as needed) will be made to other islands to
validate the more general applicability of the findings for Samoa and Tonga. 49 In particular, we
plan to review selective aspects of the programs in Kiribati 50, notably those aimed at
strengthening environmental resilience, using the findings from a recently completed PPAR. The
Pacific Islands program evaluation will identify the special focus on Samoa and Tonga in its title,
with sections dealing specifically with Samoa and Tonga under each of the sections of the two
evaluation pillars and selected examples from other islands (as needed).
61.     The country and regional program evaluations will be supplemented by a briefer,
more selective assessment of Bank Group support to African small states—Cabo Verde,
Djibouti, Mauritius, , and the Seychelles. 51 The achievement of selected outcomes stipulated in
the results matrix of each country CPS will be discussed under the two-pillar framework of the

49
   For example, in assessing the tourism sector in Samoa, it is important to note that given the amount of subsidized
finance provided to private tourist operators, the true private sector is limited. Under this environment, the sector
responds poorly to market incentives (compared to the private sector in other similar PICs under the program).
Therefore, work in Samoa has been limited and is not representative of the Pacific Tourism Program regionally.
Therefore, we will cover IFC support for tourism projects in other Pacific islands selected small states through desk
reviews and/or a field mission (depending on budget constraints).
50
  If budget constraints permit, we would consider a mission to Kiribati to assess other dimensions of the program
for comparative purposes.
51
  As a reminder, only Mauritius and Seychelles, Cabo Verde, Comoros, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Sao Tome and
Principe, and Swaziland meet the defining population < 1.5 million criterion. Of these, Equatorial Guinea is oil-rich
(hence an outlier, with a high per capita income of some $14,320 in 2013) and is not a recent Bank borrower, while
Swaziland had adopted only two projects during the 2005-14 evaluation period. Comoros presently has an FCS
classification, so was excluded on the grounds that IEG completed an FCS evaluation in 2013.



                                                         31
evaluation. Starting from an initial desk review of the programs and drawing on available self-
evaluations (ICRs and CPSCRs) and IEG reviews, elements of the WBG programs that appear to
have been particularly effective, innovative, or indeed ineffective (i.e., WBG program elements
that offer potential learning value) would be identified. In so doing, balance would be sought
across the countries as well as across the two pillars—resilience and competitiveness—and the
areas under them. Based on more in-depth fieldwork, the usual CPE methodology (querying the
extent to which these WBG program elements efficiently attained their relevant objectives)
would be applied in order to confirm or contest the initial conclusions, and lessons would be
brought out accordingly. Prior desk work suggests that the team will review bank activities to
foster sustainable and inclusive growth (Pillar 2) in Djibouti/Mauritius/Seychelles/Capo Verde
and selected measures to improve resilience under Pillar 1 (such as macro resilience in Cabo
Verde, social protection in Seychelles and/or Djibouti, environment resilience in Djibouti).
62.     Hence, the assessment of the African small state experience will provide useful
benchmarks when distilling CPE findings and drawing general lessons for the overall
synthesis of evaluation findings. For example, a range of effective policies and strategic
investments—including some supported by the WBG—helped transform Mauritius into an
upper-middle income country with a record of strong performance on economic growth and
social indicators. The Seychelles provides an instructive example of successful adjustment
during 2008-13 that reversed the previous setback of deteriorating conditions and performance..
The Bank has also provided a set of four PRSCs to Cape Verde, which, despite its many
challenges and scarce natural resources, recorded one of the most impressive socioeconomic
performances in Africa.
SYNTHESIS OF EVALUATION FINDINGS

63.      An overall “chapeau” report for the CCPE will pull together and interpret CPE
findings in a broader small state client context. Once the individual country/regional program
evaluations and the selective assessment of WBG programs in African small states are
substantially complete, the chapeau report will provide an overview and distillation of the
findings. While its precise structure and content will be adjusted in light of how the evaluation
work unfolds and the associated findings, it is envisioned that the synthesis will include certain
key elements. One such element is a review of all WBG activities—including financing
operations, trust-funded activities, and AAA— in small states in general using a methodology
along the lines of that used in IEG’s Regional Updates. 52 A second such element will be a
distillation of findings regarding the pertinence and effectiveness of WBG initiatives, provisions,
and/or instruments tailored—at least among other clients—to small states in general (or to a
broad category of small states), such as the IDA “small island exception” clause and the Small
States Forum. This will also imply looking into the WBG business model to assess for example
the extent of use of simplified procedures to reduce transactions costs. The synthesis report will
seek to compare unit cost measures in small versus non-small states. Using findings from
52
  This would include a full description and assessment of these activities by Bank Region based on a review of
regional challenges and IEG evaluation findings—at the individual activity level (e.g., from ICR Reviews), at the
country program level (e.g., from CPSCR Reviews and CPEs, including those completed under this CCPE), and using
any relevant thematic, corporate, or global evaluations.



                                                       32
individual CPEs, the chapeau report will also discuss the implications of graduation to provide a
comprehensive picture on how tailored WB financial support to small states has been. A third
element would be a discussion of evaluation findings regarding the WBG’s strategic approach in
small states—assessing strategies along dimensions such as strategic relevance and selectivity of
objectives, relevance of design, flexibility, the role of AAA, dialogue and participatory
underpinnings, institutional development and capacity building, gender, assessment and
mitigation of risks, monitoring and evaluation, and partnerships. A fourth element will be an
overall assessment of the results that the WBG has helped achieve under the twin objectives of
building resilience and fostering inclusive and sustainable growth. Finally, a fifth element will
involve identifying lessons and recommendations with potential applicability beyond the small
state programs covered in the CCPE.

IV. Evaluation Design and Evaluability Assessment
64.    The CCPE will draw on a broad range of informational needs and sources as well as
data collection and analysis methods, which nevertheless have limitations. The evaluation
design matrix (see Attachment 6) presents the details of the various informational/data needs and
sources, as well as of the various data collection and analysis methods to be used, in order to
answer each of the main evaluation questions. As is standard in IEG CPEs, a combination of
quantitative and qualitative data/information and methods will be used to address the evaluation
questions, and the use of different information sources will allow “triangulation” in order to test
robustness of findings. Nevertheless, even under ideal conditions of fully successful collection
and analysis of information/data from all relevant sources, there are likely to be limitations—
notably regarding causal attribution of country-level results to WBG support—on the extent to
which the evaluation questions can be answered deterministically.

65.     Information/data needs encompass both factual evidence (qualitative and
quantitative) and stakeholder views and opinions. Factual information ranges from
government policies and data on macro- and socio-economic conditions in the relevant country
or countries (and comparators), to the findings of analytical work on small states in general, to
the details of WBG strategy and activities (including Bank and IFC projects, MIGA operations,
economic and sector work, trust-funded activities, and so on) in the country or countries.
Necessary details regarding WBG strategy and activities include the relevant country/regional
strategy and project-specific results frameworks, implementation and results details (including
outturns in relation to outputs and outcomes targeted), and joint activities with other
development partners. Related information needs pertain to the views of a broad range of
stakeholders: WBG staff and management on the thinking underlying WBG strategy and
operations in the country or countries and the corporate approach to small states in general;
country officials on overall and specific aspects of WBG support; other country stakeholders,
such as beneficiaries and civil society representatives, on specific aspects of WBG support and
the quality of consultation; and development partners on the quality of WBG coordination and
collaboration with other partners.

66.    In keeping with the diverse informational needs, their sources will also vary.
Sources of information and data on government policies and macro- and socio-economic


                                                33
conditions will include official government documents (e.g., relevant laws, policy and budget
documents, and statistical publications) and government officials, as well as Bank, IMF, and
other sources of data (e.g., Doing Business and the Worldwide Governance Indicators). For
background and context, an important source of information and data will be the significant
analytical and policy literature on small states. On the details of WBG strategy and activities, the
principal sources will include relevant policy documents at the corporate level, Country (or
Regional) Partnership Strategy (CPS) and Project Appraisal documents, and the corresponding
self-evaluations (CPS Completion Reports, Implementation Completion Reports (ICRs),
including those for regional approaches tried and tested in the small island states, as well as IFC
Project Completion Reports (PCRs) and their IEG reviews, complemented where available by
IEG Project Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs) and other IEG country program,
thematic, corporate, or global program evaluations. 53 Related sources include the extensive
WBG Economic and Sector Work (ESW) completed on small states as well as relevant Quality
Assurance Group (QAG) assessments—now discontinued. Sources of information for
stakeholder views will include relevant publications and suitable representatives of the various
stakeholder constituencies, including; (i) Bank country directors, project task team leaders, IFC
Investment Officers, and staff and managers responsible for corporate-level engagement with
small states; (ii) relevant country officials and representatives of regional institutions; (iii)
country CSO and private sector representatives; and (iv) development partner representatives
dealing with the Bank Group on the countries in question.

67.     Methods for collecting the required information will include secondary collection
from reputable data sources and semi-structured interviews with stakeholder
representatives. With one or two possible exceptions covering specific aspects (see paragraph
66), no primary collection of quantitative data is envisioned under the CCPE. The key methods
for collecting the required information will therefore involve drawing on WBG, country, or other
(e.g., IMF or UN) reliable quantitative databases, gathering all the available WBG, IEG, and
outside documentation (following a literature search) described above in a Box-based document
database, and conducting semi-structured interviews with representatives of the various
stakeholder constituencies.

68.     The CCPE will use multiple methods for the analysis of information and data.
Statistical analysis will be used on available macro- and socio-economic data to gauge evolution
of, and variations in, conditions over time. Analysis of the WBG portfolio quality will involve
tracing the evolution of key summary quality indicators (e.g., extent to which development
objectives have been—or are likely to be—met, implementation status, and proactivity indices)
over time and effecting comparisons with the same measures in other small states and in WBG
programs in general. 54 Desk-based reviews—including content analysis, where relevant—of the

53
   In the case of IFC Investment Services and MIGA operations, the evaluation will largely rely on Extended Project
Supervision Reports, Project Evaluation Summaries, and Project Evaluation Reports conducted at operational
maturity, usually about two years after financial closure.
54
   The portfolio analysis will include a focus on portfolio quality indicators (covering both the now-closed and still-
active portfolios) in order to help form judgments on the efficiency of WBG support.



                                                         34
available WBG, IEG, and outside documentation, as well as of notes from interviews with
stakeholder representatives, would be mainly qualitative in nature. Regarding the WBG country
strategy and project-specific results matrices, retrospective reviews would be undertaken to
compare outturns with outputs and outcomes targeted ex ante. In addition, certain thematic
areas—climate change and disaster risk management, for instance—have received substantial
attention in the WBG’s overall development activities in small states, and care will be taken to
ensure the requisite focus and technical depth of analysis on these areas.

69.     How the evaluation will set about answering one among many key questions
illustrates the methods to be employed and their limitations. Consider the question of: To
what extent has the WBG been successful in helping the countries tailor macroeconomic policies
to provide greater resilience to macroeconomic shocks and restore fiscal and public debt
sustainability? As detailed in Attachment 6, evidence-gathering will span the results chain. It will
include information and data on WBG projects and activities pertaining to macroeconomic and
fiscal policy-making, and on country macroeconomic and fiscal policies and performance over
time. Sources to be tapped include relevant WBG project and program documentation, WBG and
country sources of information and data, the analytical and policy literature regarding
macroeconomic and fiscal policy in small states, and interviews with stakeholders, including
WBG, country, and development partner representatives. Analytical methods will include desk-
based reviews and analysis of macroeconomic and fiscal data and of the relevant parts of WBG
results frameworks, comparative analysis of country performance, qualitative review of WBG-
recommended and –supported policy measures against any good-practice standards in the
analytical and policy literature, and qualitative analysis of stakeholder interviews. However, a
major limitation involves the difficulty of attributing outcomes (e.g., improved fiscal and debt-
related outcomes) to WBG support, whether in the form of budget support, traditional investment
lending, or AAA/technical assistance, particularly in contexts whether the WBG is one of many
partners providing support in this area. Consequently, the evaluation will seek to assess the
general likelihood of a WBG contribution to results, rather than seeking simple yes/no answers.

70.     The evaluation team will explore the possibility of using social media to collect
additional evidence. The dispersion of many of island states constitutes a challenge for the
evaluation team, which is also encountered by the country office for the Pacific in Sydney. Given
these constraints, the evaluation team will explore the possibility of generating additional
evaluative evidence using social media, through such techniques as: (a) beneficiary surveys
using radio/mobile phones; (b) feedback on social media, including a Facebook survey; and/or
(c) focus group discussions with Facilitating Partners of Bank programs. Any findings from such
sources will be triangulated with feedback from the numerous meetings with representatives of
government agencies and partner organizations, and with findings from the literature review. The
team will investigate the possibility of using such methods to assess the impact of Bank Group
interventions on disaster management and employment.




                                                35
71.     Evidence will also be gathered in order to answer the evaluation questions on
partnerships, 55 gender, and institutional capacity issues. In collecting evidence to assess the
treatment of these aspects, the evaluation team will: (i) ensure that attention to partnerships,
gender, and capacity are mainstreamed in interviews with staff, partners, and client
representatives; (ii) review the treatment of these aspects in relevant documents and strategies;
(iii) undertake portfolio analysis with special reference to these aspects; (iv) conduct in-depth
interviews with staff, donors, and partnership representatives specifically focused on these
aspects; and (v) review existing evaluations of partnership programs and MDTFs, gender, and
capacity development.

V. Quality Assurance Process
72.     Steps will be taken to ensure that the evaluation fully benefits from small state-
related analytical as well as development practitioner knowledge and experience. Through
both exhaustive literature reviews as well as individual and group discussions, particular care
will be taken to ensure that all state-of-the-art technical knowledge and analysis concerning
small states fully informs the evaluation. In the same vein, relevant practitioners—both WBG
managers and staff, including those involved in the country programs being evaluated in the
CCPE, as well as country policy-makers and other development partners—will be mobilized and
their views solicited on the evaluation questions and CCPE coverage. As a first step to these
ends, the evaluation team organized a thematic “learning event” over the period December 15-
19, 2014, where it exchanged views with key Bank Group managers and staff working on small
states—including the Bank’s Country Directors for the OECS, the Pacific island countries, and
Africa’s Indian Ocean countries, as well as practice managers and staff coordinating support to
small states at the corporate levels—on the proposed content of the evaluation, even prior to the
completion of the draft of the AP and its circulation for WBG Management content. Similar
learning events on the country/regional programs will be undertaken prior to the main country
missions.

73.     The quality assurance process will be further reinforced through appropriate peer
review arrangements and deployment of the full range of IEG knowledge resources. Jyoti
Shukla (who combines significant experience on small states and expertise on infrastructure and
private sector development), Ali Mansoor (currently Assistant Director in the IMF’s African
Department, who has also served as a senior policy-maker in Mauritius), and Alan Gelb (former
Bank Director and Chief Economist) have agreed to serve as external peer reviewers. Together,
the peer reviewers offer expertise in a range of thematic and operational matters pertinent to
small states. In addition, as is standard in major IEG evaluations, team composition reflects
broad, IEG-wide thematic and evaluative expertise. Finally, aside from close oversight from




55
  Each team member is in charge of looking at the role of partnerships, gender, and institutional capacity in their
respective areas. But in addition, one team member will be in charge of reviewing more specifically selected
partnerships in each CPE (e.g., the CCRIF in the case of the OECS countries).



                                                         36
IEGCC Management, the entire IEG Management Team has been mobilized to help shape and
review the evaluation, and will be available to support the evaluation team as needed.

VI. Expected Outputs and Dissemination
74.     CCPE outputs submitted to CODE will include two regional program evaluations
(consisting of one regional CPE on the OECS countries, and one “hybrid regional CPE” with a
“country drill” on Samoa and Tonga) and an overall synthesis report. In addition, IEG will
prepare two self-standing case studies on Mauritius and Seychelles, which will be processed as
IEG working papers and publicly disclosed in line with the protocol for IEG working papers; and
two background papers on Djibouti and Cabo Verde, which will be processed as internal
deliberative material for the CCPE. The findings of the two case studies and two background
papers will be integrated into the overall synthesis report. A 50-page limit will be imposed on
each reports. The two regional program evaluations are scheduled for submission to CODE by
May 2016, and the synthesis report by June 2016.

75.     IEG plans to use both traditional and small state-specific means of disseminating
CCPE findings. Plans include publicizing findings using conventional means of dissemination,
including through WBG seminars and established evaluation networks such as the Evaluation
Cooperation Group, relevant regional conferences and development partner meetings. In seeking
to publicize and encourage discussion around CCPE findings, IEG will explore the use of
customized media, including PowerPoint presentations and short, made-to-order “learning notes”
and/or webcasts. However, efforts will also be concentrated on publicizing and discussing CCPE
findings in one or more forums in which key stakeholders in the development of small states
convene on a regular basis. Presentation/discussion sessions in such groupings as the Small
States Forum or the Caribbean Growth Forum, for instance, would have the advantage of tapping
an audience that is normally very dispersed at relatively modest cost.

VII. Resources
76.     CCPE team composition—which will encompass leads on each of the CPEs and
thematic specialists—provides for the needed blend of operational, evaluative, and
thematic knowledge and experience. Task team leader Florence Charlier (Senior Economist,
IEGCC) will oversee and participate in all CPE sub-teams and the review of WBG programs in
African small states. Ali Khadr (STC, IEGCC, and former World Bank country director and
Lead Economist/Sector Leader on the Caribbean countries), assisted by co-author Swizen
Rubbani (ETC, IEGCC), will lead the regional CPE on the OECS countries. Basil Kavalsky
(STC, IEGCC, and former World Bank country director) will lead the hybrid regional/Samoa
CPE. . Claude Leroy (Senior Economist, IEGCC) will lead the assessment of WBG programs in
the African small states. In each case, the CPE team will include sector/thematic specialists
reflecting program composition, including: Chandra Pant (STC, IEGCC, and former senior Bank
staff with significant operational and evaluation experience), Andrew Stone (Lead Evaluation
Specialist, IEGPE, competitiveness and investment climate); Pia Schneider (Lead Evaluation
Officer, IEGPS, human development); Stephen Hutton (Evaluation Officer, IEGPS,
environment, disaster risk management, and climate change); and Xiaolun Sun (Senior Evaluator


                                              37
Officer, IEGCC, private sector development). Anna Aghumian (Evaluation Officer, IEGCC) and
Rasmus Heltberg (Senior Evaluation Officer, IEGCC) will cover the partnerships-related aspects.
The team includes members with significant experience in all focus regions—the Caribbean, the
Pacific, and Africa. Finally, Ms. Charlier, Mr. Khadr, Mr. Kavalsky, Mr. Pant, and Mr.
Rubbani—again with inputs from other team members as needed—will be responsible for
preparing the overall synthesis of CCPE findings. In selecting team members—whether staff or
consultants—special care has been taken to avoid possible conflicts of interest. In particular,
where staff or consultants have previously worked on countries where WBG programs are to be
evaluated, care has been taken to ensure that such involvement ended at least several years prior
to the start of the evaluation period.

77.     The budget needed for the CCPE amounts to US$1.325 million over two fiscal years
(FY15-16). The planned CCPE budget offers significant country coverage at a substantial cost
advantage relative to the traditional, single-country CPEs. 56 Staff (including ETC) costs are
estimated at some US$750k, and the remaining costs are split between consultant and travel
costs (which are substantial, owing notably to the high cost of travel to the Pacific island
countries. Finally, a budget of US$35k has been set aside to cover costs associated with
dissemination of CCPE findings, bearing in mind that IEG will endeavor to leverage both
evaluation- and small-state-related networks in publicizing this work.




56
   This does not take into account the fact that the OECS CPE covers multiple countries, as does the hybrid Pacific
island/Samoa CPE, with the latter involving significantly higher-than-average travel costs.



                                                        38
Attachment 1 – Small States: Characteristics and Challenges
1.       The framework underpinning this evaluation reflects the multi-faceted nature of the
challenges confronting small states. The size and location of small states typically generate a
set of intertwined challenges: remoteness and insularity result in high trade costs and
susceptibility to natural disasters and the effects of climate change; meanwhile, diseconomies of
small scale translate into limited economic diversification and competition given the narrow
resource base and small domestic markets. As a result, small states tend to rely heavily on
external trade and FDI to overcome scale and resource limitations (including paucity of arable
land and limited human capital). Moreover, the most striking characteristic of small states is the
highly volatile environment that they face as a result of their significant exposure to global
economic shocks and natural hazards. Small states’ limited institutional capacity, a consequence
of the small size (in absolute terms) of their public sectors, further compounds their ability to
tailor policies toward greater resilience to such shocks and sustainability. This attachment
summarizes elements of a growing literature on small states’ characteristics and development
challenges.
2.      In small states, the presence of fixed costs in the production of private goods and
services engenders diseconomies of scale, translating inter alia into limited diversification
and competition in their economies and inducing greater openness and outmigration
(“brain drain”). In the private sector, indivisibilities and high fixed costs in the production of
tradables often create barriers to entry for private firms. As a result, small states’ economies tend
to be concentrated in few goods and services that are not scale intensive, and to rely on imports
for most tradables. Table 1 shows the greater openness of small states compared to the average
for low- and middle-income countries.


   Table 1. Openness of small states

                                                                                Average share of GDP (percent)
                                           Number of countries with
    Region                                          data                Exports       Imports      Exports +Imports
    Africa                                           08                   72            69               141
    Asia & Pacific                                    10                   52           73               125
    Caribbean & Latin America                         12                   54           46               100
    Memo:
    All low income countries                                               23           34                57
    All middle income countries                                              31          29               60
   Based on data for exports of goods and services for latest available year in 2004-2012
   Source: World Bank Development Indicators database


Given the typically narrow economic base and small market size in a small state, competition is
low and the economy offers limited opportunities for employment, especially to individuals with


                                                             39
specialized expertise, which fuels outward migration among the more highly educated (referred
to the “brain drain”; see Figures 1 and 2). Particularly in recent years, there have also been
mounting concerns regarding youth unemployment, which tends to correlate with many other
social problems (see Figure 3).


      Figure 1. Small States with Highest Percentage of Emigrants, 2013

                               Dominica
                                   Samoa
                  Antigua and Barbuda
                                  Guyana
                                   Tonga
        St. Vincent and the Grenadines
                                Grenada
                     St. Kitts and Nevis
                               Suriname
                            Montenegro
                                  Tuvalu
                               Barbados
                             Cape Verde
                                 St. Lucia
                          Micronesia FS
                  Trinidad and Tobago
                                     Palau
                                       Fiji
                                    Belize
                Sao Tome and Principe
                       Marshall Islands
                     Equatorial Guinea
                                Comoros
                               Mauritius
                                Bahamas
                                  Bhutan
                              Seychelles
                              Swaziland
                                  Kiribati
                                 Vanuatu
                            Timor-Leste
                                 Djibouti
                       Solomon Islands
                                Maldives
                                              0     20           40       60    80   100

                  2013 Migrant stock as a % of population             Percent

      Source: UNPD 2013




                                                            40
         Figure 2. Emigration rate of tertiary-educated population (%)

              90
                         89
              85
                                       85               85
              80
                                                                     79             78
              75
                                                                                                      76         75
              70

              65
                      Guyana        Grenada         St. Vincent Trinidad & St. Kits &                Samoa     Tonga
                                                         &       Tobago      Nevis
                                                    Grenadines

         Source: Migration & Remittances Factbook (2011) showing data for the year 2000.




                   Figure 3. Unemployment Rate in Select Small States

                           Grenada(2013)                                                                        33.5

                           St. Lucia(2013)                                                    23.3

                              Guyana(2012)                                                21.7

                       Montenegro(2012)                                                19.6

                          Dominica(2009)                                    13.9

                     Bahamas, The(2012)                                    13.6

                         Suriname(2012)                                   12.7

                          Barbados(2012)                             11.6

                          Maldives(2012)                             11.3

                                 Fiji(2012)                    8.4

                               Belize(2012)                   7.9

                         Mauritius(2012)                      7.9

                                              0.0      5.0    10.0        15.0     20.0       25.0      30.0   35.0

                                                                             Percent

                   Source: World Development Indicators (modeled ILO estimate), Country authorities


3.     Diseconomies of small scale also affect the provision of public goods and services.
Operation at a small scale raises the average cost of public services and may result in the under-


                                                                    41
             provision of certain public goods and services (e.g., in education and infrastructure), further
             hindering the competitiveness of the private sector. In some small states, a widely scattered
             population adds to the challenge of public service delivery and translates into a (relatively)
             larger-sized public sector than other countries. In response to the absence of competition in the
             private sector, small states have frequently seen heavy state intervention in their economies—
             nationalized banks, public utilities, and state-owned enterprises in agriculture and manufacturing.
             As a result, small states tend to have relatively larger governments than non-small states—as
             measured for instance by the ratio of government expenditures to GDP (see Figure 4)—as well
             as higher wage bills and higher quasi-fiscal risks in relation to the size of their economies.


                           Figure 4. Government expenditure (% of GDP)

                                       20


                                       18


                                       16
                             Percent




                                       14


                                       12


                                       10
                                            2004     2005     2006         2007      2008      2009        2010       2011    2012

                                                      Micro small states            Other small states            All LICs
                           Source: World Development Indicators



Table 2. Selected indicators for small states, 2004-12

                                                                                                 Other Small
                                                                     Micro states                                            Other LICs   Other MICs
                                                                                                   states
 Net ODA received (% of GDP)                                                 7.2                     2.7                        9.3          0.4
 Net flows on external debt, public and publicly
                                                                             2.2                         2.3                    1.6          0.4
 guaranteed (PPG) (% of GDP)
 General government final consumption
                                                                            18.4                         13.9                   10.6         13.9
 expenditure (% of GDP)
 Current account balance (% of GDP)                                         -20.8                        1.7                     -5          1.2
 General government revenue (% of GDP) -
                                                                            33.4                         28.8                   18.6         26.4
 median
 General government primary net
                                                                             -3.1                        -1.9                   -2.5         -1.6
 lending/borrowing (% of GDP) median
Source: World Bank Development Indicators database




                                                                                   42
4.      Some—although by no means all—small states are also remote, which results in
higher trade costs and makes it more difficult for them to integrate into the global
economy. Remoteness and isolation increase the cost of intermediate inputs and hinders
efficiency and innovation. Transportation costs between small states in the Pacific and their main
export markets are high, which reduces the competitiveness of exports and leads to larger
consumer welfare losses for imported goods (in multi-island small states, high transportation
costs can even constrain the development of a domestic market). However, several recent global
trends—notably the emergence of global value chains, advances in hard and soft connectivity,
and the emergence of new production technologies—offer potential opportunities for the affected
small states to address remoteness.

          Figure 5. Liner Shipping Connectivity Index, 2013

                         Bahamas, The
                              Mauritius
                                Djibouti
                  Trinidad and Tobago
                                     Fiji
                                  Belize
                               Maldives
                             Seychelles
                Sao Tome and Principe
                       Solomon Islands
                               Comoros
                               Barbados
                               St. Lucia
                              Suriname
                                Grenada
                                Guyana
                                 Samoa                                                         Small states average
                            Cabo Verde
                    St. Vincent and the…
                     Equatorial Guinea
                                Vanuatu
                                  Tonga
                       Marshall Islands
                                Kiribati
                    St. Kitts and Nevis
                  Antigua and Barbuda
                           Montenegro
                                   Palau
                  Micronesia, Fed. Sts.
                              Dominica
                                           0           5          10          15          20          25          30



          Note: A smaller number indicates lower connectivity/high transportation costs. Countries with maximum
          connectivity=100
          Source: WDI




                                                               43
5.      Small states also tend to have shallower financial systems and face less favorable
access to financial capital on global markets. Small states’ thin economic base reduces lending
opportunities for domestic banks. 57 As a result, banking sectors in small states tend to exhibit
greater concentration. The lack of depth of the banking sector typically translates into higher
lending-to-deposit rate spreads, which further hinders private sector investment and
competitiveness. Under such conditions, commercial banks lend disproportionately to the
government. Bank soundness and fiscal sustainability are particularly intertwined in small states:
on the one hand, banks are heavily exposed to public debt, while on the other hand, traditionally
weak supervision and regulatory capacity add to the vulnerability of the domestic financial
system, and quasi-fiscal risks, to the extent that they materialize, can jeopardize fiscal
sustainability. Small states also tend to have lower access to international financial markets.
Creditors may be reluctant to take on exposure to small states, given the risks associated with
their vulnerability to macroeconomic shocks and natural disasters, but also owing to the fixed
costs of gathering information and monitoring financial transactions, which are higher in relation
to the smaller amounts that small states typically need to borrow.

 Table 3. Selected indicators of small states

                                                                                                              Domestic
                                              GDP per capita                GDP per capita growth
                                                                                                               credit to
                                                                                                                private
     Country Grouping                         (current US$)                      (current US$)               sector (% of
                                                 Median                             Median                       GDP)
                                        1994-2003        2004-2013        1994-2003         2004-2013           2013
     All Small states                     2,119             4,136             2.0               1.5             45.4
     Caribbean small states               4,509             7,366             2.2               1.2             56.2
     Asia & Pacific island small
                                          1,630             2,858             2.4               1.6             42.6
     states
     African small states                 1,243             3,082             1.5               2.0             28.2
     Memo
     All Low Income countries              264               526              1.2               3.9             30.7
     All middle income countries          1,272             3,217             2.8               5.3             88.6
 Source: World Bank Development Indicators database


6.      Small states tend to face greater vulnerability given their proneness to natural
disasters. Many small states are located in regions that are vulnerable to hurricanes or cyclones,
droughts, volcanic eruptions, and/or tsunamis. Small island developing states account for two-
thirds of the countries posting (in relative terms) the highest annual losses from disasters (see
graph below). The United Nations Disaster Relief Organization has estimated that the 25 most
disaster-prone countries (which include 13 small island states) have experienced costs ranging
from 28 percent to 1200 percent of their annual GDP as a result of disasters (WB, 2000, p. 11).
In the Caribbean, for example, annual damage to infrastructure from natural disasters averages

57
     For those that have large off-shore financial centers, they often tend to serve non-resident markets.



                                                             44
an estimated US$0.5-1 billion. For many island states, exposure to natural disasters is
exacerbated by the impact of climate change. In the Caribbean, the estimated cost of climate
change—in the absence of adaptation—is projected to double, increasing from 5% to 10.3% of
2007 GDP, between 2025 and 2050 (see Bueno et al., 2008).


 Figure 6. Exposure to Natural Hazard – Relative Annual Disaster Loss




 Table 4. Cost and historical probability of natural disasters, 1987-2011




                                              45
7.       Greater exposure to macroeconomic shocks is an added source of volatility. Small
states are plagued by highly erratic economic growth. To overcome diseconomies of small scale,
they foster more concentrated structures of production and greater trade openness, which renders
them more vulnerable to both industry-specific and generalized shocks. Furthermore, natural
disasters also cause severe economic disruption through production and export losses. As a
result, small states experience greater external sector volatility—their current accounts are much
more volatile, reflecting the larger impact of terms of trade volatility. In the same vein, fiscal
volatility is also higher in small states. Vulnerability to economic shocks translates into greater
volatility in revenue. Government revenues typically rely more heavily on trade taxes on a
handful of commodities, which fluctuate with terms of trade shocks, and/or depend on certain
services (mainly tourism and financial services) that are subject to the vagaries of the global
economy and foster contagion. Similarly, greater volatility affects public expenditures as small
states cope with the damage caused by natural disasters.

 Table 5. Small States: Volatility measures

                                                                           2005-2012, median
  Country groups/indicators                              Micro states       Other small states       Other LMICs

  Private capital flows (% of GDP)                           3.11                  1.17                  0.71

  Current account balance (% of GDP)                         2.97                  3.57                  0.87

  Net ODA received (% of GNI)                                1.14                   0.2                   0.1

  GDP growth                                                 1.88                  1.88                  1.66
 Note: Volatility is measured as a five-year backward-looking standard deviation of a variable. For example, the volatility
 reported for the year 2005 is the standard deviation of a variable x from year 2001 to 2005

 Source: World Bank Development Indicators database, IEG Calculations


8.      A number of indices have been developed to measure the combined effect of these
different sources of vulnerability, allowing for their resilience. The Commonwealth vulnerability
index, for example, considers the three most significant determinants of income volatility—lack
of diversification, export dependence, and impact of natural disasters—and combines them to
form a composite index of the impact of vulnerability. The resulting index is then weighted by
average GDP as a proxy for resilience. The results show that small states account for most
vulnerable developing countries.




                                                              46
 Figure 7. Economic Vulnerability Index (30 most vulnerable states)


                                       100
   Economic Vulnerability Index 2012




                                        80

                                        60                                   Small states average
                                        40

                                        20

                                         0




                                                        Non small states average
 Source: UN Development Policy & Analysis Division
 Note: Blue bars are for small states & red for non-small states. Averages are computed basing on data for the 30 most vulnerable countries


9.       Chronic fiscal deficits—together with the impacts of repeated external shocks and
natural disasters—have led to a sizeable accumulation of public debt in many small states
(see Figure 8). In fact, small states’ debt burden varies substantially. Almost half of small states
have been able to contain their debt through sound economic management. The remainder has
not been able to mitigate risks effectively through appropriate macro-financial policies and has
built sizeable debt over time. For these small states, a high debt service burden diverts public
resources away from critical social and productive capital expenditures and increases the cost of
new borrowing, as markets perceive high risks to be associated with newly-issued debt. As a
result, they have limited financial capacity to respond to and recover from natural disasters, and
limited fiscal space for counter-cyclical spending. Restoring debt sustainability through growth,
fiscal consolidation, and in some cases debt restructuring, is a key challenge for many small
states.




                                                                    47
 Figure 8. Change in Debt to GDP Ratio after Natural Disasters in Caribbean States




10.     Among IDA countries, all but one of the small states are at moderate to high risk of
external debt distress. Among World Bank clients, 14 out of 53 countries with moderately high
to high risk of domestic or external debt distress are small island states. Similarly, eight of the 15
countries at high risk of external debt distress are small island states (see Figure 9).


                                           Figure 9. Risk of Debt Distress




Source: Joint Bank-Fund LIC-DSAs Bank presentation at 2014 Small States Forum




                                                                48
11.      Small states may also have some countervailing advantages:
     Small states have no choice but to turn outward, and on balance openness pays off in growth,
      as has been most vividly illustrated by the case of Singapore. “Any growth disadvantages of
      …. greater volatility are more than outweighed by the growth benefits of trade openness
      reaped by microstates by virtue of their necessary large trade volumes” (Easterly and Kray,
      1999, p. 3 on microstates) or “growth volatility and volatility of terms of trade shocks as
      percent of GDP is higher in small states but this is due entirely to their greater trade openness
      ….. and the net benefits of openness on growth are positive” (Easterly and Kray, 1999, p.
      13).
     The expansion of world trade makes a big domestic market less vital for development and
      new opportunities can be seized. Indeed, a new range of services has become tradable, thanks
      to advances in ICT as illustrated by the rise in outsourcing and offshoring.
     Small states often benefit from greater social homogeneity and social cohesion, leading to
      greater social capital. In 1960, Kuznets noted that small states have a small and more
      cohesive population, which allows them to better adapt to change and build resilience.
      “Social capital formation is believed to be a significant factor in growth by enhancing social
      cohesion and so fostering effective policy-making and strategic flexibility … Social capital
      will continue to be a key source of strength and potential growth for small island states in the
      future and should therefore be cherished” (Robert Read, 2004, The Implications of Increasing
      Globalization and Regionalism for the Economic Growth of Small Island States World
      Development).
     Small states may be easier to monitor and comprehend, allowing policy-makers to rely more
      on common sense and discretion. Nevertheless, public officials are more likely to be
      subjected to conflicting pressures (Farrugia, 1993).




                                                   49
Attachment 2: World Bank Group Support to Small States
Genesis of Bank Group Engagement with Small States
1.      In the late 1990s, when the Task Force for small states was established, there was a view
that the WBG model of advice was overly generic, and based on an IDA country “model”. This
limited the ability of Small States to take full advantage of the Bank Group, and limited the
WBG’s ability to serve this client group which faces unique challenges and vulnerabilities.

2.      WBG recognition of the special issues related to small states began formally in July
1998, when the Bank Group and the Commonwealth secretariat established a joint task force on
small states to address the special development challenges facing these countries. The task
force’s report, submitted to the Development Committee in April 2000, identified an agenda that
largely still underpins WBG work in this area, and is based on the common challenges that these
countries face, despite their diversity. The WBG convenes an annual Small States Forum (SSF,
co-sponsored by the Commonwealth secretariat, EU, IMF, UNCTAD and WTO) in the context
of the IMF/WB annual meetings. The forum is intended to raise the profile of small states and
provide an opportunity for small states officials to bring their views and ideas to the attention of
the international community. Other events are also organized during the year to pursue the Small
States agenda. This complements several UN initiatives in this area.

3.       Today at the WBG Board, there is an ED Advisor group on Small States. Among Bank
staff, there is an internal and informal network of people, coordinated at OPCS, including
prominently three country directors (for the Caribbean, Pacific and Indian Ocean areas) as well
as working groups as the sectoral level (e.g., the Ocean initiative, the Climate change group,
remittances, tourism). The WBG has begun preparing statistics on small states that encompass a
number of areas, as a special supplement to the DEC Development Indicators for 2009 and
2011. 58 Flags for the small states are now being mainstreamed in the Development Data
Platform. A special internet-based platform is also in place to gather relevant information and
events on small states at http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/smallstates.

World Bank Financing Eligibility
4.       In 1995, the World Bank implemented a “small island economies” exception to allow
small islands to access IDA funding in recognition of their vulnerability to economic shocks and
natural disasters despite having GNI per-capita levels above the operational cutoff for IDA
eligibility. Although initially limited, and brought in on an exceptional basis, it is now quite
widespread in terms of the number of countries covered.

5.     Over time, the World Bank has enhanced its financial support to small states under IDA
through additional measures:


58
   The Supplement for example contains information on GDP and economic size, MDG achievement, poverty,
education, health, labor markets, economic activity including some subsectors, aid dependency, trade, and 'global
links'.



                                                        50
   Raising the minimum base of support: As part of its Performance Based Allocation (PBA)
    system, IDA provides a minimum base allocation to each IDA-eligible country. For small
    states, this minimum base allocation constitutes the majority of IDA’s financial support. The
    minimum base allocation was increased from SDR1.1 million per year in IDA-14 to SDR3
    million per year in IDA-16. As a result, IDA’s annual per-capita allocation to small states
    during IDA-16 was on average twice that for non-small states. And in IDA-17, the raising of
    the minimum base allocation from SDR3 million to SDR4 million per year was a significant
    achievement.

   Providing access to IDA terms under the “small island exception” countries: In IDA-16, the
    terms of IDA funding for countries under the small island economies exception were
    changed from blend to regular IDA credit terms, which resulted in longer maturities and
    grace periods, as well as a lower interest rate.

   Regional IDA programs: Beyond core IDA funding, small states are eligible for funding
    under regional IDA programs. Provisions have been made to allow for leveraging
    significantly more financing from the regional program compared to larger IDA clients, with
    national co-financing capped at 20 percent of annual allocation for small states. In IDA-16,
    several regional projects ranging from aviation, harbors, and IT/broadband connectivity are
    being funded in the Pacific and the Caribbean; raising IDA’s financing contribution in these
    small states in addition to country allocations—and with benefits for higher-income small
    states as well.

World Bank Financing Amounts, Trends, and Composition

6.      Official development assistance (ODA) to small states experienced steady growth in the
early part of the period, but has been declining in recent years. Net official development
assistance received by small states rose from US$1.9 billion in 2004, reaching a peak of US$4.2
billion in 2010 and thereafter declining to US$3.6 billion in 2012. The trend of increasing
volumes of ODA was present but less pronounced for low- and middle-income states as a whole
(see Figure 1 below).

    Figure 1. Net official development assistance received
                     4.5                                                                                 150
                           All low and middle
                     4.0
                                                                                                               US$ Billions




                     3.5                                                                                 100
                     3.0
      US$ Billions




                     2.5                                                                                 50
                     2.0                                      Small states
                     1.5                                                                                 0
                            2004      2005      2006   2007       2008       2009   2010   2011   2012
                                                                  Year
    Source: World Bank Development Indicators database




                                                                    51
7.      The rise in ODA to small states encompassed all regions, but was most pronounced and
persistent for the small states in Africa (see Figure 2).

     Figure 2. Trends in Aid Flows to Small States (Net Official Development Assistance
     Received)

                      2.5

                      2.0
       US$ Billions




                      1.5

                      1.0

                      0.5

                      0.0
                            2004   2005         2006      2007        2008   2009      2010       2011   2012
                                                                    Year
                                   African SS          Asia & Pacific SS       Caribbean small states

     Source: World Bank Development Indicators database


8.      The World Bank Group deployed a wide range of financing instruments and knowledge
services targeting small states. 59 In the period FY05-14, the World Bank made US$2.4 billion in
new commitments, and disbursed US$1.8 billion, to small states. About 83 percent of
commitments and 95 percent of disbursements during this period were from IDA/IBRD. Bank
lending support to small states rose sharply in response to the global financial crisis and has yet
to return to pre-crisis levels. Average annual WB commitments grew from US$138 million
during FY05-08 to US$274 million during FY09-11 and then to US$349 million over FY12-14.
At US$435 million, the FY12 World Bank commitments reflected the highest level of non-crisis
lending commitments to small states.




59
  Note that the definition of small states used in discussing WBG support in this attachment is based on
the strict population < 1.5 million criterion.


                                                                 52
                                                   Figure 3. World Bank lending support to Small States

                         500

                         400
      US$ millions




                         300

                         200

                         100

                                    0
                                            2005     2006    2007         2008   2009      2010   2011     2012     2013        2014
                                                                                  Fiscal Year
                                                                Commitments                         Disbursements

 Source: WB BW Database


9.      About US$1.0 billion, or 58 percent of the disbursements, were on highly concessional
terms from IDA, going mainly to Bhutan, Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Samoa, and Maldives. The
share of IDA financing to small states grew from 50 percent during FY00-02 to 69 percent over
FY03-FY08 and then fell back to 52 percent over FY09-14 (see Figure 4 below). The principal
recipients of IBRD disbursements were Mauritius, Montenegro, St. Lucia, and Barbados.

                                                   Figure 4. World Bank Disbursements to Small States


                                    250
    Average annual disbursements,




                                    200
            US$ millions




                                    150

                                    100

                                     50                             70%                 67%          54%              50%
                                                   50%
                                        0
                                               2000-2002       2003-2005           2006-2008      2009-2011         2012-2014

                                                                           IDA   IBRD     Other

 Source: World Bank BW database




                                                                                 53
10.     Disbursements to the small island states were US$1.6 billion in the last 10 years, reaching
US$134 million annually over the last three years (see Figure 5 below). IDA’s share of financing
to the small island states was 52 percent compared to 58 percent for small states overall.


                                              Figure 5. Small Islands Share of World Bank Disbursements


                                        250
        Average annual disbursements,




                                        200
                US$ millions




                                        150

                                        100
                                                                                                       71%         65%
                                         50        79%           67%                  66%

                                          0
                                                 2000-2002     2003-2005            2006-2008        2009-2011   2012-2014


                                                               Small Islands    Other Small states

 Source: Business Warehouse


11.     Some small states were also able to leverage financing through the World Bank’s
regional programs. Bank lending to small states for regional projects during FY05-14 comprised
37 additional commitments totaling US$202 million, and was directed primarily to the small
states in the Pacific and the Caribbean, including the OECS. This support to regional projects
aimed at, among other things, promoting telecommunications and ICT Development,
strengthening labor markets, and providing catastrophe risk insurance to mitigate the effects of
natural disasters.

12.     Lending to the small states in the Asia-Pacific region and to those in Sub-Saharan Africa
made up a higher proportion of commitments to small states over FY05-14. The African small
states—which together account for about 38 percent of the overall population of small states—
received 37 percent of the commitments and 42 percent of World Bank disbursements to small
states during the period FY05-14.




                                                                               54
                                 Table 1. World Bank Support to Small States

                                                        Sub-Saharan                Caribbean SS       Asia & Pacific
  Number of small states in region                                 7                       12                 13
  Share of 2013 SS Population (%)                                  38                      28                 30
  Share by value of World Bank 2005-2014
                                                                   37                      14                 37
  commitments (%)
  Share by value of World Bank 2005-2014
                                                                   42                      17                 32
  disbursements (%)
 Source: Business Warehouse database




13.     The sectoral distribution of Bank commitments to small states was broadly similar across
all small states but with different thematic areas of focus in the various regions. In the Asia
Pacific region, for instance, the transport sector board accounted for the largest share of
commitments, while in the Caribbean and Africa, the urban development and economic policy
sector boards, respectively, received the greatest share of commitments (see Figure 6 below).
Overall, five sector boards—economic policy, transport, energy and mining, urban development,
and Financial and Private Sector Development (FPD) together accounted for 60 percent of the
value of World Bank commitments to small states.

   Figure 6. Share of World Bank Commitments to SS by sector Board (in value terms),
                                      FY05-14


                   Economic Policy
                           Transport
                  Energy & Mining
               Urban Development
   Financial & Private Sector Dev't
                          Education
   Health, Nutrition and Population
           Social protection & dev't
             Agriculture and Rural…
                       Environment
                 Poverty Reduction
        Financial Systems Practice
                              GICT
                              Water
         Public Sector Governance
       Investment Climate Practice
            Financial Management
                              Others
                                   0         50        100              150          200        250     300        350
                                       SSA        Caribbean              Asia & Pacific
 .
 Source: World Bank Business Warehouse database




                                                              55
14.     The pattern of World Bank support to small states in the form of analytical and
advisory activities (AAA) was similar to lending. The largest share of AAA products delivered
to small states during FY05-14 were to states in the Asia Pacific region which received almost
half of the number of AAA products delivered. The FPD sector board accounted for the largest
share of AAA products to small states over FY05-14 (see Figure 7). The technical and advisory
services to small states covered a broad range of issues, including expanding and improving
service delivery for health and education; enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of public
spending; PPPs and SOE reform; debt and macro-financial vulnerability; public financial
management reform and strengthening statistical capacity; improving investment climate and
private sector development; building resilience; and developing options for scaling up renewable
energy and energy efficiency measures.


                     Figure 7. Share of World Bank AAA (count), FY04-14
            By Geographical Area                                        By Sector Board

Caribbean                                                                  FPD
  small                                                        Economic Policy
  states                                              Public Sector Governance
   8%                                                  Social Protection & dev't
                                                                          GICT
                                                            Energy and Mining
                                                         Financial Management
                                              Health, Nutrition and Population
                                                           Urban Development
                                                             Poverty Reduction
                                            Agriculture and Rural Development
    Asia &                African                                      Transport
    Pacific                                                           Education
                            SS                                     Environment
     37%                   50%                                     Procurement
                                                Competitive Industries Practice
                                                   Investment Climate Practice
                                                     Financial Systems Practice
                                                       Capital Markets Practice
                                                                          Water
                                                      Gender and Development
                                                           Operational Services
                                                    Financial Inclusion Practice

                                                                                   0   5   10   15   20
                                                                                           %



15.      IFC involvement in small states over FY05-14 included the provision of technical
and advisory services as well as investments. To at least 25 of the 34 small states, IFC
provided advisory services in the areas of sustainable business, investment climate, access to
finance and on PPP partnerships transactions. IFCs investment in small states amounted to
US$742 million in 22 small states and US$142 million to three regional investments in the
Caribbean. The main sectors of focus for IFC investments in small states were finance and
insurance, accommodation and tourism, and ICT, which together accounted for about 70 percent
of total investments.




                                                56
                                               Figure 8. IFC support to small states FY05-14
                                                                                                                    By primary sector

                                                                                                         Finance & Insurance                         48%
         300                                                                16.0
                                                                                                 Accommodation & Tourism…                  16%
                                                                            14.0
         250                                                                                                     Information             11%
                                                                            12.0                         Oil, Gas and Mining         7%
         200
                                                                            10.0                Nonmetallic Mineral Product…        4%




                                                                                US$ millions
US$ millions




         150                                                                8.0                Collective Investment Vehicles       4%

                                                                            6.0                           Education Services       3%
         100
                                                                            4.0                           Transportation and…      3%
               50                                                                                Construction and Real Estate      2%
                                                                            2.0

               0                                                            0.0                      Agriculture and Forestry      1%
                    2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                                         Electric Power      0.5%
                     IFC commitments    Disbursements   IFC Advisory services
                                                                                                                Pulp & Paper      0.1%

                                                                                                                                0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60%



          16.   The small states with the largest share of IFC investments included Trinidad & Tobago,
          Maldives, and Montenegro.
          17.     In addition to financing from IBRD and IDA, several small states have received
          substantial assistance in the form of grants from the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) and
          the Institutional Development Fund (IDF). IDF grants focus on technical assistance and other
          support for economic management and public sector functions. Over the last ten years, small
          states have received grants for 53 capacity building projects totaling US$20.1 million. Most of
          the small states have benefited from IDF grants, and several countries received more than one
          grant (e.g., Bhutan received 11 separate IDF grants and Djibouti received seven while Bhutan
          and Jamaica obtained five each). In addition, the World Bank provided IDF grants of US$6.3
          million for 12 regional and multi-country projects involving small states, most of them in the
          OECS or wider Caribbean region (see Table 2 below). Since 2004, GEF support has totaled
          US$118 million for 26 WBG-implemented projects and was directed not only to individual
          countries, but also to regions with many small states, such as the OECS and Pacific islands (see
          Table 3).




                                                                   57
                        Table 2. Use of IDF by Small States

                                               FY05-09   FY10-14   Total
 African small states
 Number of grants                                 9         5       14
 Amount (US$ millions)                           3.3       2.2      5.5
 Asia & Pacific small states
 Number of grants                                11        11       22
 Amount (US$ millions)                           3.7       4.4      8.0
 Latin America & Caribbean small states
 Number of grants                                 2         4        6
 Amount (US$ millions)                           0.8       1.4      2.1
 Total small states (all Regions)
 Number of grants                                22        21       43
 Amount (US$ millions)                           7.7       8.4     16.2
 Total All Countries
 Number of grants                                301       245      546
 Amount (US$ millions)                          112.8     102.7    215.6
Source: Business Warehouse database




                                          58
                                     Table 3. Use of GEF by Small States

                                                       Commitment Amount             Number of
                            Country
                                                           (US$ M)                  commitments
                     Bhutan                                      11.7                     2
                     Solomon Islands                              7.3                     1
                     Djibouti                                     6.0                     1
                     Kiribati                                     5.8                     3
                     Vanuatu                                      5.6                     1
                     Sao Tome and Principe                        4.1                     1
                     Montenegro                                   4.0                     1
                     Guyana                                       3.8                     1
                     Seychelles                                   0.8                     1
             Regional/multi-country projects
                   OECS Countries                                12.5                     2
                   Pacific Islands                                9.5                     1
                   Caribbean                                      2.1                     1
             Total small states                                   73.3                     16
             Total all countries                                2,400.4                   373
             Share of small states                                3%                      4%
            Source: Business Warehouse database



         Table 4. Small States Frequency and Amount of Borrowing from IBRD/IDA

                                                                                                      Amount
                                                                Number of operations approved
                                                                                                     approved
             Country                    FY15 Eligibility        Last 5 years   Previous 5 years    Last 10 years
                                                                 (FY10-14)        (FY05-09)       ($ Million FY05-
                                                                                                         14)
15 Frequent borrowers (>4 operations last 5 years)
Djibouti                               IDA                           11               6                90.0
Cabo Verde                                   Blend                      8             8                212.5
Comoros                                        IDA                      8             1                35.4
Samoa                                          IDA                      8             2                117.3
Tonga                                          IDA                      8             2                88.7
Mauritius                                     IBRD                      7             4                368.0
Sao Tome and Principe                          IDA                      7             2                33.4
Solomon Islands                                IDA                      7             3                38.2
Montenegro                                    IBRD                      6             8                292.0
Bhutan                                         IDA                      5             8                174.5



                                                           59
                                                                                                  Amount
                                                            Number of operations approved
                                                                                                 approved
             Country                FY15 Eligibility        Last 5 years   Previous 5 years    Last 10 years
                                                             (FY10-14)        (FY05-09)       ($ Million FY05-
                                                                                                     14)
Maldives                                  IDA                    5                7                119.5
16 Occasional Borrowers (1-4 operations last 5 years)
Guyana                                IDA                        4                2                57.0
Kiribati                                  IDA                    4                                 49.1
Seychelles                               IBRD                    4                                 32.0
Timor-Leste                              Blend                   4                7                94.1
Grenada                                  Blend                   3                5                48.3
Tuvalu                                    IDA                    3                                 20.9
St. Lucia                                Blend                   2                5                49.4
St. Vincent and the
                                         Blend                   2                1                47.6
Grenadines
Swaziland                                IBRD                    2                                 46.9
Antigua and Barbuda                      IBRD                    1                                 10.0
Belize                                   IBRD                    1                                 15.0
Dominica                                 Blend                   1                1                18.4
Marshall Islands                          IDA                    1                                  3.0
Micronesia, Federated States
                                          IDA                    1                                 14.4
of
10 Inactive Borrowers (no operations last 5 years)
Vanuatu                            IDA & IBRD                                                        ..


Fiji, Namibia, Palau, St. Kitts &     IDA & IBRD                                  2                15.0
Nevis, Suriname
Bahamas, Barbados, Trinidad
                                    Non-borrowers                                 1                35.0
& Tobago
Total small states operations                                   144              77               2183.6




                                                       60
       Table 5. Small States: Status and Net ODA received per capita (current US$)

           Country Name           Status     2005     2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011     2012

Africa

Cabo Verde                         Blend     338.9    287.3    341.5    457.6    402.7    672.5    514.1    497.9

Comoros                             IDA       38      51.7     71.1     64.1     75.7     98.4      74      95.7

Djibouti                            IDA      95.4     146.3     141     173.8    202.8    158.6    167.4    170.5

Equatorial Guinea                  IBRD      63.2     42.2      49      48.8     46.5     121.7    33.9     19.3

Mauritius                          IBRD      27.8     15.3     54.6     86.5     121.5    97.8     144.1    137.8

Sao Tome and Principe               IDA      209.8    144.4    312.7    281.3    176.1    276.6    395.2    259.4

Seychelles                         IBRD      201.8    161.2    129.8     144     260.7    624.3    252.7    400.1

Swaziland                          IBRD      42.2     31.1     44.6     60.6     47.7     76.6      103     71.6

Africa Small States Average                  127.1    109.9    143.0    164.6    166.7    265.8    210.6    206.5

Latin America and the Caribbean

Antigua and Barbuda                IBRD      94.3     39.3     87.4     102.5    65.4     218.6    173.9    26.4
                                    Non
Bahamas, The                                   ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..
                                  Borrower
                                    Non
Barbados                                      -6.6     -7.6    63.4     25.6     42.9     57.8       ..       ..
                                  Borrower
Belize                             IBRD      44.8     30.9     76.1     81.3     91.6     80.2     71.3     77.7

Dominica                           Blend     299.4     276     274.2    313.3    506.4     456     343.7     358

Grenada                            Blend      510      259     222.5    318.5    458.4    323.3    116.4    72.5

Guyana                              IDA      197.1    227.8     166     214.4    221.9    212.5    200.8    143.9

St. Kitts and Nevis                IBRD      50.9     103.6    68.1     915.7    99.2     218.1     303     408.9

St. Lucia                          Blend     63.4      110     114.3    110.5    233.8     232     197.4    148.4

St. Vincent and the Grenadines     Blend     70.7     43.4     603.9    246.1    281.6    154.1    163.4    78.3

Suriname                           IBRD      88.4     127.1    295.6    196.9    301.9    199.1    170.9    74.1

Trinidad and Tobago                IBRD       -1.5    10.6     15.9      7.1      5.2      3.3       ..       ..

LCR Small States Average                     128.3    110.9    180.7    230.2    209.8    195.9    193.4    154.2

Asia and Pacific

Fiji                               IBRD      80.4     67.2     60.8     53.6     83.3     88.8      91      122.7

Kiribati                            IDA      309.4    292.1    288.6    285.8    281.9    233.5    644.1    641.6
                                             1,090.   1,056.            1,018.   1,121.   1,728.   1,572.   1,446.
Marshall Islands                    IDA                        999.4
                                               90       80                70       50       70       70       30
                                             1,003.   1,026.   1,093.            1,163.   1,208.   1,296.   1,112.
Micronesia, Fed. States             IDA                                 900.9
                                               60       60       10                30       40       90       60
                                             1,190.   1,864.   1,110.   2,122.   1,737.   1,285.   1,372.
Palau                              IBRD                                                                     722.8
                                               00       90       40       80       60       30       40
Samoa                               IDA       242      260     205.6    219.7    418.6    792.8    521.9    638.8

Solomon Islands                     IDA      422.9    425.4     500     445.5    399.7    646.8    620.9    554.9

Timor-Leste                        Blend      188     209.3     274     268.9    206.3    273.3    249.3    246.4




                                                        61
         Country Name            Status     2005     2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011     2012

Tonga                             IDA       316.8    211.5    301.7    249.7    378.9    676.8     897     745.8
                                                     1,576.   1,202.   1,646.   1,781.   1,356.   3,941.   2,483.
Tuvalu                            IDA        949
                                                       20       40       90       20       50       50       80
Vanuatu                           IDA       188.6    227.3    257.7    409.4     447     458.4    381.1    410.2

Bhutan                            IDA       138.4    152.6    132.2     125      178     182.7    195.3    217.4

Maldives                          IDA       254.8    123.9    121.6    173.3    103.9     340     134.9    171.4
Asia & Pacific Small States
                                            490.4    576.4    503.7    609.2    638.5    713.2    916.9    731.9
Average
Europe

Montenegro                       IBRD        6.3      155      171     169.5    121.1    129.5    202.6    166.2



Tailored support
18.     Mitigating external shocks. While much of the financial assistance provided to small
island states is targeted at addressing longer-term development needs, some financing windows
in the Bank provide complementary resources to respond rapidly to sudden, unexpected needs,
such as the IDA16 Crisis Response Window (CRW) and the recently established Immediate
Response Mechanism (IRM). 60

19.     Other instruments for sovereign risk management. Examples include weather
derivatives against drought risks, call options to help cap the price of maize imports, regional
risk pooling schemes (prominent due to the disaster-prone nature of the regions) (the Caribbean
Catastrophic Risk Insurance Facility, later “exported” to the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Insurance
Pilot Program); 61 and other innovative approaches to leverage concessional funds for adaptation
to climate change and mitigation of the impact of natural disasters (the Program for Climate
Resilience, Agriculture Risk Insurance). Better adapted instruments such as a Development
Policy Operation (DPO) with a Catastrophic Risk Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) have
been used to enable rapid response to a natural disaster. The Cat DDO instrument, which is
available to IBRD-eligible countries, can provide immediate liquidity in emergency situations
caused by natural disasters and catastrophes. In addition to being a source of bridge financing
while other resources are being mobilized, this instrument can support countries’ efforts to
enhance resilience and capacity to manage natural hazard risk.

20.    TA and AAA. The Small States Forum (SSF)—the annual gathering of Finance
Ministers and Central Bank Governors from small states in conjunction with the World
Bank/IMF Annual Meetings—provides a platform for small states to discuss common
challenges, learn from each other, interact with development partners, and forge new
partnerships. Since the first meeting in 2000, the SSF has covered a wide variety of topics central

60
   In the past year many small states used the CRW, including Tonga, Samoa, St Kitts, St Lucia, etc. The CRW has a
cap that benefits small countries.
61
   Japan provided insurance coverage. The Bank’s role was more akin to that of a broker.



                                                       62
to small states’ development challenges, including: trade; remittance flows; climate change; food
and energy security; the impact of the global recession; and sustainability of small states’
development and growth. A number of successful projects and initiatives have emerged as a
result of the SSF discussions. In addition, for specific states, technical assistance (TA) and AAA
are often "embedded" into World Bank operations, or provided as stand-alone initiatives,
covering the usual spectrum of issues (better service delivery for health and education;
enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending; debt and macro-financial
vulnerability; PFM reform and strengthening statistical capacity; improving the investment
climate and private sector development; building resilience and developing options for scaling up
renewable energy and energy efficiency measures, etc.).

21.     Bank lending. A difficulty for the Bank is the high costs (per dollar lent) of single
operations, due to the small size of the countries concerned. And this affects pipeline design.
Other issues in this context are the extent to which the Bank has been able to undertake regional
projects (see also above on IDA regional lending)—which may be desirable especially for
developing transportation hubs, etc. Despite the difficulties of single country lending, a number
of operations are undertaken each year. Some areas of Bank lending policy such as procurement
regulations have special provisions for small states that have in fact only just been introduced
under the new OP10.0, which essentially expands special provisions for FCS countries towards
small states.




                                                63
                      Attachment 3. Summary Table of Country characteristics of small states
                                                                                                                                              World Bank
                                                                         Country Characteristics                                             Commitments                AAA          Trust Fund Commitments
                                                                                                                                              (criterion 5)         (criterion 5)           (criterion 5)
                                                                                                                                          IBRD/ IDA operations     AAA products         All non- IDA/IBRD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Recent Country Strategies
Country                                                 2013 Per                                  FY15       Small island      FY15             approved             delivered             commitments
                       Island/Mainland/      2013                                  FY15 WB                                                                                                                                (criterion 6)
                                                          capita   WB Region                    Income          states        Fragile           (FY05-14)            (FY05-14)                (FY05-14)
                          Landlocked      Population                               Lending
                                                         Income    (criterion 1)                 Group        exception     Situation?             Commitment                                      Commitment
                          (criterion 2)    (millions)                              category                                                                         ESW     NLTA       No. of
                                                          (US$)                                Criterion 3   beneficiary?   Criterion 4    Nos.       amount                                          amount
                                                                                                                                                                   (Nos.)   (Nos.)    commit.
                                                                                                                                                    ($ millions)                                    ($ millions)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CPS FY15-17
Cabo Verde                  Island            0.5        3,630         AFR          Blend          LMIC         YES                        16          213          15        3          3            1.98           CPSPR/CPS FY09-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAS FY05-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CPS FY14-17
Comoros                     Island            0.7         880          AFR           IDA           LIC                         YES          9           35           5        5          5            6.51              ISN FY10-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ISN FY07-08
Mauritius                   Island            1.3        9,300         AFR          IBRD           UMIC                                    11          368          14        14         3            26.37          CPSPR/CPS FY07-13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CPS FY14-18
Sao Tome &
                            Island            0.2        1,470         AFR           IDA           LMIC         YES                         9           33           5        1          7            8.82              ISN FY11-12
Principe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAS FY06-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CPSPR FY12-16
Seychelles                  Island            0.1        12,530        AFR          IBRD           UMIC                                     4           32           4        10         4            3.61              CPS FY12-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ISN FY10-11
Swaziland                Landlocked           1.2        3,080         AFR          IBRD           LMIC                                     2           47          13        11         2            3.05              ISN FY08-10
Fiji                       Island             0.9        4,430         EAP          IBRD           UMIC                                     ..           ..         4         6          2            1.28                   ..
Kiribati                   Island             0.1        2,620         EAP           IDA           LMIC         YES            YES          4           49          0         4          5            8.20              CAS FY11-14
Marshall Islands           Island             0.1        4,200         EAP           IDA           UMIC         YES            YES          1            3          ..        ..         1            1.35              CPS FY13-16
Micronesia,
                            Island            0.1        3,430         EAP           IDA           LMIC         YES            YES          1           14           ..       ..         ..             ..               CPS FY14-17
Federated States of
Palau                       Island           0.02        10,970        EAP          IBRD           UMIC                                    ..           ..           0        2          1            0.24                   ..
Samoa                       Island           0.2         3,430         EAP           IDA           LMIC         YES                        10          117           2        4          ..            ..               CPS FY12-16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CPS FY13-17
Solomon Islands             Island            0.6        1,610         EAP           IDA           LMIC                        YES         10           38           8        9          7            14.41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ISN FY10-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CPS FY13-17
Timor-Leste                 Island            1.2        3,580         EAP          Blend          LMIC                        YES         11           94          16        35         ..             ..              ISN FY10-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAS FY06-08
Tonga                       Island           0.1         4,490         EAP           IDA           UMIC         YES                        10           89           2        3          ..             ..              CAS FY11-14
Tuvalu                      Island           0.01        6,630         EAP           IDA           UMIC         YES            YES         3            21           ..       ..         ..             ..              CAS FY12-15
Vanuatu                     Island           0.3         3,130         EAP           IDA           LMIC         YES                        ..            ..          1        9          ..             ..                   ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CPSPR/CPS FY11-14
Montenegro                Mainland            0.6        7,260         ECA          IBRD           UMIC                                    14          292          11        9          3            4.84
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CPSPR/CPS FY07-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RPS FY15-19
Antigua & Barbuda           Island            0.1        12,910        LCR          IBRD           HIC                                      1          10.0          2        0          1            0.31           RPSPR/RPS FY10-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CASPR/CAS FY06-09
Belize                    Mainland            0.3        4,660         LCR          IBRD           UMIC                                     1           15           3        4          5            6.85                   ..


                                                                                                                   64
                                                                                                                                             World Bank
                                                                        Country Characteristics                                             Commitments                AAA          Trust Fund Commitments
                                                                                                                                             (criterion 5)         (criterion 5)           (criterion 5)
                                                                                                                                         IBRD/ IDA operations     AAA products         All non- IDA/IBRD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Recent Country Strategies
Country                                                2013 Per                                  FY15       Small island      FY15             approved             delivered             commitments
                      Island/Mainland/      2013                                  FY15 WB                                                                                                                                (criterion 6)
                                                         capita   WB Region                    Income          states        Fragile           (FY05-14)            (FY05-14)                (FY05-14)
                         Landlocked      Population                               Lending
                                                        Income    (criterion 1)                 Group        exception     Situation?             Commitment                                      Commitment
                         (criterion 2)    (millions)                              category                                                                         ESW     NLTA       No. of
                                                         (US$)                                Criterion 3   beneficiary?   Criterion 4    Nos.       amount                                          amount
                                                                                                                                                                  (Nos.)   (Nos.)    commit.
                                                                                                                                                   ($ millions)                                    ($ millions)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RPS FY15-19
Dominica                   Island            0.1        6,760         LCR          Blend          UMIC         YES                         2           18           ..       ..         ..             ..           RPSPR/RPS FY10-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CASPR/CAS FY06-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RPS FY15-19
Grenada                    Island            0.1        7,460         LCR          Blend          UMIC         YES                         8           48           2        0          2            1.35           RPSPR/RPS FY10-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CASPR/CAS FY06-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAS FY09-12
Guyana                   Mainland            0.8        3,750         LCR           IDA           LMIC                                     6           57           4        4          4            39.59
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAS FY03-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RPS FY15-19
St. Kitts and Nevis        Island            0.1        13,460        LCR          IBRD           HIC                                      ..          ..           1        0          1            0.42           RPSPR/RPS FY10-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CASPR/CAS FY06-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RPS FY15-19
St. Lucia                  Island            0.2        7,090         LCR          Blend          UMIC         YES                         7          49.4          1        0          1            0.42           RPSPR/RPS FY10-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CASPR/CAS FY06-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RPS FY15-19
St. Vincent and the
                           Island            0.1        6,580         LCR          Blend          UMIC         YES                         3          47.6          1        0          ..             ..           RPSPR/RPS FY10-14
Grenadines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CASPR/CAS FY06-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CPS FY15-19
Suriname                 Mainland            0.5        9,260         LCR          IBRD           UMIC                                     ..          ..           1        0          1            0.30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ISN FY13-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CPS FY14-17
Djibouti                 Mainland            0.9        1030b        MNA            IDA           LMIC                                    17           90          12        17        16            34.07             CPS FY09-12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAS FY06-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CPS FY15-19
Bhutan                  Landlocked           0.8        2,460         SAR           IDA           LMIC                                    13          174          23        24        21            27.46          CPSPR/CPS FY11-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAS FY06-09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ISN FY14-16
Maldives                   Island            0.3        5,600         SAR           IDA           UMIC         YES                        12          119          14        21         8            9.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CASPR/CAS FY08-12
Caribbean                   N/A             N/A          N/A          LCR           N/A           N/A                         N/A          1           25          13        16        12            53.16                  ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RPS FY15-19
OECS Countries              N/A             N/A          N/A          LCR           N/A           N/A                         N/A          7           94           5        9          7            11.33          RPSPR/RPS FY10-14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CASPR/CAS FY06-09
Pacific Islands             N/A             N/A          N/A          EAP           N/A           N/A                         N/A          1           2           12        20         9            16.72             CAS FY 2000




                                                                                                                  65
Attachment 4. Guide to IEG’s Country Program Evaluation Methodology
1.     This methodological note describes the key elements of IEG’s Country Program
evaluation (CPE) methodology.

2.    CPEs rate the outcomes of World Bank Group assistance programs, not the
country’s overall development progress.

•   A World Bank Group assistance program needs to be assessed on how well it met its
    particular objectives, which are typically a subset of the country’s development objectives. If
    a Bank Group assistance program is large in relation to the country’s total development
    effort, the program outcome should be similar to the country’s overall development progress.
    However, most Bank Group assistance programs provide only a fraction of the total
    resources devoted to a country’s development by development partners, stakeholders, and the
    government itself. In CPEs, IEG rates only the outcome of the Bank Group’s program, not
    the country’s overall development outcome, although the latter is clearly relevant for judging
    the program’s outcome.
•   The experience gained in CPEs confirms that Bank Group program outcomes sometimes
    diverge significantly from the country’s overall development progress. CPEs have identified
    Bank Group assistance programs which had:
     Satisfactory outcomes matched by good country development;
     Unsatisfactory outcomes in countries which achieved good overall development results,
        notwithstanding the weak Bank Group program; and,
     Satisfactory outcomes in countries which did not achieve satisfactory overall results
        during the period of program implementation.
3.     Assessments of assistance program outcome and Bank Group performance are not
the same.

•   By the same token, an unsatisfactory Bank Group assistance program outcome does not
    always mean that Bank Group performance was also unsatisfactory, and vice versa. This
    becomes clearer in considering that the Bank Group’s contribution to the outcome of its
    assistance program is only part of the story. The assistance program’s outcome is determined
    by the joint impact of four agents: (i) the country; (ii) the Bank Group; (iii) partners and other
    stakeholders; and (iv) exogenous forces (for example, events of nature, international
    economic shocks, and so forth). Under the right circumstances, a negative contribution from
    any one agent might overwhelm the positive contributions from the other three and lead to an
    unsatisfactory outcome.
•   IEG measures Bank Group performance primarily on the basis of contributory actions the
    Bank Group directly controlled. Judgments regarding Bank Group performance typically
    consider the relevance and implementation of the strategy, the design and supervision of the
    Bank Group’s lending and financial support interventions, the scope, quality and follow-up
    of diagnostic work and other AAA, the consistency of the Bank Group’s lending and



                                                 66
     financial support with its non-lending work and with its safeguard policies, and the Bank
     Group’s partnership activities.
4.      Rating Assistance Program Outcome

•    In rating the outcome (expected development impact) of an assistance program, IEG gauges
     the extent to which major strategic objectives were relevant and achieved, without any
     shortcomings. In other words, did the Bank Group do the right thing, and did it do it right.
     Programs typically express their goals in terms of higher-order objectives, such as poverty
     reduction. The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) may also establish intermediate goals,
     such as improved targeting of social services or promotion of integrated rural development,
     and specify how they are expected to contribute toward achieving the higher-order objective.
     IEG’s task is then to validate whether the intermediate objectives were the right ones and
     whether they produced satisfactory net benefits, as well as whether the results chain specified
     in the CAS was valid. Where causal linkages were not fully specified in the CAS, it is the
     evaluator’s task to reconstruct this causal chain from the available evidence and assess
     relevance, efficacy, and outcome with reference to the intermediate and higher-order
     objectives.
•    For each of the main objectives, the CPE evaluates the relevance of the objective; the
     relevance of the Bank Group’s strategy toward meeting the objective, including the balance
     between lending and non-lending instruments; the efficacy with which the strategy was
     implemented; and the results achieved. This is done in two steps. The first is a top-down
     review of whether the Bank Group’s program achieved a particular Bank Group objective or
     planned outcome and had a substantive impact on the country’s development. The second
     step is a bottom-up review of the Bank Group’s products and services (lending, analytical
     and advisory services, and aid coordination) used to achieve the objective. Together these
     two steps test the consistency of findings from the products and services and the development
     impact dimensions. Subsequently, an assessment is made of the relative contribution to the
     results achieved by the Bank Group, other development partners, the government and
     exogenous factors.
5.      Evaluators also assess the degree of country ownership of international development
priorities, such as the Millennium Development Goals, and Bank Group corporate advocacy
priorities, such as safeguards. Ideally, any differences on dealing with these issues would be
identified and resolved by the CAS, enabling the evaluator to focus on whether the trade-offs
adopted were appropriate. However, in other instances, the strategy may be found to have
glossed over certain conflicts, or avoided addressing key country development constraints. In
either case, the consequences could include a diminution of program relevance, a loss of country
ownership, and/or unwelcome side-effects, such as safeguard violations, all of which must be
taken into account in judging program outcome.

6.      Ratings Scale

•    IEG utilizes six rating categories for outcome, ranging from highly satisfactory to highly
     unsatisfactory:


                                                 67
Highly satisfactory:          The assistance program achieved at least
                              acceptable progress toward all major relevant
                              objectives, and had best practice development
                              impact on one or more of them. No major
                              shortcomings were identified.
Satisfactory:                 The assistance program achieved acceptable
                              progress toward all major relevant objectives.
                              No best practice achievements or major
                              shortcomings were identified.
Moderately satisfactory:      The assistance program achieved acceptable
                              progress toward most of its major relevant
                              objectives. No major shortcomings were
                              identified.
                              The assistance program did not make
Moderately unsatisfactory:    acceptable progress toward most of its major
                              relevant objectives, or made acceptable
                              progress on all of them, but either (a) did not
                              take into adequate account a key development
                              constraint or (b) produced a major
                              shortcoming, such as a safeguard violation.
                              The assistance program did not make
Unsatisfactory:               acceptable progress toward most of its major
                              relevant objectives, and either (a) did not take
                              into adequate account a key development
                              constraint or (b) produced a major
                              shortcoming, such as a safeguard violation.
Highly unsatisfactory:        The assistance program did not make
                              acceptable progress toward any of its major
                              relevant objectives and did not take into
                              account a key development constraint, while
                              also producing at least one major
                              shortcoming, such as a safeguard violation.




                             68
Attachment 5. Country Profile and Bank Group Portfolio of Selected Small
states
OECS States 62

1.      The Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) comprises six independent
countries: Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Lucia, St. Kitts & Nevis, and St.
Vincent & the Grenadines. The OECS was formed within the larger Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) in 1981 to address some of the political and economic limitations posed by its
member countries’ small size. Since then, economic integration has been deepened through: (i)
the maintenance of a common currency, the Eastern Caribbean dollar (EC$) which is issued by a
shared Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB); (ii) an integrated legal system, (iii) collective
regulation of banking and securities, telecommunications (the Eastern Telecommunication
Authority); and civil aviation (the Eastern Caribbean Civil Aviation Authority), and (iv) attempts
to harmonize several policies to support sub-regional development by a coordinating body, the
OECS secretariat. The treaty of Basseterre which established the OECS in 1981 was revised in
June 2010 to define a regional vision anchored on the establishment of the OECS Economic
Union, within which a single financial and economic space would be established with
harmonized monetary and fiscal policies and within which goods, people, and capital could
move freely. The 2012 OECS growth and development strategy provide directions for the
region’s development over the next 10 years. Several common policies were established over
2011-14, such as the OECS common tourism policy (2011) and the OECS education strategy
(2013). The OECS assembly (consisting of members of parliament) was established in 2012.
Despite all these initiatives, it seems that political economy considerations and the lack of
resources slows progress and creates obstacles to an effective integration process.
2.     The OECS countries are among the top 10 disaster-prone countries in the world. Over the
evaluation period, they were hit by several hurricanes 63 and floods 64 which disrupted key
economic activities and destroyed infrastructure.
3.      The recent country diagnosis (November 2-14) noted that for years these countries
“have been trapped in a spiral of low growth, high debt, limited fiscal space, and growing
social problems, exacerbated by external shocks”. In the 1980s, economic growth was driven
by agricultural exports benefiting from preferential arrangements with Europe. Growth started to
slow down in the 1990s as preferential access was dismantled, and government efforts in the
early 2000s to spur growth through increased public investment were not successful and instead
crowded out private investment. The 2008 global economic crisis led to a severe contraction of

62
     The material in this section is adapted from the WBG’s OECS Regional Partnership Strategy for FY15-FY19.


 Hurricane Ivan (2004) (which damaged over 200 percent of Grenada’s GDP) and Hurricane Tomas in St Lucia in
63

November 2010.
64
  A tropical storm in St. Vincent and the Grenadines and St. Lucia in December 2013 caused damage of approximately
15 and 7 percent of GDP, respectively.



                                                        69
GDP, with four consecutive years of negative growth (on average 1.5 percent per year). This
slower growth is the result of deep-rooted competitiveness problems, driven in part by policies.
For example, labor costs are high and have grown faster than productivity, electricity costs are
among the highest in the world, and the Doing Business assessment also points to weaknesses in
access to finance, contract enforcement, registering property and resolving insolvency.
Imprudent fiscal policies (persistent fiscal deficits, public enterprise borrowing, off-balance sheet
spending) combined with low growth have generated a high and rising debt burden. Recent debt
sustainability analysis revealed that the level of public debt is not sustainable in most OECS
countries. Furthermore, inadequate supervision and regulation have also engendered
vulnerabilities in the financial sector.
4.      The combination of low growth, significant vulnerabilities, and limited resilience to
shocks have slowed down progress against the twin goals of reduced poverty and shared
prosperity. Caribbean countries are now lagging behind the LAC countries in terms of poverty
reduction. The recent WBG regional partnership strategy noted small rates of extreme poverty
and low inequality, but higher poverty rates than would be suggested by the OECS countries’
level of income. Official rates vary from 18 to 38 percent, but most poverty assessments are
outdated and do not capture the impact of the 2008 financial crisis. The poverty burden is mostly
felt by children and female headed households (WB Social protection and labor discussion paper
N1306, 2013). 65 The poor, youth and women also tend to suffer disproportionately from
unemployment 66. The OECS has made progress towards the education MDG and is on track for
achieving the MDGs related to maternal and child health, but progress is lagging in some island
countries in reducing hunger and accessing water.
5.      Over the evaluation period, the Bank Group supported the OECS countries in
building resilience and enhancing competitiveness. The Bank has developed a comprehensive
approach tailored to the Caribbean states, including the OECS, to address the structural
interdependence of high debt, low growth and natural disasters “the comprehensive growth and
debt framework”. The Bank is leading a multi-stakeholder initiative, the Caribbean Growth
Forum, to facilitate an action- oriented dialogue around key policy reforms needed to create
sustainable and inclusive growth. Beyond country-specific activities, the Bank is supporting
reforms in several areas through regional projects. For example, the Bank is supporting
governments throughout the region to: (i) improve procurement, tax and customs across the sub-
region (e-Government regional integration project); (ii) advance public financial management
reform (Supporting Economic Management in the Caribbean project); (iii) build capacity in
social protection tools (Social Protection OECS non-lending TA). Bank projects have also aimed
at identifying and reducing the vulnerability of critical infrastructure (regional disaster

65
  For instance, 53 percent of Grenada’s poor are children; 35.7 percent of Dominica’s poor were under age 15; 35.5
percent of the poor in Antigua and Barbuda were children under age 14; one in three children in St Kitts is poor; while
over 50 percent of the poor in St. Lucia are under age 20.In St Vincent and the Grenadines, 48.2 percent of the poor
were between 0-19 years.
66
  Unemployment rates among the poor reached 35 percent in Grenada (10 points above the national average); 27.8
percent in Dominica; and 25.3 percent in St. Vincent and the Grenadines. Youth also had high prevalence among the
unemployed, with rates around 56 percent in 2002 in Dominica, and 42 percent in Grenada.



                                                         70
vulnerability reduction projects). In addition, the Bank has also supported recovery after major
disasters through emergency recovery loans and designed the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
Insurance Facility (CCRIF) which provides timely resources to member countries in the
aftermath of a natural disaster. The Caribbean Regional Pilot Program for Climate resilience is
seeking to increase resilience to the impact of climate change and decrease vulnerability to
natural disasters.
              Eastern Caribbean                                    OECS RPS FY10-        OECS RPS FY15-
 Pillar #                                OECS RPS FY06-09
              CAS, FY02-06                                         14                    19
 Pillar 1 :   Human and institutional    Stimulating Growth and    Enhancing             Competitiveness
              development                Improving                 Competitiveness
                                         Competitiveness           and
                                                                   Stimulating
                                                                   Sustainable
                                                                   Growth
 Pillar 2 :   Reducing income            Reducing Vulnerability    Building Resilience   Public Sector
              insecurity and                                                             Modernization
              vulnerability
 Pillar 3                                                                                Resilience


Seychelles 67
6.       The Republic of Seychelles is a service-based, highly concentrated, middle-income
economy. It has an estimated population of 92,000 (2014) and comprises 115 tropical islands
spread over 45,166 hectares in the Indian Ocean. The population inhabits only 10 of the islands,
with about 90 percent concentrated on the largest island, Mahé. The nation enjoys a stable
political system, good public sector governance, and has better social indicators than comparator
small countries. It has already achieved most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
especially for education, health, poverty eradication, and the environment. Poverty in Seychelles
is relatively low with less than 2 percent of the population living on less than US$2 per day, but
inequality increased between 2000 and 2007.
7.       Given its small size and insularity, Seychelles faces a number of development
challenges. With a limited land surface area of just 455.3 sq. kms. and few options for
diversification, Seychelles relies heavily on imports for oil, food, almost all raw materials, and
specialized services. The country is thus highly vulnerable to global economic and/or terms-of-
trade shocks. Tourism and fisheries (fishing and fish processing) are the economy’s two major
pillars. Tourism accounts for about 25 percent of GDP, 25 percent of employment, and 70
percent of foreign exchange earnings. Tuna fishing and processing combined account for close to
5 percent of GDP, about 7 percent of jobs, and around 35 percent of export goods, despite the
impacts of piracy, environmental factors, and increased regional competition between fishing
ports and processing plants. The small manufacturing sector (8 percent of GDP) includes the
tuna cannery, small food and beverage enterprises, and a modest construction sector that
accounts for 5 percent of GDP.



67
     The material in this section is adapted from the WBG’s Seychelles Country Partnership Strategy for FY12-FY15.



                                                         71
8.       Since enduring a major crisis in 2008, Seychelles has managed a turnaround in
restoring fiscal sustainability and laying the groundwork for growth. Five years ago, the
country was struggling with several challenges: an overvalued fixed exchange rate, rapidly
depleting foreign exchange reserves, a bloated and pervasive public sector, and an unsustainable
debt burden—all in the midst of the global financial crisis. By 2007, the fiscal deficit reached 8
percent of GDP, public debt stood at 131 percent of GDP (two-thirds of its foreign), and reserves
fell to two weeks of imports. An ambitious reform program launched in 2008 and supported by
generous debt relief focused on fundamental liberalization of the exchange regime, significant
and sustained tightening of fiscal policy, and a reduction in the state’s role in the economy to
boost private sector development.
9.      In FY10, the World Bank reengaged with Seychelles after a 17-year hiatus. Through
its lending and knowledge program, the Bank focused on three key objectives: (i) supporting the
economic stabilization program; (ii) removing constraints to private sector development; and (iii)
addressing the challenge of climate change and natural disaster risk management. The lending
program included two DPOs aimed at helping Seychelles establish a stable and sustainable fiscal
stance through fiscal adjustment underpinned by public administration and civil service reform
and a reduction of the state’s role in commercial activities. The operations also supported the
establishment of a targeted social safety net as well as reforms to improve public sector
effectiveness and the business environment. Under a Reimbursable Agreement for Advisory
Services framework, the Bank provided assistance in the areas of social protection, public
enterprises, and health financing.

   Pillar #                   ISN FY10-11                                 CPS FY12-15

   Pillar 1 :                 Macroeconomic stabilization: fiscal         Competitiveness and
                              adjustment, civil service reform and        Employment
                              social safety net.

   Pillar 2 :                 Removing constraints to private             Vulnerability and Resilience
                              sector development and supporting
                              private sector investment

   Pillar 3 :                 Addressing the impact of climate            Governance and Public Sector
                              change and infrastructure                   Capacity


Cabo Verde 68

10.    Cabo Verde is an archipelago of 10 islands located off the west coast of Africa. It has an
estimated population of 500,000 people concentrated on Santiago Island (55.7% of the
population). The country has few natural resources and suffers from serious water shortages
exacerbated by cycles of long-term drought. The insularity, geographic discontinuity and the

68
   The material in this section is adapted from the WBG Country Partnership Strategy for Cabo Verde for the period
FY15-17, dated November 18, 2014.



                                                       72
micro-nature of the Cabo Verde islands have made it difficult right from its inception to have a
unified national economy. Cabo Verde has been a country of emigration for many years and the
number of Cabo Verdeans living abroad today is estimated to be twice the number of those living
within the country.
11.     Despite its vulnerability due to its isolated and fragmented territory, the small size of its
population, its dry Sahel climate, and scarce natural resources, the country recorded one of the
most impressive socioeconomic performances in Africa and graduated from the UN Least
Developed Country (LDC) status in 2007. The main drivers of growth in Cabo Verde are the
buoyant tourism industry, the high investment rate, remittances from the Diaspora, FDIs and
ODA. Fueled by strong external demand, tourism export receipts grew from US$40 million in
2000 to more than US$400 million in 2012. The boom in tourism was driven by large FDI
inflows, while the extensive utilization of Official Development Assistance (ODA) enabled the
Government of Cabo Verde to increase public investment to about 10 percent of GDP over the
last two decades.
12.     There has also been noticeable progress in terms of poverty reduction and boosting
shared prosperity. The poverty rate dropped from 49 percent in 1988/89 to 37 percent in
2001/2002 and then to 27 percent in 2007. The proportion of the population in extreme poverty
also dropped significantly, from 21 percent in 2002 to 12 percent 2007. Income distribution and
shared prosperity have improved. The Gini coefficient fell from 0.55 in 2002 to 0.48 in 2007,
while the income of the bottom 40 percent as a share of total income increased from 9.9 percent
in 2002 to 21 percent in 2007. While the national poverty headcount is about 27 percent, the
poverty headcount among agriculture and fisheries workers is 44 percent and 35 percent,
respectively. Poverty among households linked to the tourism sector is just 12 percent. Falling
poverty rates on other islands have likely been fueled by internal remittances from relatives
working in the tourism sector in Sal and Boa Vista.
13.     The WBG program in Cabo Verde was articulated around three pillars: (a) promotion of
good governance and public sector capacity; (b) improving competitiveness and the investment
climate for private sector growth; and (c) strengthening human capital and social inclusion. This
support was delivered using a blend of investment loans and a series of four Poverty Reduction
Support Credits (PRSCs). The program also included risk identification and mitigation efforts,
with the provision of TA to assist the Government in weathering the impacts of the global
financial crisis. The main policy areas of engagement under the PRSC series were (i) good
governance; (ii) human capital enhancement; (iii) competitiveness; and (iv) infrastructure. Under
the competitiveness pillar, Bank support helped raise the country’s Doing Business ranking from
146th in 2010 to 122nd in 2012 mainly through the simplification of firms’ closure procedures,
reduction of registration costs, and a more transparent and predictable investment code. In the
fisheries sector, the program successfully established fisheries management tools and is on track
to reach the expected results.




                                                  73
                   Cabo Verde CAS              Cabo Verde CPS           Cabo Verde CPS
 Pillar #
                      FY05-08                     FY09-12                  FY15-17
 Pillar 1 :     Ensuring sound               Promoting Good            Enhancing Macro-
                macroeconomic stability      Governance and Public     Fiscal Stability – Setting
                and sound public finance     Sector Capacity           the foundation for
                and budget systems.                                    renewed growth
 Pillar 2 :     Enhancing the investment     Improving                 Improving
                climate and increasing       Competitiveness and the   competitiveness
                competitiveness              Investment Climate for    and private sector
                through public-private       Private Sector Growth     development.
                partnerships (PPPs).


 Pillar 3 :     Implementing social          Strengthening Human
                programs to alleviate        Capital and Social
                poverty and inequity.        Inclusion



Djibouti 69

14.      Djibouti is a small country of about 864,617 people, strategically located in the Horn of
Africa at the southern end of the Red Sea. Nearly 90 percent of the population lives in urban
areas, mostly in the capital city. As with other small states, the small size of Djibouti’s economy
limits its ability to diversify production and increases its reliance on foreign markets, making it
more vulnerable to external market downturns and hampering access to external capital.
15.    Djibouti is poorly endowed with natural resources, and has limited arable land, rainfall,
and water. The manufacturing sector is weak and agriculture non-existent. As a result, Djibouti’s
economy is based on rents deriving from its strategic location: port revenues, military revenues,
and foreign aid. 70 Some sectors, such as telecommunications and construction have experienced
strong growth in recent years, now accounting for close to 75 percent of GDP and employing
most private sector workers. Economic growth, which averaged 4.5 percent per year during
2009–2012, reached an estimated 5 percent in 2013. After a marked improvement between 2009
and 2010, the deficit has gradually widened again and is estimated to have increased from 2.7
percent of GDP in 2012 to 3.1 percent of GDP in 2013.
16.     Despite a relatively high per capita income (US$1,060 in 2007), the incidence of poverty
in Djibouti is high and has been exacerbated by drought conditions since 2007—the worst in 60
years. The drought is estimated to have affected at least half the rural population, with annual
economic losses of 3.9 percent of GDP over the period 2008–2011 and a substantial flow of

 The material in this section is adapted from the WBG Country Partnership Strategy for Djibouti for the period
69

FY14-17, dated March 13, 2014.
70
   Owing to its proximity to the Persian Gulf, Djibouti hosts military bases for France, the United States, Japan, and
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), as well as other foreign forces that are located in the country to
support anti-piracy efforts.




                                                          74
refugees from neighboring countries. The country’s population is relatively young, with nearly
40 percent of Djiboutians under the age of 15, but the ability of these young people to serve as an
engine of growth and poverty reduction is challenged by severely limited employment options.
17.     These challenges are compounded by the widespread consumption of qat, a leaf that
serves as a mild stimulant when chewed. Nearly 90 percent of Djibouti’s male population chews
qat, leading to adverse social, economic, and health effects on the population. Estimates suggest
that Djiboutians spend about 20 to 30 percent of their disposable income on qat, which comes
second only to food expenses and well ahead of spending on education (5.4 percent) and health
(4.3 percent).
18.     The Bank’s support to Djibouti was framed around three strategic themes: (i) supporting
growth through efforts to strengthen the business environment, with a focus on reducing
constraints and costs to private sector development, especially in the power, telecommunications,
and financial sectors; (ii) supporting access to basic social services and human development by
increasing access to and quality of education and health services and strengthening social
protection and direct support to poor people; and (iii) supporting governance and public sector
management through policy dialogue and technical assistance to strengthen the budget process
and improve monitoring and evaluation. The instruments of Bank support included a
combination of advisory services, technical assistance and investment lending. Support through
the use of trust fund grants was a key aspect of the Bank’s program, especially in response to the
drought of 2011. The Power Access and Diversification project (FY05) helped develop medium
and low voltage lines that have been used to expand the distribution grid and connect
households, while much of the financial sector reform was done in the context of the Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP).
 Pillar #          Djibouti CAS FY05-08              Djibouti CAS FY09-12           Djibouti CPS FY14-17
 Pillar 1 :     Growth & competitiveness         Supporting economic growth        Reducing Vulnerability

 Pillar 2 :     Human resources                  Supporting access to basic        Strengthening the
                development and poverty          human services &                  Business Environment
                alleviation                      development
 Pillar 3 :     Good governance                  Supporting governance &
                                                 public sector management



Mauritius
19.     In the context of the African continent, the island nation of Mauritius stands out as
a social, economic, and development success. It has undergone a remarkable economic
transformation since it attained independence in 1968, and now has one of the highest per capita
incomes in Africa. 71 High economic growth rates averaging 4.5 percent between 1990 and 2013
more than tripled Mauritius’ GDP per capita, from US$2506 to US$9,210. Underpinning this
performance has been a combination of factors including; macroeconomic and political stability,

71
     At US$9,300 in 2013, Mauritius’ GNI per capita is several times that of the Sub-Saharan Africa’s US$1625.



                                                          75
robust institutions, an efficient administration, a favorable regulatory environment, a well-
developed financial system, and effective use of trade preferences, particularly with Europe and
India. At independence, Mauritius faced several challenges common to African economies: it
was highly dependent on a single commodity, sugar, was subject to significant terms of trade and
output shocks, and also faced high population growth coupled with bouts of ethnic tensions.
20.     The economy has since diversified into tourism, textiles, financial services, and
Information and Communication Technology (ICT). Tourism now accounts for 8 percent of
GDP, 30.9 percent of exports and 7.9 percent of employment. Textiles, at 4.9 percent of GDP
and 19.2 percent of exports, employ about 13.8 percent of the workforce. A vibrant financial
services sector driven by off-shore services has also emerged, accounting for 10.2 percent of
GDP. Other sectors such as Information and Communication Technology (ICT), real estate and
wholesale and retail trade have each also contributed between 5-10 percent of GDP on average
over the past 5 years. This diversification was supported in part by attracting Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) from multiple sources. Net inflows of FDI, which were only Rs 41million in
2005 have since risen by a factor of more than ten, to an annual average of Rs 427 million during
FY11-13. Prudent fiscal policy in the years prior to the crisis allowed the government to pursue a
set of countercyclical policies that enabled the economy to keep growing during the global
financial crisis. At 53.8 percent of GDP in 2013, public debt remains sustainable and within the
legally mandated public debt ceiling of 60 percent. Citing a strengthened institutional
framework, increased diversification of the economy and the government's significant progress
in reducing its debt-servicing burden, Moody’s upgraded its sovereign debt rating for Mauritius
from Baa2 to Baa1 in 2012.
21.     Mauritius’ generous social welfare system has been used to distribute proceeds from its
sustained high economic growth rates. 72 Although severe poverty is rare in Mauritius compared
to parts of the African continent, the country contains a minority of very poor households, most
of which are located in rural areas. 73 12.4 percent of the rural population is poor and
disproportionately prevalent on Rodrigues island (40 percent) where livelihoods are derived from
subsistence agriculture and fishing. An increase in the country’s Gini coefficient from 0.388 in
2006 to 0.413 in 2012 also suggests a less inclusive growth during the period. 74 At 8.0 percent in
2013, unemployment has increased from 7.3 percent in 2009. However, it appears to be largely
structural affecting low skilled youth and women. Forty six percent of the unemployed are the



72
  The system provides for free education, free primary health care, universal pension scheme, government subsidies
on key food stuffs and free housing for the vulnerable groups.
73
  The proportion of the population living below the poverty line as defined by $1.25 (PPP) per day, was 0.43% in
2013 while proportion of households below the relative poverty line (defined in Mauritius as half the Median
monthly household income per adult equivalent) increased from 7.9% in 2006/07 to 9.4% in 2012.
74
  The share of total income going to the 20% of households at the lower end of the income range which was 7.6%
in 2006, has decreased to 7.4% in 2012. On the other hand, the share of income of the upper 20% of households
increased from 43.7% in 2006 to 43.6% in 2012.




                                                       76
youth between the ages of 15-25 while female unemployment, at 12.6 percent, is double that of
men.
22.     Over the evaluation period, the Bank Group supported Mauritius in improving public
sector performance, maintaining economic stability, and enhancing private sector
competitiveness. A number of Development Policy Loans, including a series during the global
financial crisis, constituted part of the Bank’s lending support. Bank support also included
investment loans for manufacturing, services and infrastructure development. AAA was provided
to support the government’s infrastructure and innovation programs.
23.     The Bank also responded flexibly during the crisis and provided just-in-time technical
assistance to review business sector vulnerability to the crisis, and provided technical advice on
arrangements to facilitate work-outs of distressed businesses.
24.     IFC has focused its interventions on three key sectors: infrastructure, tourism, and
financial services. Its activities have been targeted at: supporting the mobilization of foreign
direct investment to these sectors; introducing climate change mitigation and cleaner production
standards and best practices; improving access to finance for Small and Medium Enterprises
(SMEs); and promoting South-South exchanges.


                Pillar #     Mauritius CAS FY02-04                Mauritius CPS FY07-13

                Pillar 1 :   Increased Competitiveness And        Fiscal Consolidation and
                             Productivity                         Improving Public Sector
                                                                  Efficiency

                Pillar 2 :   Improved Social Development          Improving Trade
                             And Social Cohesion                  Competitiveness

                Pillar 3 :   Preservation Of The Environment      Improving the Investment
                                                                  Climate
                Pillar 4 :                                        Democratizing the
                                                                  Economy through
                                                                  participation, inclusion and
                                                                  sustainability

SAMOA 75

25.     As a very small remote economy that is highly vulnerable to external shocks, Samoa
faces significant development challenges. Samoa’s 189,000 residents live on two main islands
located approximately 3,000km from New Zealand and 4,000km from Australia. The small size
of the domestic economy and its extreme remoteness from major markets push up production

75
  The material in this section has been adapted from Samoa: First Fiscal and Economic Reform Operation Program:
June 2014




                                                      77
costs in Samoa, making it hard for economic activity to be competitive – unless it can capture
some form of rent or premium price in markets to cover its higher production costs. Remittances
from Samoans living and working abroad are critical to the livelihoods of the resident
population, averaging 24.9 percent of GDP over the last four years. Earnings from visitor arrivals
are also critical to the economy, averaging 20.5 percent of GDP over the last four years. The
limited nature of livelihood opportunities that are available in such small remote economies
exacerbates Samoa’s already acute vulnerability to external shocks.
26.     Since independence from New Zealand in 1962, Samoa has been a stable democracy.
Samoa illustrates many of the constraints facing even well performing small island states.
Samoa’s country policy and institutional assessment is the highest among the Bank’s Pacific
Island member states and among the top five of all IDA borrowing countries. Strong policy
settings for almost two decades have resulted in MDG outcomes and economic performance well
above the average for comparable island countries. Yet Samoa’s small size, limited natural
resources, narrowly based economy, distance to major markets, and vulnerability to exogenous
shocks, impose speed limits on growth and have led to a high degree of volatility in recent
economic performance.
27.      Reflecting strong policy performance and service delivery capacity, Samoa is on track to
meet key MDGs. Hunger is almost non-existent, with the 2008 Household Income and
Expenditure Survey suggesting that the level of food poverty in Samoa is about 3% of
households. Nevertheless, using the national poverty line, the level of basic needs poverty
remains persistent at about one in five households. Education access in Samoa is good. The
adult literacy rate is 99 percent. Net primary school enrolment is 93 percent, although quality of
education remains a concern. Health indicators have improved, although with emerging issues.
Samoans are now living, on average, a decade longer than thirty years ago, with life expectancy
at birth rising from 62 in 1980 to 72 in 2008. Samoa has met MDGs targets for improved infant,
child and maternal mortality rates, and almost all births are attended by skilled health
professionals.
28.     Since the start of reforms in the mid-1990s, Samoa’s economy has until recently shown
reasonable growth, underpinned by a stable macro-economic environment and a business-
friendly investment climate. Samoa’s GDP per capita is about US$2,900 (2012). Since the early
1990s, growth has averaged 3 percent per annum, well above both Pacific and Caribbean
comparators. Growth has been accompanied by prudent fiscal policy, which has seen
government debt reduced dramatically since peaking at over 100 percent of GDP in the mid-
1990s. This has been driven by tax reforms, including the introduction of a VAGST (value added
goods & services tax) in 1994 to improve revenue and move away from tariffs, as well as
restructuring to contain expenditures while modernizing the public service and improving service
delivery. An exchange rate peg to a basket of currencies has proven credible, anchoring inflation
expectations. Macro-economic stability has been matched by structural reform to encourage
investment.
29.     In recent years, however, economic growth in Samoa has been low and volatile, as the
country has been buffeted by a series of major external shocks. In FY09, the economy contracted
by 5.1 percent, as the global economic crisis hit its major exporter of manufactured goods—



                                                78
Yazaki, a vehicle parts supplier for manufacturers in Australia—particularly hard. Growth
remained low at 0.5 percent in FY10, as Samoa was hit by a powerful tsunami that caused an
estimated 30 percent of GDP in damage and losses. The government’s policy responses to these
two major shocks helped support modest economic growth of 1.4 percent in FY11 and 2.9
percent in FY12, but in FY13 Samoa was hit by a major cyclone estimated to have caused
another 30 percent of GDP in damage and losses. Samoa’s fiscal situation has deteriorated
markedly since the global economic crisis, as the government responded to this succession of
major shocks with a fiscal stimulus programs that raised public debt such that Samoa is now at
high risk of debt distress. In this context, consolidating the fiscal situation and returning the
economy to a more robust growth path are a formidable challenge.
30.     The Bank is helping the Government deal with this situation through a proposed DPO
series of which the first operation was approved in August 2014. The new DPO series is a central
component of the Bank’s overall engagement with Samoa, as laid out in the CPS. The design of
the development objectives and selection of reform areas are aligned with the CPS’s first theme
on rebuilding macro-economic resilience and encouraging inclusive growth. A strong economic
policy dialogue with the government is the anchor for the Bank’s efforts to support this CPS
theme, with a programmatic series of DPOs as its centerpiece. There is also a link between the
payments system reform area and the second theme of the CPS, on generating opportunities from
global and regional integration, including by capitalizing on migration and remittances.
31.     The DPO series is complemented by a set of other World Bank Group operations in order
to achieve the CPS outcomes. These include technical assistance on debt management reform,
procurement reform, and PPPs by the Bank and/or IFC, and an extensive engagement with
Samoa as part of the Pacific Payments, Remittances and Securities Settlement Initiative. The
tourism sector reform is informed by IFC analysis and complemented by reforms that also
support inclusive growth through the agriculture sector, supported by the Samoa Agriculture
Competitiveness Enhancement Project. Both the tourism sector and agriculture sector reforms
could be complemented by potential work by the IFC on domestic agricultural supply of tourism
operators such as hotels and restaurants, under the Pacific Regional Tourism Initiative.

                            Pillar #     Samoa CPS, FY12-16
                            Pillar 1 :   Rebuilding Economic Resilience
                                         and Encouraging Inclusive
                                         Growth
                            Pillar 2 :   Generating Opportunities from
                                         Greater Global and Regional
                                         Integration

                            Pillar 3 :   Overcoming Isolation and
                                         Generating Opportunities from
                                         Greater Global and Regional
                                         Integration




                                                  79
Attachment 6- Evaluation Design Matrix
Evaluation questions              Information             Information            Data collection       Data analysis methods                Limitations
                                  required                sources                methods
Overarching questions
   1. Has the WBG been relevant, effective and efficient in supporting the development of small state clients?
Specific Questions - Relevance of Objectives
1. To what extent have Bank Group objectives (programs, lending and non-lending programs) at both the country and regional level been relevant to the needs
    of the selected small states?

a.          Were development                              Regional and country   Downloading           Content analysis, to assess the
                                  Country                                                                                                   Difficulty to generalize based
objectives appropriate and                                strategies             relevant documents    extent to which objectives
                                  socioeconomic                                                                                             on different political economy
realistic given country initial                                                  from WBG              reflected priority issues and took
                                  context and major                                                                                         in each region
conditions (in particular                                                        databases             into account country context.
                                  development
capacity level) and main                                                                                                                    Interviewee sample limitations
                                  challenges                                     Interviews with key
challenges?
                                                                                 stakeholders : bank
                                  Regional and
                                                                                 group staff,
                                  Country risk profiles
                                                                                 researchers, and
                                                                                 experts, government
                                                                                 counterparts and
                                                                                 country
                                                                                 stakeholders
Relevance of Design
2. To what extend did the intervention focus on the right issues and provide appropriate and adequate solutions to clients’ needs?

a.         How relevant and
efficient are WBG initiatives,
provisions, and/or instruments
tailored—at least among other
clients—to small states in
general (or to a broad category
of small states), such as the
IDA “small island exception”




                                                                                  80
clause and the Small States
Forum?.
b.        Was the Bank Group      Analytical               Regional and           Collation of available   Literature review                    CAS/CPS may not reflect all
program, including technical      underpinnings of         country strategies     data, documents,                                              activities
                                  country and regional                                                     Desk review of CAS/CPS, lending
advice and lending tailored to                                                    produced by the
                                  strategies and project   Project documents                               portfolio and AAA                    Availability of documents over
the country specific needs                                                        Bank Group,
                                  design                                                                                                        the evaluation period
and political economy?                                     AAA                    authorities, and         Interviews
                                  Development                                     external sources                                              Interviewee sample limitations
Was the Bank successful in                                 Government                                      Retrospective review of the
                                  objectives formulated
fostering multi-stakeholder                                strategies             Interviews with key      results frameworks
                                  in the CAS/CPS
engagement to inform                                                              stakeholders : bank
strategy and project design                                Official statistics    group staff,             Qualitative analysis of interviews
and disseminating analytical                               (governments,          researchers, and
knowledge to inform the policy                             WBG, IMF, etc.)        experts, government
debate?                                                    Relevant literature,   counterparts and
                                                           analytical work and    country stakeholders
                                                           databases
                                                           IEG reports
                                                           Key stakeholders;
                                                           development
                                                           partners and area
                                                           experts inside and
                                                           outside the bank
                                                           group
b. Was the program selective,
focusing on the most critical
issues taking into account bank
comparative advantage and
other DPs ongoing programs?




                                                                                    81
c.         Was the program
flexible in design and practice
to respond to unforeseen
shocks (notably economic and
environmental shocks)?

Effectiveness:
3. To what extent did WBG interventions achieve their objectives relevant to building macro, environmental and social resilience in small states?

a.         Was the Bank Group
                                  Country performance   Official statistics   Relevant external        Desk-based review and analysis        Data availability
successful in helping small
                                  based on main         (governments,         documentation.           of macro indicators, results
states tailor macroeconomic                                                                                                                  Uneven levels of statistical
                                  macroeconomic         WBG, IMF, etc.)                                frameworks, and available
policies to provide greater                                                   Collation of available                                         capacity
                                  indicators and                                                       monitoring data
resilience to macroeconomic                             Relevant literature   Bank Group data
                                  analytical reports                                                                                         Attribution problems,
shocks and restore fiscal and                           and analytical work   and documents.           Statistical analysis of performance
public debt sustainability?                                                                                                                  especially given the important
                                  Cross-country                                                        over time
                                                        Program/project       Interviews with key                                            role played by many donors
                                  performance
                                                        documents             stakeholders.            Desk-based review of: country
                                  comparison
                                                                                                       documentation, relevant AAA
                                                        IEG reports, ICR
                                  Degree of synergy                                                    products, notes and background
                                                        Reviews, PPARs
                                  achieved among                                                       paper, lending including joint
                                                        CASCR Reviews,
                                  Bank Group                                                           operations
                                                        etc.
                                  members on these
                                                                                                       Bank Group and IEG performance
                                  objectives and with   Key stakeholders,
                                                                                                       data and reports
                                  DPs                   clients and
                                                        beneficiaries,                                 Desk-based comparative
                                                        development                                    performance analysis
                                                        partners and area
                                                                                                       Qualitative analysis of interviews
                                                        experts inside and
                                                        outside the Bank
                                                        Group




                                                                                82
b.        How effective has                                                                                   Desk-based review and analysis
                                   Evidence on              Project documents,       Interviews with key                                             Data availability.
WBG support been in helping to                                                                                of quantitative and qualitative data
                                   effectiveness of         IEG reviews, key         stakeholders in                                                 Difficulty of meaningfully
enhance small states’ resilience
                                   relevant interventions   stakeholders             government, private                                             assessing resilience
through better disaster risk
                                                                                     sector, civil society,
management, climate change         Gap analysis of risks    Official statistics                                                                      Difficulty of assessing
                                                                                     beneficiaries,
adaptation, and more               and degree of            from government                                                                          effectiveness of
                                                                                     development
sustainable use of resources?      remaining                agencies (especially                                                                     preparedness/risk reduction
                                                                                     partners
                                   vulnerability            impacts of disasters,                                                                    for a disaster that has not yet
                                                            asset vulnerabilities)   Field site visits                                               happened
                                                                                     especially
                                                            Relevant literature                                                                      Uncertainties in degree/timing
                                                                                     comparisons of
                                                            and analytical work                                                                      of long run climate change
                                                                                     areas with/without
                                                                                     DRM measures that
                                                                                     have suffered
                                                                                     disaster events
                                                                                     Bank Group and
                                                                                     external
                                                                                     documentation
                                                                                     analysis
c.        How effective has        Data and analysis
                                                            Program/project          Collation of data on     Desk-based review and analysis         Same as above
WBG support been in improving      relating to education,
                                                            documents and            lending and non-         of results frameworks,
the countries’ social              labor market reforms,                                                                                             Staff turnover in partner
                                                            country team             lending portfolio        management material, and
resilience—through better          health policy, social                                                                                             agencies can limit feedback
                                                            documentation.           (ICR/PPAR) and           available monitoring data
education quality and enhanced     assistance, socio-                                                                                                on early years in of evaluation
                                                            Published literature     ongoing projects
labor force employability,         economic inclusion,                                                        Desk-based analysis of Bank
                                                                                     (ISR)
improved health policy, and        remittances.             ISRs, ICRs, XPSRs                                 Group and IEG performance-
more effective social protection                                                     Collation of relevant    related documents and data
systems, including remittances                              IEG documents: ICR
                                                                                     documents                including databases, ICR-reviews,
policy ?                                                    reviews, CASCR,
                                                                                     produced by IEG          XPSRs, PPARs, CASCRs etc.
                                                            PPARs, IEG
                                                            evaluations (youth       Literature search        Desk-review of ISRs of ongoing
                                                            employment, social                                activities
                                                                                     Interviews with
                                                            safety nets, health
                                                                                     clients                  Cluster-based AAA assessment
                                                            financing, education
                                                                                                              of efficacy and sustainability using
                                                            review)
                                                                                                              questionnaire




                                                                                       83
                                                                                     Interviews with
                                                                                     partner
                                                                                     organizations

Effectiveness:
4. To what extent did WBG intervention achieve their objectives, relevant to building sustainable and inclusive growth?

a.         Was the Bank Group       Contextual                Country strategy,      IMF Art IV report,     Data analysis and portfolio          Data limitations
successful and relevant (in         information on trade      Trade and IMF          country visit and      reviews at the country and           Attribution problems
conjunction with IMF) in            and exchange rate         report AAA work        interviews             regional level
advising and assisting small        policies
states in managing their trade
and exchange rate policies?
b.          Has the World Bank      Contextual                Country strategy       Web-based              Data analysis, strategy and          There may be mitigating or
Group, provided relevant and        information for states    documents, portfolio   research, portfolio    portfolio reviews, country case      contributing factors that are
effective support to small states   plus strategy and         documents, Doing       review, country        study methodology                    difficult to identify such as
to promote an efficient legal       portfolio information     Business and           visits, data and                                            contributions of local actors
and regulatory framework for        on investment             Enterprise survey      document collection,                                        and other donors. There are
market-led growth?                  climate priorities and    data, other indices,   enterprise surveys,                                         likely to be data limitations
                                    reform; information       State Department       interviews                                                  and a lack of AAA or
                                    on baseline               Investment Climate                                                                 strategy/portfolio attention to
                                    conditions and            Statements,                                                                        the issues for some small
                                    outcomes                  interviews, IEG                                                                    states
                                                              evaluations, AAA
                                                              work
c.         Has the World Bank       Information on            FSAPs, IMF data        Web-based              Research, data analysis, strategy    Role of global financial crisis
Group provided the countries        baseline and              and reports, AAA       research, portfolio    and portfolio reviews, interviews,   and other regional and global
with relevant and effective         subsequent                work, enterprise       review, country        country case study methodology       events may overwhelm
support to build deeper, more       conditions in financial   surveys, strategy      visits, data and                                            reform efforts. Challenges in
competitive, yet stable and         sector, on financial      and project            document collection                                         attribution of effects to WBG
sound financial sectors that        sector depth,             documents,             (including IMF and                                          interventions. Limited data.
can contribute to economic          stability, growth and     interviews, IEG        FINDEX data),
growth?                             accessibility             evaluations, Central   enterprise survey
                                                              Banks, private         data, interviews
                                                              sector financial
                                                              players, experts



                                                                                       84
d.        Has the WBG               Evidence of           AAA work, country-        Web-based              Research, data analysis, strategy   Confounding role of
provided relevant and effective     infrastructure        level indices, ITC,       research, portfolio    and portfolio reviews, country      geography and natural
support to countries in             development.          transport, energy,        review, country        case study methodology              disaster in infrastructure
mobilizing public and private       Information and       trade facilitation data   visits, data and                                           status. Limited data for small
resources to provide sound          indices on            and indices, country      document collection                                        countries. Challenges in
basic infrastructure to             infrastructure        strategy and              (including WDI and                                         attribution of effects to WBG
underpin economic                   availability and      portfolio documents,      LPI), enterprise                                           interventions. Potential
development, overcome               performance, and      field and desk            survey data,                                               weakness of links of
geographic isolation, and           information on        interviews, IEG           interviews                                                 infrastructure to
increase resilience against         degree to which       evaluations                                                                          economic/business outcomes
environmental and weather-          businesses and                                                                                             due to other binding
related shocks                      investment are                                                                                             constraints
                                    constrained by
                                    infrastructure
e.         Has World Bank           Evidence of growth    AAA work (including       Web-based              Research, data analysis, strategy   Data limitations, confounding
group support to leading or high    of leading/high       relevant ESW), UN         research, portfolio    and portfolio reviews, country      role of global financial crisis
potential sectors in small states   potential sectors;    COMTRADE data,            review, data and       case study methodology, trade       on country and regional trade
been relevant and efficient in      evidence of role of   country-level macro-      document collection,   share analysis,                     performance, confounding
building competitive and            WBG engagement in     and microeconomic         interviews             microeconomic/sectoral analysis     impact of natural disasters on
globally or regionally integrated   improved sectoral     data and indices,                                                                    sectoral performance.
industries?                         performance           strategy and project                                                                 Challenges in attribution of
                                    (competitiveness)     documents, field and                                                                 effects to WBG interventions.
                                                          desk interviews, IEG                                                                 Potential weakness of links of
                                                          evaluations                                                                          interventions to sectoral
                                                                                                                                               performance due to other
                                                                                                                                               binding constraints




                                                                                      85
Building Capacity
5. Did the WBG work in small states devote enough attention to building capacity? Was design of activities geared to clients’ institutional capacity?

 a. Did the Bank Group devote  Review of project /   WBG staff and         Downloading of         Content analysis of documents,     Limited number of country
 adequate attention to         program documents, clients                  relevant documents     Field visit data and questionnaire case studies
 strengthening institutions andimplementation                              Interviews and         responses
 CSOs through its analytical   supervision reports,                        surveys
 and lending program?          completion reports as
                               available,
                               TTL interviews and
                               surveys, client
                               interview, interviews
                               with management of
                               relevant
                               departments. Field
                               visit data
Work Quality and Organizational Efficiency
6. Was the WBG work in small countries undertaken effectively in terms of internal and external quality assurance and coordination and use of partnerships?

a.        Has the WBG met         Review of project /     WBG staff and      Downloading of        Content analysis of documents,       Limited number of country
internal work quality standards   program documents,      clients            relevant documents,   field visit data and questionnaire   case studies
in preparation, implementation    implementation                             Interviews and        responses
and supervision, and leveraged    supervision reports,                       surveys
synergies through                 completion reports as
coordination?                     available, TTL
                                  interviews and
                                  surveys, client
                                  interview, interviews
                                  with management of
                                  relevant
                                  departments. Field
                                  visit data.




                                                                               86
b.         Has the WBG used         Review of relevant       Program websites,     Compiling relevant   Desk–based review and analysis,   Data availability. Attribution of
partnerships and MDTFs in a         WBG country and          WBG staff, key        documents,           interviews, field visit data      results to a single
manner that is congruent with       regional strategies.     stakeholders of       interviews                                             partnership/MDTF.
its objectives and business         Review of key            partnership
needs, and enhanced its ability     documents of             programs
to assist clients?                  selected partnerships
                                    and MDTFs such as
What are some specific
                                    programs’ self- or
achievements of partnerships
                                    independent
and MDTFs in the countries
                                    evaluations, annual
covered by this evaluation and
                                    reports, completion
how do they align with the
                                    reports,
development needs of the
                                    interviews with
countries (as reflected in
                                    program managers,
country/ regional assistance
                                    client/ beneficiary
strategies)?
                                    interviews, Interviews
Has the WBG performed well in       with key donors.
the many partnering roles that it   Field visit data.
performs (host, convener,           Relevant IEG
trustee, implementing agency,       evaluations.
chair, and so on)? Has the
WBG collaborated effectively
with partner agencies?
c.         Were WBG                 Information on the       Project/program       Review of            Review of results frameworks to   Limited information on use of
monitoring and evaluation           results frameworks       AS/AAA documents.     documents and TTL    assess good practice, review of   results data.
standards adequate for              and monitoring and       Completion reports    discussions          data on results achieved, and
accountability and learning and     evaluation               where available.                           review of use of such data.
has WBG management used             arrangements for the     External reviews.
the resulting information to        intervention, on the     Discussions with
improve performance?                information collected,   TTLs on use of such
                                    and the use made of      information.
                                    such information




                                                                                     87
Attachment 7

Detailed Timeline
Item                                              Date
IEG One-Stop Review for Approach Paper            January 29, 2015
Submission of Approach paper to Bank Group        February 26, 2015
Management
Comments on Approach paper from Bank Group        March 19, 2015
Management
Submission of Approach paper to CODE              March 27, 2015
IEG One-Stop Review for Report                    March 21, 2016
Report submitted for Internal Bank Group review   April 18, 2016
Report finalized and distributed to CODE          May 30, 2016




                                                  88
Attachment 8

Team and Skills Mix
Staff:

    • Florence Charlier, TTL - Macroeconomist
    • Claude Leroy, Senior Evaluation Officer -Macro-economist
    • Swizen Rubbani, Macroeconomic and fiscal management
    • Stephen Hutton, Evaluation Officer - Environment and Climate Change
    • Andrew Stone, Lead Evaluation Officer - Private Sector Development
    • Xiaolun Sun, Senior Evaluation Officer – Private Sector Development
    • Pia Schneider, Lead Evaluation Officer –Human Development
    • Ana Aghumian, Evaluation Officer – Partnership Programs, Governance
    • Rasmus Heltberg, Lead Evaluation Officer – Partnership Programs

Consultants:

    • Ali Khadr, former World Bank country director and Lead Economist on the
      Caribbean countries
    • Basil Kavalsky former World Bank country director
    • Chandra Pant, former senior Bank staff – macroeconomic management and private
       and financial specialist




                                          89
References
Aghion.P. and Howitt.P.1998. Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press

Alesina, A., and R. Wacziarg, 1998, “Openness, Country Size, and the Government,” Journal of
Public Economics, Vol. 69, No. 3, pp. 305–321.

Alesina, A., E. Spolaore, and R. Wacziarg, 2005, “Trade, Growth, and the Size of Countries,” in
Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (Stanford: Stanford University).

Alexandraki, K. and H. Lankes, 2004, “The Impact of Preference Erosion on Middle-Income
Developing Countries,” IMF Working Paper 04/169 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Timothy Cheston, Aline Coudouel Ludovico Subran and Asha Williams. WP80105- Social
Protection and Labor, 2013. Tailoring Social Protection to Small Island Developing States- lessons
learnt from the Carribean.

Docquier.F and Schiff.M, 2009. Measuring Skilled Migration Rates: The Case of Small States. World
Bank. WP 4827

Easterly.W and Kray A. Small States, Small Problems? 1999. WPS 2139.

Favaro, E. and D. Peretz, 2008, “Overview of Studies of Economic Growth,” in Small States, Smart
Solutions: Improving Connectivity and Increasing the Effectiveness of Public Services, ed. By E.
Favaro (Washington: World Bank).

GEF – GEF and Small Island Developing States. Report 33338

Hallegatte, 2012. A Cost Effective Solution to Reduce Disaster Losses in Developing Countries:
Hydro-Meteorological Services, Early Warning, and Evacuation

IEG, 2005. Evaluation of World Bank Assistance to Pacific Member Countries, 1991-2002.

IEG, 2006. Hazards of Nature, Risks to Development: An IEG Evaluation of World Bank Assistance
for Natural Disasters

IEG, 2006. Small States: Making the Most of Development Assistance.

IEG, 2007. The Development Potential of Regional Programs: An evaluation of World Bank Support
of Multi-country Operations

IEG 2007. Evaluation of Development Results in Middle Income Countries.

IEG, 2008. Environmental Sustainability, An Evaluation of World Bank Group Support.

IEG, 2012. Review of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery Program.

IEG 2014. Adapting to Climate Change: Assessing the World Bank Group Experience. Phase III




                                                 90
IMF, 2013. Asia and Pacific Small States: Raising potential growth and enhancing resilience to
shocks.

IMF, 2013. Caribbean Small States: Challenges of high debt and low growth.

IMF POLICY PAPER, 2014. Staff guidance note on the fund’s engagement with small developing
states.

IMF. WP 13/123. Are the Asia and Pacific Small States Different from Other Small States? Patrizia
Tumbarello, Ezequiel Cabezon, and Yiqun Wu

IMF. WP 08/39. Big Government, High Debt, and Fiscal Adjustment in Small States. Stephanie
Medina Cas and Rui Ota

IMF. WB12/123. Small Island States in the Pacific: the Tyranny of Distance? Chris Becker.

IMF, 2013. Macroeconomic issues in small states and implications for fund engagement

Mlachila, M. and P. Cashin, 2007, “The Macroeconomic Impact of Trade Preference Erosion on the
Windward Islands,” in Eastern Caribbean Currency Union: Selected Issues, IMF Staff Country
Report No. 07/97.

Meilak C., 2008, “Measuring Export Concentration: The Implications for Small States,” Bank of
Valletta Review, No. 37

Malik, A. and J. Temple, 2008, “The Geography of Output Volatility,” Journal of Economic
Development, Vol. 90, No. 2, pp. 163–178.

Prasad. A and Pollock. M. Ying Li. 2013. Small States Performance in Public Debt Management.
WP6356. World Bank

Robert Read. The Implications of Increasing Globalization and Regionalism for the Economic
Growth of Small Island States World Development [2004]

Romer.P (1986). "Increasing returns and Long-Run Growth" Journal of Political Economy. 94:1002-
37.

Schiff, M. and Y. Wang, 2012, “North-South Trade-Related Technology Diffusion and Productivity:
Are small States different?

Schiff, M and Wang.Y, 2008. “Brain Drain and Productivity Growth: Are Small States Different?”

Schiff.M. 2002. Regional Integration and Development in Small States. WP2797.

United Nations and World Bank. 2010. Natural Hazards Unnatural disasters. The economics of
prevention. WP 57060.

Winters, A., and P. Martins, 2004, “When Comparative Advantage is not Enough: Business Costs in
Small Remote Economies,” World Trade Review, Vol. 3, No. 3.

                                                 91
World Bank and Caribbean Growth Forum. 2014. Connectivity for Caribbean Countries: An Initial
Assessment Report 89692.

The World Bank and IFC. 2012. Doing Business. Report 65638

The World Bank 2000 – Report of the Commonwealth secretariat- joint World Bank taskforce.
Meeting challenges in the global economy




                                              92
