                                                                                       96477

                                          Approach Paper

                   Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support for
                             Capital Market Development
                                           March 30, 2015


Introduction

1.       Well-functioning capital markets are an integral part of the financial framework and
help support the development of the real sector of the economy. Long-term bank finance is
limited in supply, reflecting the difficulty of matching the duration of assets and liabilities and
appropriately pricing its risk. Capital markets thus complement bank finance, allowing house-
holds and firms to better manage interest rate and maturity risk associated with long-term real
sector investments, such as housing and infrastructure. Research provides evidence to support
the links between sound financial development, real sector economic growth and poverty allevi-
ation, showing that financial development can disproportionately benefit the incomes of the
poorest, thus supporting the twin goals of the WBG, of reducing poverty and improving the lives
of the poorest.1 Moreover, properly channeled finance can help avert instability and incidents of
crisis that are known to have severe effects on poverty. A more diverse financial system also tends
to be more stable and better able to absorb shocks, providing a financial “spare tire” to firms in
case of banking crises. Well-functioning capital markets, that are an integral part of such financial
systems, particularly support the achievement of real sector growth in those sectors that require
long term finance, such as infrastructure and housing. And local capital markets expand the range
of investment opportunities available to local institutional investors, such as pension funds and
life insurance companies that have long time horizons for their liabilities.

2.     Deep and liquid domestic government debt markets support sound budget manage-
ment and help finance overall economic development, growth, and poverty alleviation in all
areas of the real economy. They enable governments to finance their fiscal deficits and manage
public debt without exposure to the currency risks associated with foreign borrowing, and at
lower costs. Government bond markets strengthen monetary management, provide benchmarks
and build yield curves that support the overall financial sector.2 Long-term bond markets give
valuable information for the conduct of monetary policy. These arguments were clearly stated
even prior to the financial crisis, in the G8 (2007) Action Plan for Developing Local Bond Markets




1As discussed further in Box 2 below.
2 See e.g., Papaiannou, Das, Pedras, Surti andAhmed (2010), Anderson, Silva and Velandia-Rubiano
(2010) and Miyajima, Mohanty and Chan (2014).

                                                  1
in Emerging Market Economies, and reiterated after the crisis, and with more broad based sup-
port, in the G20 (2011) Action Plan.3

3.      More recently the case for developing bond markets, especially project bonds, for in-
frastructure finance in emerging markets, has received increasing attention. Estimated
variously at US$57 trillion to US$67 trillion from 2013 through 2030, it is recognized that
traditional financing from governments and banks will not be enough to cover these financing
needs, even without including social infrastructure.4 Given their long maturities and stable cash
flows, project bonds can help make up the deficit and attract institutional investors. Such capital
markets instruments had declined in the years following the financial crisis, but are now making
a comeback. The G-20 High Level Panel on Infrastructure has pointed to the critical need to find
new mechanisms for leveraging resources for infrastructure projects.5 This evaluation is even
more timely and relevant as the World Bank Group envisages a scale up of its infrastructure fi-
nancing activities, as described in its umbrella report on Long-Term Investment Financing for
Growth and Development (2013), in the latest WB (2013) infrastructure strategy update FY13-15,
and in its recent establishment of a Global Infrastructure Fund (World Bank, 2014). Moreover the
most recent Global Financial Development Report, under preparation at the Bank’s Research
group (DEC), focuses on the provision of long term finance, significantly in the context of capital
market development.6

4.      The development and expansion of capital markets, and indeed financial markets as a
whole, is not without risk. Instability may limit the impact of financial development on poverty
alleviation. Banking, a central part of most financial systems, is highly leveraged and has been
prone to exaggerated credit cycles that sometimes end in crisis, and there are some signs of in-
creasing global levels of leverage and possibly nascent bubbles in the real economy. The greater
role of capital markets in more developed financial systems can diversify some risk away from
banks, dampening overall economic effects of shocks to the banking system. Yet, in a changing
world, technological shifts have introduced new forms and delivery mechanisms of financial ser-
vices that bear their own risks.7 And dynamic changes in global financial structure, in a post-crisis
environment, including regulatory shifts in the banking system, could shift risks towards
‘shadow banks’ and capital markets, and towards emerging as opposed to developed markets.8


3 Underpinning the G8 Action plan was a BIS (2007) report by the Committee on the Global Financial
System, discussing the benefits of local currency bond markets for financial stability.
4Garcia-Kilroy (2014), based on estimates from Ernst & Young (USD 57tn); the OECD (USD 50tn), and the

McKinsey Global Institute (USD 57–67tn).
5 G20 High Level Panel on Infrastructure (2011).
6 World Bank (2014).
7 Credit derivatives are a recent example. Certain market processes, such as high frequency trading, now

increasingly present in the larger middle income countries, also carry own risks of exacerbating volatility.
8 ‘Shadow banking’ refer to structures that are not new, nor are they illegal, untaxed, or unmonitored.

Rather they use instruments and legal structures deliberately designed to fall outside the traditional
purview of regulators. While these complex structures may use capital markets as financial

                                                     2
5.     Such areas of potential risk underscore the need to be aware that extrapolation from
the past may not be the most reliable guide for a future road map and further highlight the
importance of governance and regulation. The role of capital market development must be
viewed against the backdrop of a given country’s overall financial framework and its levels of
leverage. If capital markets are to serve the economic welfare of all economic segments, including
small entrepreneurs, the balance between the developments of different segments of capital mar-
kets must also be taken into account.

6.      In this evaluation, the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) will assess the World Bank
Group’s support for capital market development, against the backdrop of overall financial sys-
tem development, and support for poverty alleviation. This evaluation will (i) examine the na-
ture of all forms of support extended by the World Bank, and International Finance             Cor-
poration (IFC) to capital market development; (ii) identify the extent to which the World Bank
Group strategy for capital markets development supported priority challenges and the extent to
which it met these challenges; and (iii) draw lessons to help build a strategic picture of the Bank
Group’s future approach to capital market development, including the overall balance between
support to different segments of the market, and links between capital market development and
overall financial system development, in a dynamic context. 9

7.       The scope, issues, and questions for this evaluation were identified in an independent
manner, following a broad–based consultative process across the World Bank Group. This pro-
cess covered consultations with a range of persons in the Finance and Markets global practice,
beginning with senior management and advisors, and a range of operational departments. The
latter included, in particular, the WBG Capital Markets unit (persons responsible for government
and corporate bonds, equities market development, corporate governance and infrastructure
finance). Another core unit consulted was the Non-Bank Financial Institutions unit including per-
sons working on housing markets, pensions and insurance. In addition, IEG met with the Pay-
ments Group, the Financial Sector Policy and Risk Management unit (that inter alia manages the
Financial Sector Assessment – FSAP-program). The team also met with the administrators of the
Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening (FIRST) program. Within IFC operations units, con-
sultations were held with the housing finance and corporate governance groups, and with the


intermediaries for transactions that would likely have previously involved banks, this is primarily a
challenge for regulators in the most developed financial markets.
9 Some recent arguments suggesting a link between capitalism, inequality and instability, e.g., Piketty

(2014), are not linked to capital markets. His argument is against the tendency of capitalism, in general, to
concentrate wealth in the hands of capitalists. There is not a single variety of capitalism and some
countries, for example, Sweden and Japan, operate capitalists systems with well developed capital
markets and low inequality. Rajan and Zingales (2009) also recognize the inherent problems with
capitalism, but argue that financial markets offer a way out of poverty when they are well managed and
developed. Galbraith (2014) offers four factors impeding a return to normal growth after the 2008 crisis,
among which is the breakdown of law and ethics of the financial sector, but he does not differentiate
between the financial sector and capital markets.

                                                      3
Corporate Strategy and Investment departments. Across the WBG, the team met with the respec-
tive Treasury departments of the World Bank and the IFC, and also met with MIGA management
(Attachment 6).


 Box 1. What are Capital Markets and What is Needed for their Development?
 Capital markets are financial markets for the buying and selling of securities, whether long-term debt, equity, or asset backed
 securities, either publicly or privately issued or traded. Capital markets thus provide an interface for suppliers and users of
 capital to come together, allocating capital according to market-based pricing of risk and returns, and in the process providing
 important public goods (information, transparency, and risk management for investors). Such markets enable the channeling
 of individual savings towards long-term productive investments, thus supporting issuers - companies or governments - to raise
 long term capital. These securities encompass:

 •    Bonds or debt instruments that earn investors a regular ‘coupon’, allowing them to become creditors to the issuer;
 •    Equity instruments or stocks and shares, which permit investors to acquire ownership of companies and thereby share
      risk
 •    Bundles of claims, such as asset-backed securities – mortgage backed securities are an example.


                                                                            Capital Market Infrastructure
                                                                               Sound Macro Management
                                                                             Deep and Liquid Money Markets
                                                                       Regulatory Framework




                                                                                                                                                                  WBG Support for Developing
                                                                                                                                        Soft Infrastructure




                                                                                                                                                                   Capital Marketsas a part of
                                                                       Corporate Governance




                                                                                                                                                                      the financial system
                                                 Securities Trading, Clearance, Settlement, Depositories                             Hard Infrastructure

                                                                                                              Returns
                                      Issuers                                      Instruments                                             Investors
                               •    Central / subna-                         •   Government bonds                                  Institutional




                                                                                                                                                                                                    IEG Evaluation
                                    tional governments                           (Treasury/state/municipal)                        •      Insurance companies
                                                                                                                  Intermediaries
                                                           Intermediaries




                               •    Companies                                •   Corporate bonds/ agency                           •      Pension funds
                               •    Banks                                        bonds                                             •      Collective investment
                               •    Project Finance en-                      •   Corporations’ stocks / eq-                               vehicles

                                                                                                                                                                   WBG Support for Use of Cap-
          Purpose of Funding




                                                                                                                                                                   ital Market Instruments to Fi-
                                    tities                                       uity                                                     Asset Managers
            Requirements




                               •    Mortgage compa-                          •   Mortgage /asset backed                            Individuals

                                                                                                                                                                         nance Real Sector
                                    nies                                         securities
                               •    IFI/ MDBs
                                                          Proceeds/                                      Investments
                                                           Funding

                                            Financing the Real Sector Through Capital Market Instruments

                                   Finance central /       Finance                   Project finance        Mortgage fi-                   Finance IFIs /
                                      subnational        corporations:               for real sectors     nance for hous-                   MDBs (e.g.,
                                   government bor-       - Risk capital             (e.g., infrastruc-   ing / other asset-               World Bank, EIB,
                                    rowing needs            (equity)                       ture)          backed securi-                    EBRD, etc)
                                                       -Long term debt                                           ties



 On primary markets, issuers of new stocks or bonds - enterprises or governments- sell these securities to investors via an
 underwriting process. In secondary markets, existing securities are sold and bought among investors or traders, usually on an
 exchange, or over-the-counter. Liquid secondary markets increase the willingness of investors to buy securities, as they can
 sell their investments when desired. Securities markets investors can include, in particular, institutions such as pension funds
 and insurance companies that have large pools of assets to be invested for long periods. Less commonly, they can also in-
 clude individuals, mutual funds, or investment banks trading on their own behalf. Entities hosting securities trading systems
 include exchanges or over-the-counter markets, and the latter may be intermediated by networks of brokers or primary deal-
 ers. Capital market instruments are generally deemed to have maturities of at least a year; instruments of shorter maturity,


                                                                                                4
 known as money market instruments (overnight paper on the interbank market, or short term Treasury bills), provide the li-
 quidity to support the development of secondary markets.

 Sound and stable macroeconomic management – low inflation and stable interest rates - is critical for the development of
 sound capital markets. Governments must adopt a clear issuance strategy and debt management framework, so that inves-
 tors can anticipate a reliable supply of fixed-income securities, and access the liquidity needed to finance capital market trans-
 actions. Second, a solid legal and institutional environment especially with regard to information disclosure requirements is
 also critical because it provides the basis for the protection of investor rights, including minority interests. Equity holders need
 to have voting rights to exert control over management and the board, and bond holders need to have the rights to claim col-
 lateral when defaults occur. And adequate mechanisms to enforce contracts are needed. Sound financial infrastructure is a
 third requirement – including the physical underpinnings of trading systems and securities clearance and settlement arrange-
 ments, here referred to as ‘hard’ financial infrastructure, as well as the ‘soft’ infrastructure such as the legal and regulatory
 apparatus and industry to process, evaluate, and validate the information being produced and used by the market. Finally,
 markets need critical size, including deep money markets, as in their absence, there will be insufficient liquidity for trading and
 market development.
 Source: IEG




Background, Context, and Motivation
CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT IN WBG CLIENT COUNTRIES (2005-2014)
8.      During the period covered by this evaluation, capital markets, especially debt markets,
grew rapidly in WBG client countries, much more so than in high income countries. Interna-
tional debt issues by lower middle income countries have grown particularly rapidly. However,
both domestic debt issues and international debt issues by lower and upper middle income coun-
tries remain dominated by government securities. Domestic debt issues remain lower than bank
credit, which is growing at a faster pace than the debt market, indicating an overall increase of
leverage even if not from capital markets (Figure 1).

9.      Stock markets have grown too, but the pace of growth has faltered and become erratic
after the global crisis. And although the numbers of listed companies has grown perhaps most
rapidly in lower middle income countries, trading volumes have not kept pace with market
capitalization, and turnover ratios (trading value as a proportion of market capitalization) have
in fact declined. The evaluation will attempt to weigh the potential benefits for greater encour-
agement towards support for equities markets that among WBG client countries have shown poor
recovery, relative to further support for debt market development.10




10 The traditional problem for emerging economies was a lack of credit. In some emerging economies, this
is no longer the case as indebtedness has increased significantly. There is also some emerging evidence
that easy global liquidity conditions may have led to a surge in some emerging market firms’ bond
issuance in international markets, largely for refinancing and securing lower rates and longer maturities.
The shift towards safer maturity structures may have come at the expense of a leveraging-up in foreign-
currency-denominated financial debt and there are trade-offs between these risk structures (Bastos et. al
2015).

                                                                  5
 Figure 1. Global Growth of Credit, Debt and Equity (2000-2013)
                             Domestic Debt Securities & Bank Credit Outstanding




                                 International Debt Securities Outstanding




                                 Stock Market Capitalization and Trading




 Notes: International Debt securities data is based on 51 countries data on equities is based on 48 countries, and
 domestic debt securities data is based on 21 countries; for which consistent data are available.
 Source: IEG estimates based on data from BIS Bond Statistics and World Development Indicators


CAPITAL MARKETS, ECONOMIC GROWTH AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
10.     Over the last two decades research has established that financial development spurs
economic growth and can disproportionately benefit the incomes of the poorest. Much of the
research has focused on the evidence that links overall financial development to economic growth
and poverty alleviation (Box 2), and their cumulative findings provide strong evidence of posi-
tive linkages. More recent work has also examined the links between financial development and
the poorest, and again, demonstrates positive results.



                                                           6
11.     There has also been considerable research on the topic of the relative contributions of
bank-based financial systems, as compared to capital markets based financial systems, as driv-
ers of growth. The accepted consensus over the past fifteen years or more is that there is no spe-
cific support for either the bank-based or the market-based approach. There is a complementarity
between the approaches, and their relative benefit is related rather to the overall level of devel-
opment of markets and financial infrastructure, including the ability of the economic system to
reduce information asymmetries. As discussed in Box 2, as countries develop they increase their
demand for the services provided by securities markets relative to those provided by banks.
Bank-based structures tend to dominate in the early stages of growth, but the relative importance
of banks decreases as economies develop.

12.     Financial instability and incidents of financial crisis can also have severe effects on
poverty. During the course of the 2008/09 financial and economic crisis, it was estimated by the
World Bank that 28 million persons lost their jobs after 2007, and an additional 53 million persons
were plunged into poverty in the developing world.11 Research also shows that financial devel-
opment helps the poor in countries with stable financial systems. However instability may limit
the impact of financial development on poverty alleviation. Available research does not so far
fully reflect the evolution of financial markets in recent years, including greater market instability
and volatility, which prompts the need for researchers to raise additional questions and further
probe the links between choices adopted regarding the development of different segments of fi-
nancial markets, and poverty alleviation, in a dynamic and evolving world.12



 Box 2 Financial Sector Development, Capital Markets, Economic Growth and Poverty Alleviation

 FINANCE AND GROWTH
 Financial systems help to allocate capital, mobilize and pool savings, monitor investments, facilitate risk diversification and
 management, and ease the exchange of goods and services (Levine 2005). Evidence of a causal link between financial depth
 and economic growth was traced by King and Levine (1993), in a multi-country study that showed that financial development
 predicts long-run economic growth; a finding that remains robust in more recent scrutiny (e.g., Panizza 2013). While this initial
 assessment of the link between finance and growth was focused on banking as the measure of financial sector development,
 Gerschenkron (1962), Allen and Gale (2000) and Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001), provided theoretical and empirical rea-
 sons to look at the financial sector beyond banks as a driver of growth. Beck and Levine (2005) expanded the analysis to in-
 clude stock markets and found that the size of the banking sector and stock market development were both positively related
 to economic growth. Extending this further, Fink, Haiss and Hristoforove (2003) found that in addition to banks and stock mar-
 kets, bond market development also influences economic activity.

 Levine (2002, 2005) based on an empirical examination, shows that classifying countries as having bank-based versus mar-
 ket-based financial systems is not very fruitful. Although overall financial development is robustly linked with economic growth,
 there is no specific support for either the bank-based or the market-based view. As pointed out by IEG (2006a) ‘Research on
 the best mix of financial institutions, in terms of bank-based systems versus market-based (capital markets), shows a striking



11   Ötker-Robe and Podpiera (2013) review the social impact of financial crises.
12   Note however some very recent work in this area including Arena et. al., (IMF, 2015).

                                                                7
lack of results. Rather, it is the overall level of financial sector development, regardless of which structure dominates, that mat-
ters for growth. Thus, whether to promote the establishment or expansion of capital markets in a country will depend on the
circumstances, including the ability of the country to reduce informational asymmetries.’

Studies also showed that financial depth influences not just the level of economic activity, but also the nature of real sector
activity, and the industrial structure of an economy. Capital market development encourages industries that need external
finance (Rajan and Zingales1998), Demirguc Kunt and Maksimovic (2000) also show that stock market development is more
related to the availability of long term financing, whereas banking sector development is more related to short term finance.
While Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Laeven and Levine (2004) suggest that financial development, overall, disproportionately helps
small firms, Didier and Schmukler (2013) point out that larger firms, especially, benefit from stock and bond market access in
some prominent emerging economies.

FINANCIAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT & CAPITAL MARKETS
The extent to which financial structure (bank-based versus market-based) affects economic growth has also been explored,
and the implications of financial structure on growth. Cross-country empirical research (reported by Levine 2005) finds fairly
consistently that there is no single preferred system, even for financially-dependent industries, or firms with external financing
needs. Overall, the conclusion from the literature to date is that while financial sector development is good for growth, the fi-
nancial structure adopted by a country is less important. However, Demirguc-Kunt, Feyen and Levine (2011) find that as coun-
tries develop they increase their demand for the services provided by securities markets relative to those provided by banks.
Bank-based structures tend to dominate in the early stages of growth, but the relative importance of banks decreases as
economies develop. Most recently, Valickova et. al (2014) suggest that stock markets may support faster economic grown
than other financial intermediaries. However, at a practical level, credit institutions and capital markets are not strictly inde-
pendent, especially in emerging market economies, where banks often tend to be early issuers as well as buyers of corporate
bonds, benefitting from the term transformation and hedging opportunities offered by capital markets.

FINANCE AND MACROECONOMIC VOLATILITY
The financial sector has played a contributing role in many, if not most, of the economic crises that have taken place in recent
years. The implications of such events on both growth and poverty are significant. Even before the 2008 crisis, Easterly, Islam
and Stiglitz (2000) found that the development of the financial sector as measured by both bank credit to the private sector
and stock market traded value are negatively related to macroeconomic volatility. But they also pointed out that while bank
credit is negatively related to macroeconomic volatility, the relationship is not linear; above a certain level of credit, financial
sector development adds to macroeconomic volatility. This is similar to the finding of Arcand, Berkes and Panizza (2012), who
find that financial sector development, defined in this case as private credit to GDP, is positively related to economic growth,
until it reaches 100 percent of GDP, beyond which it has a negative impact.

Caprio and Klingebiel (2003) showed that fiscal costs of financial crises often exceeded 20 percent of GDP. Bordo et al.
(2001), determined that twin (banking and currency) crises have led to cumulative GDP losses on the order of 18 percent, and
Halac and Schmukler (2004) discuss the significance of regressive wealth transfers unleashed by financial crises. During the
course of the 2008/09 financial and economic crisis, it was estimated by the World Bank that an additional 53 million persons
were plunged into poverty in the developing world. Banking, a central part of most developed and developing financial sys-
tems, is highly leveraged and has been prone to exaggerated credit cycles that sometimes end in crisis. But historical evi-
dence informs us that in fact financial crises are more frequent in developing than in developed countries, likely due to better
macroeconomic policy, regulation and supervision in the latter (Reinhart and Rogoff 2009). The greater role of capital markets
in more developed financial systems diversifies some risk away from banks, dampening overall economic effects of shocks to
the banking system.


FINANCE, POVERTY AND INEQUALITY
Does financial development help the poor through better resource allocation and more information? Or does financial develop-
ment inordinately help the rich, because the poor rely mostly on informal networks and family? Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Lev-
ine (2007) and Clarke, Xu and Zhou, (2006) find that that financial development, measured by growth in private credit, dispro-
portionately boosts incomes of the poorest quintile of the population and reduces income inequality. Akhter and Liu (2010),
using a broader measure of financial development that includes non-bank financial institutions, find that financial development


                                                                 8
 helps the poor in countries with stable financial systems. However instability may limit the impact of financial development on
 poverty alleviation; a caution echoed by Jeanneney and Kpodhar (2008). Perez-Moreno (2010) also points out that it is the
 moderately poor that clearly benefit. Kim and Lin (2011), using measures of both bank and stock market development, also
 find that the relation between financial development and inequality depends on the development level the country has
 reached. Studies on individual countries also exist, though most use bank-based measures of financial development. Ayya-
 gari, Beck and Hoseini (2013) also find that financial development is strongly associated with poverty reduction, a result ech-
 oed for Kenya by Odihambo (2010) and for Pakistan by Imran and Khalil (2012), using bank based data. Jalil and Feridun
 (2001), in a study on China which uses a wider spectrum of financial development variables, also finds that increased financial
 development will reduce income inequality in China. Nevertheless, the effect of finance on shared prosperity has not been
 studied exhaustively. And studies that isolate the effects of capital markets as a component of the financial system, and pov-
 erty, are rare.

 Source: IEG Review



13.     Beyond the research, there is direct evidence of links between capital market access and
poverty, and the evaluation is expected to yield further such examples, based on an underlying
theory of change that links the eased provision of financing to institutions that support the
financial needs of the poor. At least three microfinance institutions have listed so far on public
equity markets: in Kenya, Mexico and India. One international MFI holding company, Procredit,
has issued public equity in the international markets. And securitizations of microcredit loans
have also taken place - which amounts to the conversion of a portfolio of microfinance loans into
securities, which are then issued to investors, often institutional investors. Microfinance institu-
tions have also issued bonds, both private and public placement. In the area of housing finance,
the establishment of mortgage liquidity facilities can enable mortgage lenders to reach out to a
wider segment of the population, including lower income citizens. And sound and diversified
portfolios for pensions and insurance companies help to safeguard the assets of the elderly and
the vulnerable.

THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S EVOLVING STRATEGY TOWARDS CAPITAL MARKET DEVELOPMENT
14.     At the IFC, the importance of the financial sector in general, and specifically, capital
markets has long been recognized, and it remains prominent in IFC’s strategy. The Capital
Markets Department was established at IFC as a jointly funded WBG department in the 1970s
with the mandate of providing technical assistance, advisory services and institution building
investment. Its initial investments included several stock exchanges, its technical assistance to
Korea and then the launching of a Korea country fund helped to put the country on the invest-
ment map. IFC’s Emerging Market Growth fund was a pioneering success despite early skepti-
cism. IFC helped the emergence of a new asset class, as well as the most comprehensive source of




                                                               9
emerging markets stock market data in its Emerging Markets Database, and additionally, the
construction of early emerging markets indices.13

15.      IFC has maintained a strong focus in most of these areas during the period under re-
view (2004-2014), although there may have been some shifts in emphasis of different elements
of its support.14 Its Strategic Directions (2004) identified strengthening the focus on frontier mar-
kets, as well as maintaining the focus on local financial markets development, as among its core
priorities. Promoting local currency financing remained a strategic focus in the Strategic Direc-
tions FY08-10 document as well, in three ways: working alongside the World Bank to create
supportive policy, legal and regulatory frameworks; investing and providing technical assistance
to financial institutions; and helping build the necessary financial infrastructure for such institu-
tions to operate effectively. IFC (2008) produced an Advisory Services product review specifically
for securities markets, and expanded this in IFC (2011a and b) in the form of a more comprehen-
sive capital market development strategy. The strategy reaffirmed support to issuers, intermedi-
aries, investors, and the development of market infrastructure, with the building of government
and corporate bond markets (the latter especially for real sector engagement), and a re-engage-
ment in equities markets, with a focus on smaller companies, as key elements. Inter alia it suggest
a low priority for support to broker-dealers, rating agencies, and investments in exchanges. It also
affirmed the need for greater coordination with the IFC Treasury. At a country level, it pointed
out the need to move away from one-off engagements, towards a comprehensive, ‘deep dive’
approach. In parallel, IFC’s Treasury recognized the need to provide local currency financing for
it clients, and has moved beyond loans to bond issuance, derivatives and swap products as well
as to structured finance and securitization through guarantees and risk sharing facilities (IFC
2010, and IFC 2014).

16.     In IFC’s most recent strategy, the ‘Road Map for 2015-2017;’ IFC reiterates the focus on
frontier markets, as well as on the need to develop local capital markets, especially in the con-
text of infrastructure and real sector finance. It also emphasizes the need to leverage its invest-
ments to promote good corporate governance and environmentally and socially responsible in-
vestment.

17.     At the World Bank, there have been fewer formal articulations of financial sector strat-
egy. The most recent, dating from March 2007, is essentially a continuation of an earlier strategy
note from the year 2000, which emphasized the continuing central role of the Bank in providing
systemic policy advice and lending support to governments. It also points to the need to distin-
guish WB long term structural support, based on its analytical and diagnostic capability, from the

13 The IFC’s Antoine van Agtamel has been credited with coining the term ‘emerging markets’ in the
1980s; later described in his pioneering volume ‘the Emerging Market Centrury’ (van Agtamel, 2007).
Barger (1998) documents the IFC’s early contributions in this area.
14 IEG has found only a limited number of interventions directly concerned with equities market

development across the WBG, numbering around 19.



                                                  10
IMF’s focus on stability, and IFC’s strength in market intelligence. With respect to capital markets,
specifically, it discusses an agenda that continues ongoing diagnostic work, especially FSAPs, as
well as, in particular, the promotion of local currency bond markets, the deepening of Bank
advisory work for financial sector aspects of pensions systems, catastrophic insurance products,
low-income housing, and building financial infrastructure, especially, payments systems. A new
financial sector strategy is under preparation and may be available in FY16. Useful inputs from
the present evaluation are expected to feed into that and close informal discussions will be main-
tained.

18.     Despite limited formal strategies, there has been an evolution of the role of the WB in
the global financial sector architecture. Some changes are reflected in the periodic Board docu-
ments reviewing the FSAP program.15 Especially after the global crisis, there was an increase in
the role of the IMF in surveillance activities (reflected in the role of the Fund as a member of the
Financial Stability Board) and a corresponding increase in the role of the WB in the structural
development aspects of countries’ financial systems.16 These changes emphasize the role of the
Bank as a key institution for support to financial systems of poorer countries.

19.     Support for capital market development in client countries has been implicit in the
setting up of internal WBG organizational structures underpinning the importance of this area
of work. Thus the joint WBG capital markets department was established in 2007, which has in-
corporated both WB and IFC staff. And at the end of 2014, both IFC and the WB have articulated


15 However on the FSAP program, specifically, there have a series of strategic papers and stocktakings.
The FSAP program began in 1999 as a joint IMF-World Bank response to the Asian financial crisis. IMF-
World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) (SM/99/116 and SecM99-371) provides a
general early description of the FSAP; the October 2002 Progress Report on the Bank-Fund Financial
Sector Liaison Committee (SM/02/308 and SecM2002-0507);World Bank and IMF Staff paper (2003)
(which details all reports on the program to date); and an IEG stocktaking (IEG 2006). More recently, WB
(2009) and SecM2009-0416 (2009) describes strategic changes to the program proposed following the
global crisis, with greater integration of the program into the IMF’s surveillance work, and more
emphasis on development aspects of financial systems at the World Bank. In the latest review (SecM2014-
0419, September2014) it describes the fact that the IMF and WB conduct independent FSAP program
reviews, though still coordinated through the joint Bank-fund Financial Sector Liaison Committee (FSLC).
The Bank paper focuses on the FSAP as a vehicle to address the needs of emerging markets and
developing economies (EMDEs), while the fund paper focuses on the FSAP as a key pillar of financial
sector surveillance. The FSAP plays a pivotal role for the financial sector work at the Bank, which in turn
is an essential component for achieving the twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and sharing
prosperity. As the cornerstone of financial sector analysis work at the Bank, the FSAP provides an
analytical framework for operations and technical assistance (TA), and a vehicle for policy dialogue.
16 There have been institutional shifts in terms of the guardians of the architecture of financial stability.

With the formalization of the Financial Stability Forum in 2009, in the form of the FSB (Financial Stability
Board), and the expansion of its membership, to include the G20 and the IMF as a Board member, the
orientation of the WB towards low income countries was further emphasized. Discussants of the new
politics of international financial regulation, including the role of the FSB, the FSAP program and the IFIs,
claim that the FSB still lacks powers of enforcement. (Knaack 2014, Helleiner 2011).



                                                     11
the need to integrate relevant aspects of the work of their Treasury departments with the overall
support given to financial sector development.

20.     Although the articulation of a Bankwide strategy towards the role of capital market
development in the financial sector was limited, individual country strategies were neverthe-
less spelled out, albeit at a technical level, in the context of countries’ financial sector diagnos-
tic work, especially in the FSAP program (Box 3). The FSAP tool, developed and implemented
jointly with the IMF, permitted the articulation of a strategy towards individual countries’ do-
mestic capital markets across a broad spectrum of issues, and enabled their prioritization in the
context of an overall financial sector agenda.



  Box 3 World Bank Strategic Advice to Capital Markets at the Country Level – FSAP Programs

 Guatemala September 2014
 The FSAP discussed the need for a new Securities Markets Law which is seen as a necessary precondition for overall capi-
 tal market development to ensure enhanced oversight of intermediaries, the exchange, and securities issuers, with special
 emphasis on debt issuers and mutual funds. As regards the government bond market, it identified dematerialization as a top
 priority as it has hindered the development of a secondary market and the creation of a yield curve. It also paid attention to
 the investor side with a review of rules governing institutional investors, recommending a new life insurance tax policy to in-
 crease savings.

 Saudi Arabia May 2012
 The FSAP points out that Saudi Arabia could further strengthen its institutional investor base and encourages public disclo-
 sure of the investment guidelines for pension funds, making greater use of private investment managers, and a reduction of
 their short-term liquid holdings. The insurance sector is also seen as a potential source of institutional assets with rapid im-
 plementation of recent reforms by Saudi Arabia Monetary Agency (SAMA). On the bond market side, the FSAP pointed out
 that fixed income and derivative markets were lacking as government debt markets dried up, corporate bonds have only
 been issued by three companies, very few derivative products are available. Suggested reforms focus on maintaining a sta-
 ble volume of government bonds to allow for the development of a benchmark yield curve and a private sector agreement on
 Sharia compliant transactions.

 India May 2013
 The update points out that regulatory and tax distortions have increased the use of money market funds as an alternative to
 bank deposits, which can weaken the transmission of monetary policy. A reduction in the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (of Banks,
 holding government securities) and reducing the amount of qualifying securities that can be accounted for as held to maturity
 are prescribed to improve liquidity in the secondary market for public bonds. These efforts combined with improved investor
 protection and strengthening securities clearing and settlement systems will help expand the corporate bond market and may
 help India meet the financing needs for its ambitious infrastructure program.

 Nigeria March 2013
 Nigeria’s post-2009 banking crisis FSAP describes a multifaceted strategy, touching on investment guidelines for the pension
 sector, privatization of state assets to reenergize IPO activity, and a comprehensive policy framework for the private equity
 industry including demutualization of the Nigerian Stock Exchange. On the government Debt Management Office side, it
 urged a focus on building a yield curve, as well as introduction of pre and post trade information systems in the fixed income
 market.

 Source: IEG, FSAP program.




                                                               12
21.      The mission of MIGA is to promote foreign direct investment into developing coun-
tries. MIGA fulfills its mission by providing political risk insurance guarantees to private sec-
tor investors and lenders. MIGA has no articulated strategy specific to capital market develop-
ment. Some MIGA projects have a capital markets dimension, although these are very limited in
number. These guarantees protect investments against non-commercial risks and can help private
investors obtain access to funding sources with improved financial terms and conditions. Over
the ten year period reviewed, some half dozen such projects were identified. Although individu-
ally of interest to the discussion, their total volume is small (see Attachment 5 for details). Given
its limited involvement, MIGA is excluded from the scope of the evaluation.17

WBG SUPPORT FOR CAPITAL MARKETS: ADVISORY SERVICES, LENDING, INVESTMENTS, AND TREASURY
OPERATIONS
22.       Capital market support at the WBG has been provided for the following areas:

         Securities issues and the development of capital markets instruments;
         Development of an investor base, especially institutional investors;
         Development of ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ market infrastructure including policy and regula-
          tion;
         Support for the use of capital markets instruments for financing real sector investment.

and by the following activities:
     WBG Analytic and Advisory Services;
     WBG Loans and Investments;
     WBG Treasury Operations.

23.     A brief discussion of the evolution of analytic work in each core capital market segment
within the WBG follows, traced against the backdrop of the evolving internal and external agenda
with regard to technical support, advisory services, as well as research. This is followed by an
overview of WBG operational support to capital market development, which followed the founda-
tions laid by core analytic work. The present overview of WBG operational support is comple-
mented by more detailed portfolio analysis of each segment in Attachment 5.

WBG ENGAGEMENT IN CAPITAL MARKETS – EVOLUTION AND EXPERTISE

Issuers and Instruments – WB and IFC Support to Bond and Stock Market Development

24.     Parallel to the establishment of IFC’s capital markets division, and DEC-led analytical re-
search on the relative benefits of bank-led versus market led systems, the WB’s financial
sector anchor also began to build up core expertise on key segments of capital markets, with early


 MIGA has been the subject of a comprehensive recent IEG evaluation, although support to capital
17

markets was not its focus. See: MIGA’s Financial Sector Guarantees in a Strategic Context (IEG, 2011).

                                                   13
emphasis on local bond market development.18 Strong external partnerships, notably with the
IMF and with the OECD, were established. The World Bank and IMF (2001) provided a first guide
to developing government bond markets.19 Soon after, a series of annual conferences on govern-
ment debt markets were jointly initiated, together with the OECD.20 More market specific studies
followed in the period under review, including a 12 country World Bank/IMF pilot program on
debt management and public bond market development (World Bank (2007a and 2007b), which
emphasized the uniqueness of each country case and the length of time needed for results.21 And
most recently, the OECD WBG and IMF jointly prepared a diagnostic framework and an action
plan for local currency bond market development (OECD 2013).22

25.     Meanwhile, factors affecting bond market development were also explored by the WB
Treasury. Sienaert (2012) examined the role of foreign investors in local government debt mar-
kets. From the research perspective, Claessens, Klingebiel and Schmukler (2013) show that in-
stitutional and macroeconomic factors are related to the development of government bond mar-
kets, as echoed, external to WBG, in Rojas-Soares (2014) and Laeven (2014). And at present, the
forthcoming DEC Global Financial Development Report (2015), focused on developing markets
for long term finance, also reviews WBG efforts at supporting capital market development in
client countries.




18 Several relevant works were produced, in this period, often jointly contributed to or managed. Dalla et

al (1995), in the WB EAP department, presented a pathbreaking review of nine emerging Asian bond
markets. Soon after, the OECD organized a review of specific issues associated with capital markets in
transition economies (OECD 1997). In-depth individual country studies were undertaken (e.g., Kumar,
1997a), together with strategies for bond markets for infrastructure finance, including subnational and
municipal finance (el Daher, 1997, Gray et. al., 1997, Dailami, 2003, Freire and Peterson 2004). Harwood
(2000) discusses, in a conference edition, the benefits of bond markets and their establishment. More
broadly, Harwood and Smith (1997) address the sequencing of capital markets reforms, Kumar et. al
(1997b) and Carmichael and Pomerleano (2002) discuss the regulation of the non-bank financial sector
and Litan, Pomerleano and Sundararajan (2003), in a joint WB / IMF / Brookings conference, recognized
the role that local capital markets play in mitigating risks associated with cross-border capital flows.
19 Reflecting the widespread view at the time that an important reason for the Asian crisis was the

relatively poorly developed local capital market, leaving these countries dependent on external capital.
Interestingly, during the 2008 crisis the EBRD recognized the lack of domestic financial markets as a key
cause of volatility in its client countries (EBRD 2010, 2014).
20 The joint OECD-World Bank -IMF Global Bond Market Forum (Blommestein and Harwood, 2011).
21 Bakker and Gross (2004) and Iorgova and Ong (2008) have examined EU accession countries’capital

markets development. An in-depth analysis of the Brazilian public debt market was prepared jointly by
the World Bank and the Brazilian government (Silva et al, 2007). Sophastienphong (2008) investigated
South Asia’s bond markets, and Garcia-Kilroy and Silva (2011) examine government bond markets in five
countries in MENA.
22 These build upon former OECD has a long tradition of involvement in government debt management,

viewed by some as a cornerstone of any financial sector. Its original Green Book on public debt
management was first published in 1983, revised in 1993 and again in 2002, providing an overview of
trends in the markets and a discussion of important policy issues.

                                                   14
26.      Corporate bond markets also became the focus of attention.23 The IMF Financial Stability
Report (2005), discussed relevant challenges and policy issues, followed by WBG research on the
regulatory framework, impediments, and domestic vs. international issuance.24 At the country
level, the World Bank undertook a comprehensive review of the corporate bond market in India
(Marathe, WB 2006). Recent attention in the non-government bond area is shifting towards the
development of project bonds, especially for infrastructure financing, given their prospective
benefits in terms of cost of finance and complementarity with other sources (Garcia-Kilroy, 2014,
draft).

27.     Perhaps reflecting market evolution, less attention has been paid to the development of
stock markets at the WBG of late, although there was a rich body of WBG research in this area a
decade or more ago, including the impact of market restrictions on share issuance and trading.25
A new interest is emerging however in the financing of small firms in emerging markets which
includes a review of stock markets for this purpose (Harwood and Konidaris, 2014). And overall
securities market regulation is a foundation upon which most capital markets development is
based, as recognized in Carvajal and Elliott (2007), who discuss issues of enforcement and com-
pliance in emerging economies.26

Issuers and Instruments – WBG Treasury Support to Capital Markets - Local Currency Bond Issues

28.    Together with other supranationals, the World Bank Group has also undertaken local
currency bond issues through its Treasury departments. However, these were undertaken pri-




23 Empirical research documenting the impact of capital markets development on firms remains limited.
As early as 2001, Gallego and Loayza show that in Chile, firm investment became less constrained as
capital markets developed. Most recently, Didier and Schmukler (2013) suggest that while beneficial,
typically the larger firms have gained the most in India and China.
24 See, e.g., Endo (2008), Gozzi et al (2012), Loladze (2014).
25 Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (1997) show that firms segment the market in order to discriminate

between different shareholder groups. Also in Mexico, Domowitz, Glen and Madhavan (1998) show that
cross-listing shares on international markets brings both costs and benefits that vary by investor class.
Primary market issuance activity, the actual raising of capital, is documented in Aylward and Glen
(1999), who show a dramatic increase in issuance activity over 1980-1995. Claessens, Klingebiel and
Schmukler (2002) examine the migration of listings from emerging markets to international financial
centers and document policy factors that increase stock market development. Finally Glen (1995) also
looked at issues related to trading infrastructure for securities exchanges, and market microstructures in
emerging markets, following early activities of IFC in this area.
26 And in parallel there is increasing recent global acknowledgement of the critical role of equities mar-

kets (Kay, 2012).

                                                    15
marily from the perspective of optimizing its own funding, rather than with the focus of devel-
oping local capital markets.27 The Treasury departments also contribute through the tailoring of
IBRD currency swaps that contribute to the lengthening of maturities in local currencies.28



      Box 4. Local Currency Bond Issues by the WBG Treasury – ‘Maharaja’ and ‘Masala’ Bonds

     Both the IBRD and IFC have been active issuers in the local currencies of client countries for many years. Those issues,
     which form part of the organizations’ overall funding programs, can play an important role in developing the capital markets of
     those currencies by providing benchmark issues that attract international investors to the currencies and markets without ex-
     posing them to credit risk, extending the maturity and helping define a yield curve. Recently, the IFC treasury issued two
     bonds that illustrate how they can play an important role, both in developing the markets and in providing clients with access
     to local currency funding.

     In September 2014 IFC issued an onshore Indian rupee bond, setting an international triple-A benchmark for that market. The
     IFC Maharaja bond, as onshore issues by foreign issuers are called, raised 6 billion rupees, or approximately $100 million,
     from international and domestic investors. There are four tranches of the bonds, with maturities ranging from 5 to 20 years
     and, for the first time, the five year and ten year tranches were both priced below the comparable Indian government bond,
     reflecting large investor appetite for IFC credit. The bonds will be listed on India’s National Stock Exchange and all proceeds
     from the bonds will be used for infrastructure investments in India, allowing IFC to provide local currency credit to its clients
     without exposing itself to exchange rate risk.

     In November 2014 IFC issued a 10-year 10 billion Indian rupee-denominated bond (equivalent to $163 million) in London, the
     first rupee-denominated bonds listed on the London Stock Exchange. These so-called Masala bonds, named by IFC as the
     first issuer, will be used to fund infrastructure projects in India and are the longest maturity rupee-denominated bonds in the
     offshore market. The bonds yield 6.3 percent, about 190 basis points below a comparable Indian government bond, reflecting
     the perceived credit quality difference between the two issuers. The investors are mostly European institutional investors who
     are interested in IFC credit quality combined with the currency exposure that the bonds provide.
     Sources: WB and IFC Treasuries, IEG


Issuers and Instruments - Supporting Real Sector Financing through Capital Markets

29.    Both the Bank and IFC have tried to support the financing of certain real sectors of the
economy through the use of capital markets instruments. IFC projects across a variety of sectors
have introduced structured financing arrangements that encourage the use of capital market in-
struments and have supported bond issues for project financing though credit enhancements and
guarantees. These have helped project financiers to access markets on better terms. In the case of
the WB, such advice and such guarantees have been offered notably in the area of infrastructure

27 Supranational bond issues in local currencies were surveyed for the ADB and IDB in Garcia and Dalla
(2005), and a broad based survey of supranational bond issues was undertaken by Wolff-Hamacher
(2007). BIS (2007) makes a case for local currency financing. More recently EBRD Treasury (2014)
summarizes its perspectives on local currency issues. Herrera-Pol (2014) summarizes the WB Treasury
position, and IFC’s perspective is discussed in IFC (2010) and in IFC’s Local Currency brochure
(undated).
28 IBRD Treasurers also advises on the management of sovereign wealth funds; however sovereign

wealth management is not necessarily related to the development of local capital markets, and is thus
outside the scope of this evaluation.

                                                                  16
finance. The WB has also offered advisory services on project bonds, though until recently, inter-
est in this area waned after the financial crisis.29 In addition, some recent Treasury programs pro-
vide support for the financing of programs in areas such as environment in particular, but also,
other areas of ‘social impact investment’ through bond issues that are linked to an underlying
portfolio of operations in these areas.30 Box 5 describes recent WBG trends in the provision of
environmental finance through ‘green bonds.’

     Box 5. Support to the Real Sector by the WBG Treasury: Green Bonds and Theme Bonds
     In 2008 the World Bank launched the Strategic Framework for Development and Climate Change to help stimulate and coordi-
     nate public and private sector activity to combat climate change. IBRD and IFC green bonds are an example of the kind of
     innovation the WBG is trying to encourage within this framework.

     The WBG green bonds raise funds from investors to support WBG investments for projects that seek to mitigate climate
     change or help affected people adapt to it. The product was designed in partnership with a Swedish bank (SEB) to respond to
     specific investor demand for a triple-A rated fixed income product that supports projects that address climate change. Pio-
     neered by the EIB in 2007, the World Bank has raised $6.4 billion through 67 green bonds in 17 currencies since its inaugural
     issue in 2008. Separately, IFC has issued more than $3.5 billion in green bonds. Globally, the green bond market from all is-
     suers surpassed $20 billion in 2014.

     Green bonds have been embraced by institutional and retail investors with a strategic focus on climate change issues and the
     issuance of these bonds is seen as a way to engage these investors who might otherwise not invest in WBG bonds and to
     build a market for private financing for climate change-related investments.

     World Bank and IFC green bonds support climate investments across a range of sectors, including renewable energy installa-
     tions, energy efficiency projects, new technologies in agriculture and forestry that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, as well
     as financing for forest and watershed management, and infrastructure to prevent climate-related flood damage and build cli-
     mate resilience. World Bank green bonds are supporting 50 projects in 20 countries, including an eco-farming project in China
     that converts methane gas from animal waste on rural farms to electricity. IFC green bonds are supporting companies like
     Mexico’s Optima Energia, which helps hotels in Mexico achieve energy savings.

     Given the success of green bonds, other types of theme bonds have been placed in the market by the WBG in recent years,
     including microfinance bonds, banking on women bonds and inclusive business bonds, all of which operate under principles
     similar to green bonds, but with the underlying projects meeting different criteria.
     Sources: WBG Treasuries, IEG




Issuers and Instruments: Asset-Backed and Mortgage-Backed Securities

30.     Capital markets can allow both financial sector and non-financial sector companies to
securitize assets, possibly expanding the base of both investors and issuers and potentially
lowering the cost and increasing the ease of funding. As early as 1998, IFC, IBRD and ADB held


29 Gray et. al., (1997), Dailami (2003), historically, and recently, Bond (2014), Bravo (2014), Garcia-Kilroy
(2014) and Inderst and Stewart (2014).
30 See e.g., Afholter (2014), WB Treasury Reichelt et al (2014), the IFC Treasury’s ‘Investing for Impact’

(2013), the WB Treasury’s Annual Green Bond Newsletter (the most recent, sixth edition, published in
2014), and Global Capital (Euroweek) March 31, 2014.

                                                                17
a joint workshop on mortgage-backed securities (Watanabe 1998). The use of mortgage-backed
securities in emerging markets is summarized in Chiquier, Hassler and Lea (2004), who also
provide case studies of their use in several emerging markets. Globalization and its profound
implications for housing finance are described in BIS (2006). Zanforlin and Espinosa (2008) track
and highlight the key legislative and institutional reforms leading to the development of primary
and secondary mortgage markets in Mexico, including the use of mortgage-backed securities.
Chiquier and Lee (2009) provide a complete overview of housing finance in emerging markets,
including a discussion of mortgage securities. Hassler and Walley (2012) review the experience
with housing liquidity facilities, which intermediate between primary mortgage companies and
bond markets and have been effective in emerging markets where mortgage-backed securities
are not well developed. This rich body of technical experience and research is reflected in a large
and diverse portfolio of WBG lending, investments and advisory work related to both mortgage-
backed and asset-backed securities.

Investors – Pension Funds and Insurance Institutions

31.     The size and structure of the institutional investor community strongly influences cap-
ital market development, and the World Bank has long been an advocate of the need for or
multi-pillar pension systems, which include employer and employee funded pillars that can
provide accumulations for capital markets investment.31 Vittas (1996) and Vittas (1999), describe
links between pension system reform and capital market development; more recently Castañeda
and Rudolph (2010) review issues of portfolio choice for pension funds. Rudolph et al (2007)
assess links between the Colombian funded pension system and the related capital market, and
Rudolph and Rocha (2007) conduct a similar analysis for Poland. Raddatz and Schmukler (2008)
and Opaz, Raddatz and Schmukler (2014) look closely at the investment portfolios of pension
fund managers in Chile in order to understand how the development of those funds impacted
the capital markets and find that the fund managers are not investing as expected and that there
is room for additional reform to change manager incentives to promote capital market develop-
ment. Stewart (2014) pursues this theme by looking at alternative approaches that could adjust
the incentives for pension fund managers, increasing the odds of meeting the needs of retirees.
Hinz et al (2010) also examine pension fund financial allocations and performance, but expand
the sample to 23 countries in order to improve understanding of what has happened to defined-
contribution pension systems. Holzman (2009) focuses on pension systems in Central and Eastern
Europe, noting the challenges there owing to a combination of an ageing population and the still
relatively undeveloped capital markets. Yermo (2004) argues that capital market development in
Latin America has been driven largely by pension regulation.




31See especially Estelle James et. al (1994), ‘Averting the Old-age Crisis’, Palacios (1994). World Bank
activities related to pension systems are documented and summarized by Dorfman and Palacios (2012).

                                                   18
32.     The insurance industry can also play an important role in the development of capital
markets, especially life insurance, which accumulates large pools of capital that needed to be
invested for long periods of time. But insurance can play other roles as well. For example, Pollner
(1999) explains the role of multilateral development banks in the development of pooled insur-
ance coverage supported by liquidity and credit enhancements, as well as hazard indexed bonds
that allow risk to be securitized.32

Capital Market Development – ‘Soft’ Infrastructure: Legal Frameworks and Corporate Governance

33.     Financial market infrastructure encompasses both ‘soft’ aspects, such as the develop-
ment of sound regulatory frameworks, or good corporate governance, as well as ‘hard’ aspects
such as building payment systems networks. It should however be recognized that the latter
also includes many policy and regulatory issues. Attention has been given to building up the
legal and regulatory aspects of capital markets in all ‘product’ segments identified above. Securi-
ties markets regulation has often been an element of the Bank’s development policy-based loans
(DPLs). Of the approximately 250 DPL operations that took place from 2004-2014, 40 included a
capital markets sector code. Of these around 30 are included in the IEG review portfolio.33 Apart
from interventions at the individual country level, the WBG had a significant role in the formu-
lation of global policies in this area, inter alia including the thirty core IOSCO Objectives and
Principles of Securities Markets Regulation, and the recent CPSS-IOSCO comprehensive set of
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure.34

34.     Developing good corporate governance frameworks is a cornerstone of building the
‘soft’ aspects of sound capital markets infrastructure. Both IFC and the Bank have supported
good corporate governance principles, essential for building investors’ confidence and deepening
equities markets. Corporate governance in a capital market context deals with the way in which
holders of corporate stock in listed companies, especially minority shareholders, are fairly treated
and protected from predation by management and majority shareholders. The CG ROSC, the
Bank’s main product for assessing corporate governance frameworks and practices for listed com-
panies, assesses and benchmarks law and practice against the OECD Principles of Corporate Gov-
ernance (2004), which are the international standard. The OECD, with World Bank support, de-
veloped a Methodology in 2006 which forms the basis for the CG ROSC assessment.
35.    World Bank (1999) announced the establishment of the joint WB/OECD Global Corporate
Governance Forum, and described the main issues and current practices. Fremond and Capaul
(2002) reviewed 15 corporate governance Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes


32 Lester (2014) provides an overview of WB insurance interventions for growth and poverty reduction,

however there is limited specific discussion of capital market enhancement.
33 There were a handful of (10) DPLs over FY 2004-2014 which had sector content in the capital markets

area but were dropped from portfolio in some cases due to the very low weighting to the capital markets
conent, or reflecting feedback from consultations on limited relevance.
34 IOSCO is the International Organization of Securities Commissions.


                                                  19
(ROSCs); a framework itself based on the OECD principles. Corporate governance was also the
subject of a joint WB/IMF/Brookings conference, (Litan, Pomerleano and Sundarajan 2002) who
concluded that there is a need to enhance transparency and contestability of markets. Carson
(2003), in a Bank commissioned paper, discussed corporate governance of stock exchanges in the
context of demutualization (the transition of an exchange from a not-for-profit to a for-profit
form), a topic also discussed by Elliott (2002) in an IMF paper. A recent scholarly overview of
corporate governance in emerging markets (Pargendler 2014) points out why this has risen to
importance with the increase in prominence of cross border investments, and Grimminger and
Di Bendetta, with the World Bank and IFC (2013) summarize attempts made by 8 stock exchanges
to create indices of ‘good governance’ firms. Corporate governance programs at the WBG finance
and markets practice encompass banks, SOEs as well as general corporate entities – ROSCs are
the standard form of support to the latter, and are the only form of the corporate governance
activity included in the WBG portfolio.35 In addition to the CG ROSC as a diagnostic tool, greater
emphasis is being placed on moving to implementation through follow up advisory services, es-
pecially with IFC. IFC’s corporate governance development program today focuses on a number
of broad areas, ranging from ‘due diligence’ of proposed investee companies, legal and regulatory
issues, training fora, and public awareness campaigns.


Capital Market Development – ‘Hard Infrastructure’ - Securities Clearance and Settlement

36.     Confidence in the clearance and settlement systems for securities is essential for market
development, but these systems have serious problems in some countries. Stehm (1996) ex-
plains the role of these systems and describes critical design features, while De La Lastra et al
(2000), document the various sets of clearance and settlements standards available and World
Bank (2002) develops a methodology for assessing these systems. Guadamillas and Keppler
(2002) describe a set of settlement systems in a cross-section of Latin American countries. National
payments systems, which allow financial institutions to transfer money efficiently, are also an
important part of World Bank work. Listfield and Montes-Negret (1994) and Humphrey (1995)
describe these systems and provide advice on their design. These matters are further explored by
Bossone and Cirasino (2001), which reflects the Western Hemisphere Payments and Securities
Clearance and Settlements Initiative, an effort led by the World Bank. Cirasino and Guadamillas
(2004) offer advice on reforming payments and settlements systems. Lessons from the work per-
formed by the Bank, the IMF and other international institutions on payments systems are sum-
marized in World Bank (2006).




35   In practice, some SOEs may also make share offerings on public equity markets (WB 2013).

                                                    20
Capital Market Development – The Sequencing of Interventions

37.     Given these multiple different segments of capital markets, that they fit into a larger pic-
ture of the financial system as a whole in any given economy, to what extent should there be an
element of sequencing or prioritizing of support for capital market reform? There have been some
attempts to look at issues relating to the sequencing of financial system development that suggest
some broad principles, particularly with regard to the liberalization of capital account transac-
tions and cross border flows, which point out that the prior achievement of sound macropruden-
tial management is suggested to reduce risk and contain volatility. Beyond this, there is some
natural sequencing that emerges as a consequence of the nature of different financial instruments.
Thus, deep and liquid money markets (for overnight and short term paper) clearly aid the devel-
opment of bond markets (and longer term instruments); and within such markets, sound primary
market structures underpin the development of efficient and liquid secondary markets. Yet it is
difficult to go further in prescription; there are no a priori broadly accepted sequences between
the development of debt and equity instruments, and their evolution is usually a reflection of
broader requirements in the real sectors and in the government. And both require the develop-
ment of other elements of the capital market, especially including both ‘soft’ and ‘hard’ infra-
structure; including sound regulatory frameworks, good corporate governance, and efficient fi-
nancial infrastructure.36


A QUANTITATIVE OVERVIEW OF WBG OPERATIONAL AND ADVISORY SUPPORT FOR CAPITAL MARKETS
38.     An overview of World Bank Group support for the development of capital markets is
summarized in Figure 2. From an operational perspective, the richly diverse program of the WBG
‘s support to capital market development is reflected in the large numbers of projects, loans and
advisory services with capital markets content, spread over a range of sectors and segments of
the portfolio. Over FY04-FY14, 677 WB AAA and 124 lending projects had some exposure to Cap-
ital Markets accounting for 5.2 percent of WB AAA, and 2 percent of WB Lending. IFC, con-
versely, exhibits a predominance of investments, as opposed to advisory services, as 543 IFC in-
vestments and 103 IFC advisory services were broadly identified as pertaining to capital markets
– 14.2 percent of all IFC investments and 4.1 percent of all advisory services.




36 E.g., Harwood (1997), IMF and World Bank (2005) Financial Sector Assesment: A Handbook (Chapter

12).

                                                21
 Figure 2. WBG Portfolio of Lending, Investments, Advisory services and Technical Assistance
 that Contribute to Capital Market Development (2004 to 2014).

                           $ m                      FY                     Count
                   5,000                                                            70
                                                                                    60
                   4,000
                                                                                    50
                   3,000                                                            40
                   2,000                                                            30
                                                                                    20
                   1,000
                                                                                    10
                       0                                                            0
                           FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14

                                 IFC Investment (LHS)          WB Lending (LHS)
                                 IFC AS (RHS)                  WB AAA (RHS)

 Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse



39.     This initial group was further filtered to identify a more relevant set of projects for
review by IEG (as detailed in Attachment 3). The share of such activities in the WBG portfolios
measured in terms of number of projects remains large, even if we focus on the IEG-identified
relevant portfolio. In all, between FY04-14, the IEG portfolio of projects that had relevant capital
markets content amounts to 3.7 percent of WB AAA, 1.4 percent of WB lending, averaging 2.9
percent of all WB interventions. Percentages are higher for the IFC, reflecting the importance of
the financial sector in its overall work - 11 percent of IFC investments, 3.4 percent of advisory
services and an average of 8 percent of all IFC interventions.




                                                    22
 Table 1 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: WB and IFC Lending, Investment, Analytic
 and Advisory Services (2004-2014), (Nos.)
                                                                      IFC    IFC Invest-     WB AAA          WB          Total
                                                                      AS       ments                       Lending
  Capital Markets Projects Identified                                  87       421             476          87          1071

  1. Developing Capital Markets Instruments
  IFC - Private Equity and Investment Funds1                          7          288                                      295
  IFC - Securities Instruments support to Investments2                            59                                       59
  WB / IFC Bond Markets Advisory 3                                    13                         81           21          115
  WB / IFC Housing and Mortgage securities                            21          46             63           17          147

  2. Supporting Capital Market Investors
  Insurance                                                           8           24             92           26          150
  Pensions                                                                                       34            6           40

  3. Building Capital Markets Infrastructure
  Capital Market Regulation, Supervision                              1                          23           1            25
  Capital Market Development incl. FSAP, ROSC follow up               3           2              52           4            61
  Payments / securities' clearance and settlement / securities        2           2              18           3            25
  exchanges4
  Corporate Governance5                                               32                         73           3           108

   4. Using Capital Markets to Support Real Sector Invest-
   ment
   Financing Infrastructure6                                                                         40         6           46
   (Memo item: IFC - Securities Instruments support to Invest-                      (59)                                   (59)
   ments)7
 Source: IEG.
 Notes: Projects / Advisory Services (AS) and Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) approved between July 2003 and June
 2014.
 For IFC the table only includes projects Completed or still in the Portfolio; excludes Projects Dropped, Terminated, or Not Yet
 Approved (Pipeline)
 1. Investment funds here include 23 Distressed Assets Relief (DARP) projects
 2. Projects identified by search of Product codes for ABS, Bonds, and Guarantees of Bonds, and further by review of project
 documents
 3. Includes 41 Gemloc, 11 ESMID projects, 14 projects identified together with FABDM team, 13 recommended by GFMDR
 team and additional projects based on word search criteria
 4. For WB, based on sector classification payments (FG) and capital markets (FK). For IFC, includes sector Market Infrastruc-
 ture (O-IB). Also includes 11 projects recommended by GFMDR, and word search.
 5. Included 31 IFC AS regional projects with Legal and Regulatory components, as well as 45 WB ROSCs
 6. An additional six projects in this area are included in IFC - Securities Instruments support to Investments
 7. Repeated here for reference (but not double counted) as these investments also support real sector investment. They in-
 clude six projects that support infrastructure.



40.   Operational departments at the World Bank Group have supported capital market de-
velopment through a number of different vehicles. In the World Bank’s lending portfolio (Table




                                                                 23
1, with extensive further details in Attachment 5), specific Bank financed loans, for housing, in-
surance and bond market development have been identified, for direct support for the develop-
ment of these areas of securities markets.37

41.      In terms of non-lending services, in recent years, the Bank executed Financial Sector
Reform and Strengthening (FIRST) initiative, a trust funded program, has been an important
vehicle for the provision of technical assistance. FIRST operates across the full spectrum of fi-
nancial market development activities, including capital markets TA projects. A total of 96 rele-
vant FIRST financed capital markets activities were undertaken over FY04-FY14.38 FIRST was in-
itially conceived as a source of finance for follow up technical assistance to the World Bank’s
FSAPs (Financial Sector Assessment Programs) programs, jointly undertaken with the IMF,
which undertake diagnostics of financial sector fundamentals and risk assessments. FSAPs them-
selves usually include diagnostics and policy recommendations on a significant spectrum of se-
curities markets activities (see Box 3).39 The IFC and World Bank have worked closely together
in terms of bond market advisory work, and IEG identified 81 Bank-financed projects in this area.
The Bank’s GEMLOC program, on local government bond market development, provided a total
of 30 advisory services to WBG clients over this period, and it has been succeeded by the comple-
mentary ESMID program, that takes a broader look at bond market development, notably, cor-
porate bond markets.40 IFC’s bond market advisory also works closely with the Treasury Debt
management unit. A limited number of the Treasury Debt Management unit’s projects also have
debt market development programs and 14 are included in the scope of the present evaluation.

42.    The Bank’s advisory services on housing finance, corporate governance and market
regulation and development were numerous, though interventions for securities clearance and
settlement were smaller in number. These include housing finance and the development of



37 In addition, several broad-spectrum policy based loans have supported the development of securities
market regulations and institutional frameworks. Since most of these have only a limited focus on
securities markets development, in conjunction with other policy areas, these have therefore not been
included for review in the IEG portfolio.
38 These are included in the IEG portfolio. Over phases 2 and 3 of FIRST, the Bank executed 325 FIRST

funded projects total, as there were also IMF executed projects. Phase 1 projects were recipient executed.
39 Over FY04 to FY14, a total of 148 FSAPs were undertaken by the WB, several in partnership with the

IMF. Of these, 55 included technical notes on capital markets, and an additional 51included detailed
reviews of other capital market related topics, such as public debt management, pensions, insurance, and
financial infrastructure. FSAPs will not be included in the scope of the present evaluation due to their
specialized character, covering all areas of the financial system, and because they are typically
undertaken jointly with the IMF. However, FSAPs will be used as a source of information when
evaluating the relevance and effectiveness of WBG interventions in specific capital market areas.
40 GEMLOC, a special initiative jointly undertaken by the Bank and IFC, aimed to provide comprehensive

support for developing emerging bond markets through a three pronged approach – the creation an
index against which local currency bonds could be benchmarked, through direct investment in countries’
government securities, and through WBG advisory work.



                                                   24
mortgage markets (63 tasks and 13 percent of the AAA portfolio), insurance and pensions (a quar-
ter of the AAA portfolio), capital markets regulation and development (75 tasks and 16 percent
of the portfolio), an almost equal volume of work on corporate governance (73 tasks and 15 per-
cent of the total), and a numerically small but important set of advisory activities on securities
clearance and settlement. Finally, the Bank provided support to the use of capital markets instru-
ments in real sector investments in infrastructure, amounting to some 40 AAA tasks over this
period.

43.     IFC investment activities related to capital markets development fall into three main
areas. These are: investments in financial sector institutions directly or indirectly related to capital
markets; investments in collective investment vehicles, which consist of portfolios of private or
public equity and sometimes debt instruments; and non-financial sector investments that involve
capital markets instruments, including bonds, asset-backed securities and securities guarantees.
Combined, these three have grown from 29 projects in FY04, to 44 projects in FY14. Over the
period FY04-14, total capital markets commitments by IFC were $11.4 billion, representing 9 per-
cent of total IFC commitments over this period and 421 projects. In addition, 59 investment pro-
jects were identified that used capital markets instruments over the period. 41 Financial Sector
Institutions represented the smallest part of total capital markets development investments, ac-
counting for only 74 projects (18%) and $1.4 billion (12%) of total volume. Of that total, housing
finance accounted for the bulk both by number of projects (46) and by volume ($1.1 billion). As
regards the category, of investments in projects related to capital markets institutions and infra-
structure (such as trading mechanisms, exchanges, clearance and settlement systems, credit rat-
ing agencies and broker-dealers), IFC’s portfolio has dwindled to negligible levels over the past
decade, likely reflecting its strategic choices.42 Table 1 summarizes the relevant portfolio identi-
fied jointly by IEG and the WBG.


Purpose, Objectives, and Audience for the Proposed Evaluation

44.     This evaluation aims to assess how well the WBG supported countries in the develop-
ment of their capital markets, across the full spectrum of activities that contribute to the devel-
opment of such markets, and to contribute towards the development of a strategic roadmap for
future directions of such work, in the dynamic context of evolving financial markets, and the
new WBG twin goals. It will also assess the extent to which the WBG achieved and leveraged
synergies across the several different areas of the organization involved in capital market devel-
opment and examined the appropriateness of sequencing in the context of risk mitigation. It will
review the extent to which it benefitted from as well as contributed to external partnerships in
this area, including other IFIs (the IMF, EBRD, EIB, ADB and IDB), standard setting bodies, and


41Details are in Attachment 3.
42IFC had only two investments in an exchange or trading platform during this period, and two in
broker-dealers.

                                                  25
organizations such as the OECD/ DAC which also have considerable involvement in this area.
As regards the evaluation community, the ECG would also be interested. Another possibility is
the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development (Cambridge, U.K.). The team welcomes fur-
ther suggestions.

45.      While the primary audience of this evaluation is the World Bank Group Boards of Di-
rectors, IEG anticipates also working closely with World Bank Group management, the second
target audience. WBG management is particularly important for the quest to leverage synergies
across the various units dealing with capital markets, and beyond this, IEG hopes to closely col-
laborate with all WBG capital market staff, to ensure that the evaluation goes beyond accounta-
bility, toward the incorporation of institutional learning at a working level. Outside the Bank,
there would be an audience for the evaluation among the numerous external agencies and inter-
national institutions that face similar challenges, and also, among the numerous donors that sup-
port significant areas of the WBG capital market development work.

46.     The value added of this evaluation follows from its importance for the realization of
the twin goals and support to the real sectors of the economy, the absence of significant previ-
ous IEG evaluations in this area, clearly manifest donor demand, and a resurgence of WBG
and external (G20) attention especially in the context of the recent infrastructure financing in-
itiatives. As illustrated in Box 6, donors that have financed such work over the preceding years
have commissioned their own independent evaluations with regard to the WBG’s use of
resources.


 Box 6. The WBG and Capital Markets: Evaluative Material
 Few major IEG evaluations have discussed issues relevant to financial sector development, and there are no major IEG evalu-
 ations of the WBG role in capital markets development. In the available IEG financial sector reviews, references to the role of
 the WBG in capital market development are scarce. In IEG’s most comprehensive review, limited to WB support for financial
 sector reforms (2006a), the report mentions that only 22 percent (of financial sector projects) included capital market reform as
 a component; the Bank’s lending tended to target banking and bank-like financial institutions. Inclusion of this area was more
 frequent in East Asia and Latin America (30 percent) and much lower in Africa (14 percent) and even East Europe (18 percent).
 The evaluation itself did not explore issues related to outputs of such interventions or their outcomes; however it includes
 changes in stock market capitalization and trading value as a measure of outcomes of WB interventions in the overall financial
 sector in specific countries. Countries that were Bank borrowers for the financial sector and those that were not did not show
 any difference in changes in these parameters.

 IEG’s evaluation of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (2006b) pointed out that while the quality and thoroughness of
 FSAP banking sector analyses were consistent, there was greater variability in the coverage and quality of the analysis of other
 sectors, including non-banks, likely reflecting their small size in many countries covered. And few FSAPs analyzed the linkages
 between sectors - for example only a third of detailed FSAP reviews had an integrated discussion of insurance issues and
 capital markets and investment. A number of FSAPs discussed the need to expand the insurance and pension sectors, and to
 diversify asset holdings (which would help develop capital markets), but failed to discuss the lack of available investment instru-
 ments. It noted that nurturing local currency bond markets should be a policy objective for many countries and that more and
 better information on these markets is needed.




                                                                26
In the WB Pension Reform evaluation (IEG 2006c), capital market development was explicitly included as one element of the
secondary goals of pension reform, to be supported by the design of multi-pillar, funded, defined contribution pension schemes.
In terms of findings, the report shows that diversification of pension funds’ investments was not achieved and in many cases
pension investments remained concentrated in government securities markets, under tight investment guidelines – possibly
reflecting macroeconomic constraints. On the whole capital market development was not observed in case study countries
despite the introduction of multi-pillar systems, although government debt maturity showed some signs of increasing.
One relevant evaluation that covered both the WB and the IFC is the IEG (2009) review of the WBG’s Guarantee instruments.
The report points to the differences and similarities in partial credit guarantees (PCGs) offered by both institutions. In terms of
outcomes, it shows that such guarantees have helped public agencies tap bond markets for better terms than they would have
received without guarantees. Most public agencies that accessed capital markets under the PCGs subsequently accessed
commercial markets again, without guarantees. In Jordan, the PCG helped the telecom utility become the first Middle Eastern
corporation to tap the Eurobond market. The Jordan operation also involved the participation of the local capital market, facili-
tating mobilization of domestic foreign exchange deposits. A Colombia operation enabled Colombia to reestablish access to
U.S. capital markets at a time when investor interest was minimal. In Argentina, although the country was able to access non-
U.S. capital markets at similar terms, the PCG enabled it to issue a significantly larger bond ($1.2 billion) than would otherwise
have been possible at the time.
Although coverage of capital markets in IEG macro and sector evaluations is thin, IEG does have individual micro level evalu-
ation reports for a small proportion of the portfolio. Out of 421 IFC investment projects in the included portfolio, 202 are old
enough to have been reviewed, 55 have XPSRs/PESs (self-evaluation), and 40 of the 58 projects have completed IEG EvNotes.
As regards advisory services in the review portfolio, 60 of the 87 are completed and thus eligible for review. Of these, 27 have
project completion reports, six of which have not yet been finalized by IEG. On the WB side, ICRRs are available for 47 out of
67 closed projects, out of a total of 87 projects in the IEG portfolio. However, there is no evaluative coverage of the large body
of 476 WB AAA, as there is no self-evaluative or independent evaluation convention for AAA at the WB/ IEG. Available task
team led AAA completion reports have limited information compared to project self-evaluations.
In terms of performance, out of the 47 evaluated lending products at the WB, a large proportion - 39 or 83 percent - received
satisfactory ratings (highly satisfactory, satisfactory, and moderately satisfactory). Performance at IFC was more mixed. Of the
40 EvNotes reviewed by IEG, less than half projects were given a satisfactory rating by IEG. As regards IFC’s advisory services,
13 of the 21 IEG reviewed projects were given satisfactory ratings, 6 were given unsatisfactory ratings, and 2 were determined
to be too early to judge.

Despite limited coverage of the WBG and capital markets in IEG evaluative material, there have been independent external
evaluations of some segments of the WBG capital markets portfolio, due to their considerable trust fund financing, and the
demand for such evaluations by the funding donors. Thus, the FIRST program had monitoring and evaluation reports in 2009,
2011(undertaken by a team of former IEG staff) and 2014 (USC DPMG). There have been country specific evaluations of the
Vietnam capital markets work and corporate governance interventions (Adam Smith International, 2013). The ESMID program
has had evaluations of its interventions in Africa (Genesis Analytics, 2013) and in Latin America (Analistas Financieros
Internacionales).

Other IFIs do have major evaluations in the capital markets area. Most recently, EBRD has undertaken an evaluation of local
currency operations, including bonds and swaps (EBRD 2013), and the Asian Development Bank has undertaken a more broad-
based evaluation of its capital markets operations (ADB 2008).

Sources: IEG (2006a, 2006b, 2006c, 2007) EBRD (2013), ADB (2008): FIRST (2009, 2011, 2014), Adam Smith Interna-
tional, (2013), Genesis Analytics (2013) and Analistas Financieros Internacionales (2014)




                                                               27
Evaluation Questions and Scope
EVALUATION QUESTIONS
The evaluation addresses the following overarching questions:

      Has the WBG been relevant, effective and efficient in supporting the development of its
       client countries’ domestic capital markets, in the evolving context of countries’ overall
       financial sector development?

      Has the WBG been relevant, effective and efficient in supporting the use of capital mar-
       ket instruments in its client countries to realize real sector development?

      Has the nature of WBG support for countries’ capital markets development reflected the
       realization of the WBG’s twin goals of poverty alleviation and shared prosperity?

Following from these overarching questions, the specific evaluation questions to be addressed
are described below.

Relevance of Objectives

1. Have WBG capital market interventions been relevant to client countries?
     Were they based on their Country Assistance Strategies?
     Were they based on financial sector knowledge, diagnostics and strategies?

Relevance of Design

2. To what extend did the intervention focus on the right issues and provide appropriate and
adequate solutions to clients’ needs?
     Did interventions build on prior achievements and was support sustained over time?
     Was support appropriately linked to the development and evolution of other areas of
       the financial sector?
     Did the WBG engage strategically with the right country counterparts?

Effectiveness:

3. To what extent did WBG intervention achieve their objectives, primary or secondary, rele-
vant to capital market development?
     What was achieved in terms of domestic capital market development, relative to WBG
         and client objectives, relevant financial sector research, diagnostics and strategies, and
         the dynamic evolution of the country specific and global financial system?
     What was achieved in the use of capital market instruments for financing real sector de-
         velopment, in terms of sustained, demonstrative or catalytic effects?

                                                28
Work Quality and Organizational Efficiency

4. Was the WBG capital market work undertaken effectively in terms of internal and external
quality control and coordination?
     Has the WBG met internal work quality standards in preparation, implementation and
         supervision, and leveraged synergies through coordination?
     Were activities consistent / complementary with donor engagement and was funding
         consistently available?
     Were WBG monitoring and evaluation standards adequate for accountability and learn-
         ing and has WBG management used the resulting data to improve future performance
         and to adapt to the evolving financial environment?


48.      It would be desirable to add an additional question, regarding effectiveness, in terms
of the achievement of long term goals at broadest level - robust and more resilient financial
systems, or greater long term capital availability. However, severe problems of attribution exist
which makes it unlikely that these questions could be answered with any level of confidence.
Therefore, while acknowledging the desirability of addressing such questions, they are omitted
from the scope of the evaluation. To the extent that IEG is able to present evidence, however, it
will be included in the evaluation.

49.     There is also the possibility that the actions undertaken by the WBG for capital market
interventions had unintended consequences, positive or negative. Although it is not possible
to anticipate such unintended consequences and include them with the scope of specific evalua-
tive questions, to the extent that information on such effects or outcomes becomes available dur-
ing the course of the evaluation, their influence on outcomes achieved would be included in the
findings of the evaluation.

50.     As illustrated in the discussions of the preceding sections, there is heterogeneity and a
high level of specialization of interventions supporting capital markets development in
individual segments of the WBG capital markets portfolio. Therefore, beyond the questions
described above that are relevant to all sections of the identified capital markets portfolio, IEG
proposes to construct metrics, based on supplementary additional questions for individual
sections of the portfolio, which would be used for evaluating outcomes in each segment. Exam-
ples of such supplementary questions are given in Table 2.




                                               29
Table 2 Examples of Supplementary Evaluative Questions Specific to Individual Areas of Support

                                           Capital Market Segment Supported

     Capital Market Issuers:
    Did the WBG provide support to governments to meet their funding needs for public debt management?
    Did the WBG help to facilitate corporations to meet their funding needs through capital market access through private
     equity, publicly listed equity, or through the issue of corporate debt?
    Did the WBG support project finance entities (e.g., for infrastructure) or housing finance companies to obtain long term
     funding through the use of capital markets instruments?
    Did the WBG’s own programs of Treasury issuance of local currency bonds and theme bonds provide additionality to
     funding the development needs of client countries?

     Capital Markets Instruments: Bonds, Equities, Asset backed securities
    Did the WBG support the development of robust government bond markets that (i) integrated with public debt manage-
     ment needs; (ii) reduced funding costs and increased the predictability and availability of funding; (iii) improved liquidity
     and price discovery of debt markets and (iii) provided benchmarks with longer maturities and extended the domestic
     yield curve?
    Did WBG support provided for the development of the corporate bond market help to remove impediments to issuing and
     build more liquidity in these markets?
    Did the WBG help catalyze the development of private equity through IFC collective investment vehicles? Did the funds
     support the eventual movement of investee companies towards publicly listed companies? Did IFC catalyze the entry of
     other investors into private equity?
    Did IFC help enhance project finance for better financing long term real sector investment or better handling risk, e.g.
     through guarantees issues or structured financing arrangements / project bonds?
    Did the WBG support for the development of asset backed securities such as mortgage bonds / covered bonds used for
     housing finance provide sustained help towards the creation of a market in such securities?
    Did the WBG’s own fund raising in local currencies help to create the necessary legal environment for local currency
     bond issues, extend maturities in local bond markets and attract other investors? How does this compare with other
     IFIs?
 

     Capital Markets Investors: Insurance Funds, Pension Funds
    Did the WBG support the development of insurance systems that would support the accumulation of funds for invest-
     ment in capital markets? Did the WBG support the development of investment rules for these funds that would encour-
     age the development of a diversified capital market?
    Did the WBG help to develop funded pensions systems that invest in domestic capital markets, with investment rules
     conducive towards such investment?
 Capital Markets Infrastructure: Legal and Regulatory Frameworks, Corporate Governance, Payments Systems
  Did the WBG help contribute to the preparation / modification of a sound legal and regulatory framework for securities?
  Did the WBG effectively support the development of sound systems for securities clearance and settlement, shortening
     elapsed time to settlement, achieving DvP and reducing counterparty risk?
  Did the WBG effectively support the improvement of corporate governance for listed companies in terms of protecting
     the rights of minority shareholders, more transparent appointments of boards of directors?



51.     The results chain that describes the theory of change underpinning this evaluation,
linking the various World Bank Group interventions with outputs and intended outcomes is
illustrated in Figure 3. One of the challenges faced by this evaluation is that tracing final out-
comes is extremely difficult, due to the small size of WBG interventions compared to the size of


                                                               30
the markets that these interventions are made in, and the many factors and complexities affecting
overall outcomes, due to actions by other market players, be they governments, other multilat-
erals, or private market participants. Additionally, capital market outcomes are notoriously af-
fected by the overall macroeconomic context, by regulatory changes in markets even if not di-
rectly related (e.g., tax policies). Situations of instability or volatility can hinder the realization of
even well-crafted and sound interventions.


 Figure 3. Results Chain – WBG Support to Capital Markets: Activities, Outputs and Outcomes


        Inputs / Activities                                      Outputs                                    Outcomes
     WBG interventions that support                       Achievement of results                            Capital market
      capital market development                   with regard to the identified activities                 strengthening

     Helping issuers use capital mar-       • More liquid government debt markets,, extended
     kets instruments to meet their           yield curve, lower funding costs ; more benchmark
     long term financing needs (central       issues
                                                                                                       • Deeper capital mar-
     and local governments, corpora-        • Eased corporate bond issuance and more liquid              kets for both issu-
     tions, project finance entities,
     housing finance, IFIs
                                              corporate bond markets                                     ers and investors
                                            • More firm level access to private equity , entry of
                                              new domestic investors in private equity
                                            • More corporate public listing , greater liquidity and    • Safer and better
     Helping the development of devel-        trading, reduced risk,
     opment of capital markets instru-      • Better market for asset backed securities espe-
                                                                                                         regulated financial
     ments (Government and Corpo-             cially for housing finance                                 systems, reduced
     rate Bonds, Equities, Asset
     backed securities)
                                            • Greater access to capital market finance for brown-        instability
                                              field and greenfield projects
                                            • Increased and eased local currency bond issuance,
                                              following IFIs, more investors, longer maturities        • More long term
     Supporting the development of                                                                       funding availability
     capital markets investors: Insti-                                                                   for corporations
     tutional investors including insur-   • Strengthened regulatory environment for insurance
     ance funds and pension funds                                                                        and for projects
                                             and better long term funding, diversified investment
                                           • Multi-pillar funded pensions systems that invest in do-     needing long term
                                             mestic capital markets                                      finance
     Building better capital markets in-
     frastructure: legal and regulatory                                                                • Greater financial
     frameworks, better corporate gov-     • Sound legal and regulatory infrastructure for capital
     ernance for listed companies / ex-
                                                                                                         depth and resili-
                                             markets
     changes, sound payments / secu-       • Reduced risk and shortened time in securities clear-        ence
     rities clearance and settlement         ance and settlement, reduced counterparty risk
     systems                               • Improved minority shareholder protection


                   Assumptions: Macro Economic Stability, Competition, Political Commitment, Other External Factors

                                                               Impacts
                                             Deeper and more robust financial systems,
                                                        Economic growth,
                                                       Reduction of poverty

 Source: IEG.




                                                                     31
EVALUATION SCOPE
52.     The evaluation covers World Bank Group interventions that have supported the devel-
opment of key segments of capital markets during the past 11 years (FY04–14).43 The evaluation
will cover IFC investments and advisory services, and World Bank lending and nonlending AAA,
and for both, includes trust-funded activities. Details of how the relevant portfolio of activities is
identified is described in Attachment 3.

53.      The evaluation will draw upon and coordinate with other IEG ongoing work, notably,
PPARs planned in the area of in housing finance and IFC collective investment vehicles. IEG
has a planned FY15 learning products on housing finance, and the capital markets evaluation will
coordinate with this team in terms of identifying common projects and questions, establishing to
the extent possible a common team and merged questionnaire. Another related and ongoing IEG
task is a pilot IFC PPAR that examines an IFC collective investment fund. It is hoped that this will
also provide case study information on such investment funds for the present evaluation.


Evaluation Design and Evaluability Assessment
EVALUABILITY ISSUES
54.     The proposed evaluation has some unusual features that impact upon its evaluability,
and influence the design of the evaluation. The following paragraphs describe these features
and the next section puts forward proposals for how they may be accommodated in the design
of the evaluation.

55.     Strategies for interventions in capital markets reform are found less in country strate-
gies than in FSAP documents or financial sector strategies. Country strategies do not typically
discuss unified overall programs for strengthening a country’s capital markets. Sometimes, ele-
ments of capital markets development are embedded in a broader financial sector strategy.
Certain areas of capital market support, such as housing finance, or pension reform, may be men-
tioned in contexts other than capital markets development. In many cases, depending on its time-
liness, FSAP documents provide the core point of reference for support to capital market devel-
opment in any given country. Follow up work undertaken for the implementation of the FSAP’s
findings and recommendations may also be financed outside the country department Bank
budget, due to reliance on trust funds such as FIRST, or ESMID.




43Some segments of capital market infrastructure are omitted, e.g., money markets, bankruptcy and
failure resolution, corporate government in entities other than private corporations (e.g. state enterprises
or banks), etc.

                                                     32
56.     Coupled with the extreme heterogeneity of WBG areas of intervention needed for the
building of capital markets, each area of intervention is associated with a high level of special-
ization. Both within the WBG, as well as among external consultants, these are considered spe-
cialized skills, and very different areas of knowledge. Thus, the development of government se-
curities markets is not related to the development of insurance, pensions or housing finance (each
a specialized area in itself). These areas are again distinct from corporate governance or payments
systems reform. Even more diverse are the areas relevant to the IFC elements such as venture
capital or private equity funds – and the treatment of Treasury bond issues is again different from
operational interventions. Implications are that highly specialized skill sets are needed to evalu-
ate each segment of capital market support. Persons knowledgeable in one of the abovemen-
tioned areas may well have limited knowledge of the others. This would impact upon the number
of specialists required to support the evaluation, and its costs. It also implies that single person
field visits would not easily be able to cover the full spectrum of issues, but would clearly be
better able to focus on their individual areas of expertise.

57.     Further challenges in evaluability are the high proportion of WBG operational inter-
ventions – around half to three fourths - that have taken the form of advisory services or AAA.
Of the 1071 interventions identified, 563 take the form of AS / AAA. But given that the numbers
of lending projects in the portfolio are heavily driven by the 295 IFC funds, netting out such funds,
three quarters of the remaining relevant portfolio (563 out of 776 interventions) consists of advi-
sory services. The difficulty for the evaluation stems from the fact that this implies an even more
limited amount of evaluative material, or even an IEG /WB agreed evaluative approach. As re-
gards IFC advisory services in the review portfolio, 21 of the 87, or around a quarter, have IEG
evaluation notes. 44 There is no evaluative coverage of the large body of 476 WB AAA, due to the
lack of any recognized vehicles for such evaluation between the WB and IEG, at least during the
period under coverage.

58.    Even on the investments and lending side, there is a paucity of microlevel evaluative
material. As illustrated in Box 6, roughly a tenth of the IFC projects evaluated have IEG validated
reviews.45 Out of 421 IFC investment projects in the included portfolio, 58 have XPSRs/PESs (self-


44 Evaluations of IFC AS only cover completed projects that were approved after January 2006 on a
sample basis. Out of 87 projects in the review portfolio, 20 were active projects in portfolio and 19 were
approved before January 2006, thus were excluded from evaluation sampling by design. Thus, though
IEG ratings are only available for 21 IFC AS in the portfolio, about 60% of the projects eligible for
evaluation have been reviewed by IEG when including the six projects not yet finalized.
45 IEG only reviews IFC investments they deem as “mature”, which generally occurs five years after

commitment, but can take longer. 219 of the 421 IFC investments in the portfolio were committed in fiscal
year 2010 or later, thus have not been evaluated by IEG at this point. Further, IEG does not review follow
on investments and excludes certain other types of projects including those aimed at product
development. Thus, only 161 of these projects met the criteria for evaluation. Of these, 58 have
XPSRs/PESs (34 percent), though only 40 of the 58 projects have completed IEG EvNotes and thus have
recognized ratings.

                                                   33
evaluation), though only 40 of the 58 projects have been reviewed by IEG and have IEG EvNotes.
On the WB side, 87 projects are included in the portfolio, of which 67 are closed and just over half
(47) have an IEG validated ICR review. This implies that the evaluation will have to largely rely
on its own evaluative assessments based on project documents and other sources.

59.      Another complex feature of the present evaluation is that it is difficult to limit its scope
to targeted or ‘direct’ interventions alone. This is because a number of activities undertaken by
the WBG that support the development of capital markets provide indirect, or secondary, support
to this objective. Yet, they are critical pillars of the development of such markets. Examples are,
Treasury issues of local currency bonds, especially those issued in domestic markets, as opposed
to offshore issues. Although primarily for funding purposes, they (especially the latter group)
can have an important ancillary impact on local capital market development, as is well recognized
by WBG and other IFIs. Most IFC investments (such as the large number of private equity funds,
or even the investment activities that used securitization / guarantees, had capital market
development at best as a secondary objective, if at all explicit. Similarly, an intervention in the
area of pensions or insurance may have the primary objective of providing old age security or
helping manage risk, yet strengthening the fundamental features of pensions or insurance activ-
ities also has the effect of helping to support the accumulation of funds for capital markets invest-
ments. This implies also that for some interventions (e.g., IFC’s funds or investments) even to the
extent that existing evaluative material is available, it will not typically address results achieved
in capital markets development.

60.     A related issue is the extent to which upstream or downstream activities are included
within the scope of the present evaluation. Supporting capital market development is a
continuum, and a project to support for example the development of mortgage liquidity facilities
is a precursor to the development of tradable asset-backed securities. Better corporate governance
eventually encourages small investors in stock markets, yet the full spectrum of due diligence of
corporate governance for individual firms at IFC is of only limited relevance to overall capital
market development.

61.     Finally, the evaluability of the programs outlined above will be a challenge in terms of
mapping outcomes, due to the small marginal size of WBG interventions, in most markets.
There is greater likelihood of achieving success in mapping outputs of various efforts, as
opposed to outcomes. Efforts will be made nevertheless to review market impact at least in asso-
ciation with WBG activity, even if attribution remains difficult.

EVALUATION METHODS - REFLECTING PROPOSED MITIGATIONS TO SPECIAL CHALLENGES
62.     The proposed evaluation design and method embeds ways to try to address the above
issues. In the following section, the IEG team first addresses the specific issues raised above, and
next, details the broader aspects of the evaluation design.


                                                 34
63.     In addition to country strategies, given the prominent role of the FSAPs and in some
cases, country-level financial sector strategies, in setting the capital market support agenda,
such documents will also be used as a starting point for the assessment of WB policy based
and advisory interventions in relevant core capital markets areas. Thus both country strategies
and CASs, as well as FSAP diagnostics and financial sector strategies will be taken as key sources
of strategy. When available, FSAPs will be a core point of reference on the initial diagnostics and
road map, as they contain rich analysis and specific recommendations of the needs going forward
for capital market development, prioritized against the backdrop of overall financial sector de-
velopment. However, FSAPs will not provide a point of reference for IFC’s private sector
interventions in specific countries. IFC’s overall strategic roadmap can be a point of reference, as
well as any available individual regional or sector specific strategies.

64.      Given the high level of heterogeneity and specialization, IEG will undertake thematic,
rather than country-based, portfolio desk reviews.46 Desk-based sector / theme portfolio re-
views will be supplemented where possible with TTL interviews, as well as phone based client
interviews if possible. They will be undertaken by a sector specialist, working in close conjunction
with Washington-based analysts/ IEG team capital markets staff. Such specialized financial sec-
tor skills have resource implications, as discussed further below. Given the large overall number
of projects, IEG will adopt a cluster approach to the selection of projects for desk review, follow-
ing recommended good practice for advisory work in particular, first selecting those in countries
with large clusters in a given area, and large overall capital market interventions. IEG also takes
into account the heterogeneity across thematic areas both in terms of the numbers of projects
overall, and the patterns of distribution of thematic interventions across countries. While overall,
there is a high level of country concentration in WBG capital market work, and in some sectors,
a relatively small number of countries account for the majority of the work (e.g., IFC private eq-
uity, bond market development and housing finance), in contrast, in areas such as pensions and
payment systems, the portfolio is more scattered across a wide range of countries.47 To accommo-
date this, and depending upon the numbers of available interventions, the review portfolio in-
cludes WBG interventions across 64 countries, with sample size varying across each segment, to
ensure representative clustering, and reviewing all projects in some segments where the number
of observations are limited.

65.     A further challenge in the selection of interventions for review is the relatively high
proportion that are regionally focused or globally focused, as opposed to country focused, in
some segments of the portfolio. These include, in particular, IFC’s private equity funds, as well
as, on the WB side, areas such as bond markets, housing finance, and insurance. In some seg-
ments, such as IFC’s private equity funds, a comprehensive approach will be taken, and all funds

46 Additionally a number of projects (around 26 percent) are not country based, but rather, regionally or
globally focused – a further reason for a strong thematic focus.
47 Around two thirds of all country-focused projects reviewed were in a handful of 25 countries over the

sample period (see Attachments 4 and 5).

                                                    35
will be included, as the desk-based analysis is expected to rest largely on systematic analysis of
IFC’s collective investment database. In other segments, as regards regional interventions, a sam-
ple will be drawn from each region, with oversampling of those regions that have had a larger
number of interventions. IEG has also invited WBG management to help identify interventions
of greater or lesser relevance from the perspective of capital market development. In terms of
global interventions (typically AAA/ AS, or contributions to international fora), efforts will be
made to cover all relevant interventions.

66.    The countries that will be drawn upon for the desk-based review include all income
groups, though the lower and upper middle income countries account for the majority (Table
3). Only nine of these countries are included in the G20 and belong to the Financial Stability
Board. Thus the Bank (and the IEG portfolio examined, by extension), reflects the position of a
large number of non-G20 countries in the area of capital market development.

Table 3 Desk Review Portfolio by Country Income Level (64 countries)
     Country        IFC AS         IFC       WB AAA         WB          Total        % Total 
     Groups                      Invest‐                  Lending 
                                  ment 
 High Income              7             23          26           2            58        8% 
 Upper Middle            24            131         121          30           306       45% 
 Lower Middle            27             98         115          28           268       39% 
 Low Income               2             10          32           7            51        7% 
  Total                  58            259         289          65           671       100% 
Source: IEG

67.      IEG also reviewed the extent to which the desk review portfolio included countries at
different levels of financial market maturity and ‘readiness’, to see whether a sampling strat-
egy could be built around this. As shown in Figure 4, there is a very high proportion of countries
with relatively shallow financial markets, whether in terms of credit and banking systems, or
equity capital mark indicators. This ‘clustering’ at one end of the maturity spectrum implies that
it is difficult to use as a basis for sampling.48 Nevertheless, information on the level of financial
market maturity will guide the reviews, to see whether WBG advice was suitably tailored to, and
appropriately sequenced with, the stage of market maturity.




48There is also a data issue in terms of mapping maturity, as not all countries have all the relevant
statistics, especially some key capital market areas, such as domestic bonds.

                                                     36
 Figure 4 Financial System Maturity: Desk Portfolio Review Countries
                                         150
                                                                                                                           South Africa

                                                                                                     Thailand
                                                                              China
           Financial Market Indicator:




                                         100
                 Credit/GDP (%)




                                                                    Lebanon


                                                                                 Morocco
                                                                                                                  Jordan
                                                              UAE
                                                   Hungary                            Brazil
                                                   Namibia
                                          50
                                   Costa Rica
                                                          Bangladesh         Russia           India
                                                                                         Colombia
                                       FYR Macedonia Romania Oman
                                              Kazakhstan        El Salvador
                                                                Kenya                Pakistan
                                                                        Peru                        Philippines
                                                      Sri Lanka                  Trinidad & Tobago
                                   Uruguay                          Mexico     Jamaica
                                      Tanzania
                                           Ghana          Zambia
                                              Nigeria

                                          0
                                               0                     50                100               150                              200
                                                             Capital Market Indicator: Market Capitalization/GDP (%)

 Source: IEG
 Note: Based on 34 countries in the list of portfolio review countries for which both pairs of data are
 available. Indicators are averages of three years’ data from 2010 to 2012.


68.     In addition to sector desk reviews, five country case studies will also be undertaken,
selected from the countries above, but with additional purposive elements. Such additional
purposive elements include regional balance (each country in a different WBG region); a signifi-
cant capital markets portfolio that reflects different types of interventions (different leading sec-
tors, and including both the WB and IFC, and both lending / investment as well as AAA and
advisory work); and an inclusion of countries along different segments of the income scale as
well as financial market maturity. In the case of the present evaluation, some questions relevant
to outcomes can only be answered by talking to market participants in the field, rather than
from desk review. Efforts will be made to ensure that country field visits will supplement desk
reviews through the provision of context-specific information, including synergies between dif-
ferent interventions, and shed light on the nature of interaction of WBG with governments, do-
nors, key stakeholders and beneficiaries. Country field visits will utilize a common protocol for
their questions, and their subsequent analysis. They will provide context-specific information
on whether and how interventions have worked or failed to work and how they responded to
country constraints and conditions. In particularly they will help to understand whether and
how the combination of WBG activities in a country have worked or failed to work. Also by
identifying country patterns that may exist between intervention types and results, the sum of


                                                                                                   37
learning from multiple case studies is expected to be greater than the learning from each coun-
try.

69.    Within the thematic context IEG will develop sector-specific indicators to capture what
constitutes success for the various segments of capital market supporting interventions. The
assessment criteria (see Results Chain in Figure 3) will be applied using indicators and perfor-
mance standards / benchmarks that are tailored to each segment. This again is a task requiring
a high degree of specialization as well as a high number of specific questionnaires’ preparation
and design for each segment. Although several IEG evaluations have had to devise multiple ques-
tionnaires for individual thematic areas, in this case at least 6 to 10 such specialized thematic
questionnaires will be needed.

70.     As regards the high proportion of non-lending activities, the team will build upon the
approaches and guidance used for other recent IEG evaluations, as well as a recent
meta-evaluation of these approaches. The experience of the present evaluation resembles some
other recent large scale IEG evaluations in this regard and the present evaluation will build upon
lessons learned from these evaluations. Prominent among recent evaluations is the IEG evalua-
tion of knowledge based country programs. The Afghanistan Country Program Evaluation and
the Procurement evaluation also faced similar challenges. Several best practices have emerged
from these experiences, and the present evaluation will build upon these methods.49 These have
included for example the contextualization and clustering of the evaluation of interventions,
which the references to FSAPs, and the selection of most active countries, will provide. Other
good practices where available are the provision of external benchmarks for performance.50 In the
capital markets area, such benchmarks exist for certain areas of activity, e.g., for bond markets,
there is the joint IMF / WB / OECD tool for diagnostic work (April 2013) which could provide
the basis for a yardstick; in the area of corporate governance, there are the OECD Corporate Gov-
ernance principles, as well as the WB’s Reports on the Observance of Standards and Code
(ROSCs) for corporate governance, and the IFC Manual for corporate governance at the firm level,
etc. The evaluation will also try to make use of the proposed IFC standard methodology for the
evaluation of Advisory Services. Finally, to the extent possible, where time series of diagnostic
assessments and recommendations are available, IEG will develop a ‘chain’ of interventions in a
given country and in a particular area, to evaluate the extent to which diagnosed difficulties were
translated into follow up actions.

71.     As regards the issue that the activities included in the portfolio do not always have
capital market development as a primary objective, IEG proposes a multi-pronged approach.
From the point of view of selecting a relevant portfolio, the team undertook quick reviews of


49As discussed in Elliot, Victoria (2014) (Mimeo for IEG).
50As in the recent IEG Procurement Evaluation, where the OECD Methodology for the Assessment of
Procurement Systems (MAPS) was used as a benchmark.

                                                38
identified interventions in consultation and also consulted extensively with sector staff, to iden-
tify those interventions that were the most relevant. From an evaluative perspective, IEG’s
reliance on its own purposely constructed questionnaires, which can tease out such questions,
will help to address. Such issues will be even more challenging in the case of interventions that
are non-operational, such as Treasury local currency issues. Finally, IEG will additionally draw
upon other assessments for an appropriate framework, and on relevant ongoing evaluations.51 A
similar approach is applied to the issue of upstream versus downstream interventions. In all
cases, efforts were made to include those interventions that had a more direct, and more down-
stream, bearing on capital markets reform.

72.     Finally, to try to tease out outcomes and impacts despite the clear issues of attribution,
IEG will examine local market development, over the same interval of time, as WBG interven-
tions. Inferences that are causal will not be made, however, market development can be meas-
ured, and compared to WBG interventions.

73.     Whilst incorporating these additional accommodations, the evaluation questions will
be answered through a combination of well-accepted methodologies. These include (i) a
review of policy and strategy documents at sector, corporate and country levels, drawing upon
relevant FSAPs; (ii) a series of theme- focused portfolio reviews of documents relating to specific
World Bank Group interventions that have provided support for the development of capital mar-
kets, that are segmented by topic and benchmarked, to the extent possible, against accepted prin-
ciples of best practice in each area, under the oversight and guidance of thematic experts; (iii) a
select number of field visits. These field visits will focus on individual segments of the WBG
capital market related portfolio in the selected countries and may not have the characteristics or
coherence of a typical ‘country case study,’ to the extent that there may not be an underlying
overall ‘capital market development’ vision at the country level. Often, relevant interventions
may be embedded in different policy areas (e.g., overall financial system soundness, as the most
directly relevant, but also, debt management, pension reform, or infrastructure development).
The analysis will also make use of (iv) external material for the purpose of benchmarking, e.g.,
data on similar undertakings in other IFIs / MDBs, especially the EBRD, EIB, ADB, and IADB. In
addition, (v), to the extent available, the evaluation will look at evidence on capital market evo-
lution in specific countries using data from BIS, Bloomberg, Datastream, EMPEA and other
sources. To the extent possible, (vi) the analysis will also include meetings / surveys with relevant
TTLs and project staff. Finally, (vii), the analysis will rely heavily on traditional processes of tri-
angulation to ensure that evidence from all sources is reflected in an evaluative finding. The
approach will combine qualitative and quantitative methods.



51E.g., Eloy Garcia and Dalla, I., (2006) for ADB and IDB, and EBRD 2014 (EvD), regarding Treasury
operations. The team will also incorporate information from ongoing IEG evaluations, such as the
Housing Finance Learning Evaluation, and the proposed pioneering PPAR on an IFC private equity fund.

                                                  39
Quality Assurance Process

74.    Both the Approach Paper and the draft final report will be subject to a rigorous peer
review process. The Approach Paper is being peer reviewed, to ensure appropriateness of the
scope of the evaluation, relevance of evaluation questions and issues covered, and adequacy of
methodology. The draft evaluation report will also be reviewed, to ensure the credibility and
impartiality of the findings and usefulness of recommendations. Peer reviewers for the evaluation
include Andrew Sheng, former head of the Hong Kong Securities Commission and the Hong
Kong Monetary Authority; Cesare Calari, former Vice President, Financial Sector, World Bank;
Amedee Prouvost, Director, Chief Risk Office, World Bank, ; Isabelle Laurent, Deputy Treasurer,
EBRD; and Noritaka Akamatsu, Chair, Financial Sector Community of Practice, ADB, and former
WB staff.


Expected Outputs and Dissemination

75.      The primary output of the evaluation will be the report to the Board’s Committee on
Development Effectiveness (CODE), following a process of parallel and regular interaction
with WBG management, as a key stakeholder. During evaluation preparation, the team will
solicit feedback and comments from government and private agencies in client countries, practi-
tioners in the industry and, importantly, other IFIs and MDBs, to improve the evaluation’s ac-
curacy and relevance. Such stakeholder interaction will contribute important information and
qualitative data to supplement data, interviews, case studies, and other research. Ultimately, the
finished evaluation will be published and disseminated both internally and externally, based on
an outreach plan to be prepared in consultation with IEGCS. Apart from internal dissemination,
such a program could include, potentially, donor agencies that have prominently contributed to
funding in this area, including SECO / SIDA, the governments of the Netherlands, Germany and
UK, etc. On the public sector side, other IFIs and MDBs, the BIS, OECD and IMF, are likely to be
keenly interested, together with private sector fora on capital markets. Finally, country clients are
also likely to have an interest, and outreach to such audiences could potentially be organized
through the Bank’s Global Distance Learning network.


Resources: Staffing
76.      Team and Skills Mix. The skills mix required to complete this evaluation includes first of
all, practical, policy, and academic expertise in core areas supporting capital markets develop-
ment, across the very diverse and highly specialized WBG segments of capital markets interven-
tions. It also requires evaluation experience and knowledge of IEG methods and practices; famil-
iarity with the policies, procedures and operations of IFC, MIGA, and the World Bank; and
knowledge of World Bank Group and external information sources.


                                                 40
77.     The evaluation will be prepared by a core team led by Anjali Kumar and Jack Glen (Task
Team leaders), together with Isaac Salem and Keita Miyaki, Houqi Hong, Takatoshi Kamezawa,
Maria Elena Pinglo and Swizen Rubbani. Senior consultants include Hany Assad, Suman Babbar,
Amitava Banerjee, Eric Cruikshank, Ismail Dalla, Jonathan Katz, Pamela Lamoreaux, Ruben Lee,
Chad Leechor, Robert Singletary and Silvina Vatnik. The team has benefitted also from early in-
puts from (especially on Treasury bond issues), as well as from Mari Noelle Lantin Roquiz. In
addition, the team will be supported by relevant experts in selected areas, for example, on bond
market development, supranational issues and Treasury operations, housing, insurance, pen-
sions, capital markets infrastructure including securities clearance and settlement and corporate
governance, and infrastructure finance and real sector support. Relevant persons have been iden-
tified and will be contracted following final agreement on the Approach Paper. Together, this
team would offer substantial knowledge and experience on subject matters, on the respective
institutions of the World Bank Group, as well as on evaluation methodology. The report will be
prepared under the direction of Stoyan Tenev, Manager, IEGPE; and Marvin Taylor-Dormond,
Director, IEGPE.

78.    Timeline and budget. The IEG team will aim for a one-stop review of the draft final report
by September 30, 2015, although this is ambitious. The finalized evaluation will be submitted to
CODE in the second quarter of 2015. The budget for the study is estimated at $1,100,000. Although
somewhat greater than the budget norms for other major IEG sector studies, it is submitted that
the proposed budget is justified, reflecting a range of factors: the expensive dual TTL
arrangement, the several highly specialized areas of work involved, limited availability of in-
house skills on this topic, and the intrinsically high fees for consultants in the financial sector.




                                                41
Attachment 1

References
Acharya, V. V., & Richardson, M. (2009). Causes of the financial crisis. Critical Review, 21(2-3), 195-210.

ADB (Asian Development Bank) (2008). ADB Assistance for Domestic Capital Market Development. ADB Eval-
      uation Study SES: OTH 2008-36. Operation Evaluation Department.

Akhter, S., Liu, Y., & Daly, K. (2010). Cross Country Evidence on the Linkages between Financial Develop-
        ment and Poverty. International Journal of Business and Management, 5(1), P3.

Allen, F. & Gale, D. (2000). Comparing Financial Systems. MIT Press.

Analistas Financieros Internacionales. (2013). Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development in Latin
        America: End of Program Evaluation.

Anderson, P. R., Silva, A. C., & Velandia-Rubiano, A. (2010). Public Debt Management in Emerging Mar-
       ket Economies: Has This Time Been Different? Policy Research Working Paper No. 5399. World
       Bank Publications.

Arcand, M. J. L., Berkes, M. E., & Panizza. (2012). Too Much Finance? IMF Working Paper No. 12/161. In-
       ternational Monetary Fund.

Aylward, A. H., & Glen, J. D. (1999). Primary Securities Markets: Cross Country Findings. IFC Discussion Pa-
      per No. 39. World Bank Publications.

Ayyagari, M., Beck, T., & Hoseini, M. (2013). Finance and Poverty: Evidence from India. Working Paper.

Badev, A., Beck, T., Vado, L., & Walley, S. (2014). Housing Finance Across Countries: New Data and Analysis.
       World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6756. World Bank Publications.

Bakker, M. R., & Gröss, A. (2004). Development of Non-Bank Financial Institutions and Capital Markets in Euro-
        pean Union Accession Countries. World Bank Working Paper No. 28. World Bank Publications.

Barger, T. (1998). Financial Institutions. International Finance Corporation. World Bank Publications.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. (2010). Principles for Enhancing Corporate Governance. Consultative
        Document. Bank of International Settlement.

Beck, T., & Levine, R. (2002). Industry Growth and Capital Allocation: Does Having a Market- or Bank-
         Based System Matter? Journal of Financial Economics, 64(2), 147-180.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., & Levine, R. (2007). Finance, Inequality and the Poor. Journal of Economic
         Growth, 12(1), 27-49.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., & Levine, R. (2010). Financial Institutions and Markets across Countries and
         over Time: The Updated Financial Development and Structure Database. The World Bank Economic
         Review, 24(1), 77-92.




                                                       42
Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Laeven, L., & Levine, R. (2004). Finance, Firm Size, and Growth. Journal of
         Money, Credit and Banking, 40(7), 1379-1405.

Bell, H. A., & Searles, H. (2014). An Analysis of Global HFT Regulation: Motivations, Market Failures, and Alter-
         native Outcomes. Working Paper No. 14-11. Mercatus Center, George Mason University.

Blommestein, H. J. (2002). Debt Management and Government Securities Markets in the 21st Century. OECD
      Publisher.

Blommestein, H. J. (2005). Legal and Regulatory Framework for Developing Government Bond Markets: Sug-
      gested Issues for Discussion. OECD Publisher.

Blommestein, H. J., Harwood, A., Holland, A. (2011). The Future of Debt Markets. OECD Journal: Financial
      Market Trends, 2011(2), 263-281.

Bond, D. L. (2014). Peer Group Discussion on Project Bonds. Presentation at Peer Group Dialogue on Project
       Bonds.

Bordo, M., Eichengreen, B., Klingebiel, D., & Martinez-Peria, M. S. (2001). Is the Crisis Problem Growing
       More Severe? Economic Policy, 16(32), 51-82.

Bossone, B., Cirasino, M., (2001). The Oversight of the Payments Systems: a Framework for the Development and
       Governance of Payment Systems in Emerging Economies. Western Hemisphere Payments and Securi-
       ties Clearance and Settlement Systems Research Series No. 1. World Bank Publications.

Bravo, L. F. (2014). Innovative Structures for Financing Infrastructure Projects in Capital Markets. Presentation
        at Peer Group Dialogue on Project Bonds.

Canuto, O., Silva, A. C., & Garcia-Kilroy, C. (2014). Long-Term Finance in EMEs: Navigating between
       Risks and Policy Choices. World Bank Economic Premise, 152, 1-5.

Caprio, G., & Klingebiel, D. (1996). Bank Insolvencies Cross-country Experience. Policy Research Working
        Paper No. 1620. World Bank Publications.

Caprio, G., Folkerts-Landau, D. F. I., & Lane, T. D. (Eds.). (1994). Building Sound Finance in Emerging Market
        Economies. International Monetary Fund.

Cardenas, V., Michel-Kerjan, E., Turgel, D., & Zelenko, I. (2011). Catastrophe Financing for Governments:
       Learning from the 2009-2012 MultiCat Program in Mexico. OECD Working Papers on Finance, Insur-
       ance, and Private Pensions No. 9. OECD Publisher.

Carmichael, J., & Pomerleano, M. (2002). The Development and Regulation of Non-Bank Financial Institutions.
       World Bank Publications.

Carson, J. W. (2003). Conflicts of Interest in Self-regulation: Can Demutualized Exchanges Successfully
        Manage Them? Policy Research Working Paper No. 3183. World Bank Publications.

Carvajal, A., & Elliott, J. A. (2007). Strengths and Weaknesses in Securities Market Regulation: A Global Analy-
        sis. IMF Working Paper No. 07/259. International Monetary Fund.

Castalia. (2013). IFC Demonstration Effects Study.



                                                       43
Castañeda, P., & Rudolph, H. P. (2010). Portfolio Choice, Minimum Return Guarantees, and Competition
       in Defined Contribution Pension Systems. Evaluating the Financial Performance of Pension Funds, 97.

Chami, R., Fullenkamp, C., & Sharma, S. (2010). A framework for financial market development. Journal of
       Economic Policy Reform, 13(2), 107-135.

Chamlou, N., Iskander, M. R. (1999). Corporate Governance: a Framework for Implementation. World Bank
      Publications.

Cheikhrouhou, H., Rocha, R. R., Rudolph, H. P., & Thorburn, C. (2007). Financial Sector Dimensions of the
       Colombian Pension System. World Bank Working Paper No. 106. World Bank Publications.

Chiquier, L., & Lea, M. J. (Eds.). (2009). Housing Finance Policy in Emerging Markets. World Bank Publica-
       tions.

Chiquier, L., Hassler, O., & Lea, M. J. (2004). Mortgage Securities in Emerging Markets. Policy Research
       Working Paper No. 3370. World Bank Publications.

Čihák, M., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Feyen, E., & Levine, R. (2012). Benchmarking Financial Systems Around
       the World. Policy Research Working Paper No. 6175. World Bank Publications.

Cirasino, M., & Guadamillas, M. (2004). Reforming Payments and Securities Settlement Systems a Key Element
        of Financial Infrastructure. Access Finance No. 2. World Bank Publications.

Claessens, S., Klingebiel, D., & Schmukler, S. L. (2002). The Future of Stock Exchanges in Emerging Econo-
       mies: Evolution and Prospects. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, 2002(1), 167-212.

Claessens, S., Klingebiel, D., & Schmukler, S. L. (2007). Government Bonds in Domestic and Foreign Cur-
       rency: the Role of Institutional and Macroeconomic Factors. Review of International Economics, 15(2),
       370-413.

Clarke, G. R., Xu, L. C., & Zou, H. F. (2006). Finance and Income Inequality: What do the Data Tell
        Us? Southern Economic Journal, 72(3), 578-596.

Committee on Global Financial System (2006) Housing Finance in the Global Financial Market. CGFS Papers
      No. 26. Bank of International Settlement.

Committee on Global Financial System (2007) Financial Stability and Local Currency Bond markets. CGFS Pa-
      pers No. 28. Bank of International Settlement.

Dailami, M., & Hauswald, R. (2003). The Emerging Project Bond Market: Covenant Provisions and Credit
       Spreads. Policy Research Working Paper No. 3095. World Bank Publications.

Dalla, I. (1995). The Emerging Asian Bond Market. World Bank Publications.

Das, U. S., Polan, M., & Papaioannou, M. G. (2008). Strategic Considerations for First-Time Sovereign Bond Is-
        suers. IMF Working Paper No. 08/261. International Monetary Fund.

De La Lastra, I., Guadamillas, M., & Holttinen, E. (2000). Matrix for the Assessment and Recommendations of
       the Securities Clearance and Settlement systems. Western Hemisphere Payments and Securities Clear-
       ance and Settlement Initiative Working Paper No. 1. World Bank Publications.



                                                      44
De la Torre, A., & Schmukler, S. L. (Eds.). (2007). Emerging Capital Markets and Globalization: the Latin Ameri-
        can Experience. World Bank Publications.

De la Torre, A., Gozzi, J. C., & Schmukler, S. L. (2008). Capital Market Development: Whither Latin
        America?. In Financial Markets Volatility and Performance in Emerging Markets, 121-154. University of
        Chicago Press.

De la Torre, A., Ize, A., & Schmukler, S. L. (2011). Financial Development in Latin America and the Caribbean:
        the Road Ahead. World Bank Publications.

De Lis, S. F., Ramis, R. C., Sabater, V. L., Osorio, M. M. E., Papp, P. I., Fernández, E. R., & López, F. J. V.
        (2010). Corporate Governance and Access to Finance. World Savings Banks Institute & European Sav-
        ings Banks Group.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., & Levine, R. (1999). Bank-Based and Market-Based Financial Systems: Cross-Country Com-
      parisons. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2143. World Bank Publications.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., & Levine, R. (Eds.). (2001). Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country
      Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development. MIT press.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., & Maksimovic, V. (2002). Funding Growth in Bank-based and Market-based Financial
      Systems: Evidence from Firm-Level Data. Journal of Financial Economics, 65(3), 337-363.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Feyen, E., & Levine, R. (2012). The Evolving Importance of Banks and Securities Mar-
      kets. Policy Research Working Paper No. 5805. World Bank Publications.

Didier, T., & Schmukler, S. L. (2013). The Financing and Growth of Firms in China and India: Evidence
        from Capital Markets. Journal of International Money and Finance, 39, 111-137.

Didier, T., & Schmukler, S. L. (2014). Financial Development in Asia: Beyond Aggregate Indicators. Policy
        Research Working Paper No. 6761. World Bank Publications.

Didier, T., & Schmukler, S. L. (Eds.). (2013). Emerging issues in financial development: Lessons from Latin
        America. World Bank Publications.

Domowitz, I., Glen, J. D., & Madhavan, A. (1997). Market Segmentation and Stock Prices: Evidence from
     an Emerging Market. The Journal of Finance, 52(3), 1059-1085.

Domowitz, I., Glen, J. D., & Madhavan, A. (1998). International Cross‐Listing and Order Flow Migration:
     Evidence from an Emerging Market. The Journal of Finance, 53(6), 2001-2027.

Dorfman, M., & Palacios, R. (2012). World Bank Support for Pensions and Social Security. Discussion Paper
      No. 1208. World Bank Publications.

Easterly, W., Islam, R., & Stiglitz, J. E. (2001, August). Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth Volatility.
        In Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, 191-211.

EBRD (European Bank for Reconstruction and Development), IMF (International Monetary Fund), OECD
       (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development), & World Bank (2013). Report on Lo-
       cal Currency Bond Markets - A Diagnostic Framework. International Monetary Fund.




                                                       45
EBRD (2013). Local Currency Lending and Borrowing 2000 -2010. EvD Special Study. EBRD.

Effron, L., Elliot, V., Fostvedt, N. (2011). FIRST Evaluation: Phase I. World Bank.

EIB (European Investment Bank) (2012). An Outline Guide to Project Bonds Credit Enhancement and the Project
        Bond Initiative. EIB.

El Daher, S. (1997). Municipal Bond Markets: Prospects for Developing Countries. Infrastructure Note, FM-8b.
       World Bank Publications.

Elliott, J. E. (2002). Demutualization of Securities Exchanges: a Regulatory Perspective. IMF Working Paper No.
          02/119. International Monetary Fund.

Elliott, V. (2014, Draft). IEG evaluation of AAA: Recent Experience and Next Steps. Mimeograph.

Endo, T. (2008). Broadening the Offering Choice of Corporate Bonds in Emerging Markets: Cost-Effective Access to
        Debt Capital. Policy Research Working Paper No. 4655. World Bank Publications.

Endo, T. (2013). The Development of Government Bond Markets in Emerging Economies: Market Structure Mat-
        ters. Working Paper.

Espinosa-Vega, M. A., & Zanforlin, L. (2008). Housing Finance and Mortgage-Backed Securities in Mexico. IMF
       Working Paper No. 08/105. International Monetary Fund.

Ezike, J. E., & Ogege, S. (2012). The Nigerian Capital Market and Economic Development: a Critical Ap-
         praisal. International Business Research, 5(8), 228-236.

Fink, G., Haiss, P., & Hristoforova, S. (2003). Bond Markets and Economic Growth. IEF Working Paper No. 49.
        Research Institute of European Affairs.

Fink, G., Haiss, P., & Hristoforova, S. (2006). Credit, Bonds, Stocks and Growth in Seven Large Economies. Eu-
        ropainstitut Working Paper No. 70.

Freire, M., & Petersen, J. E. (Eds.). (2004). Subnational Capital Markets in Developing Countries: from Theory to
         Practice. World Bank Publications.

Fremond, O., & Capaul, M. (2002). The State of Corporate Governance: Experience from Country Assess-
      ments. Policy Research Working Paper No. 2858. World Bank Publications.

G20 (2013). Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and Development. Umbrella Paper.

G20 High-Level Panel on Infrastructure (2011). Recommendations to G20.

G20 (2011). G20 Action Plan to Support the Development of Local Currency Bond Markets.

G8 (2007). G8 Action Plan for Developing Local Bond Markets in Emerging Market Economies and Developing
        Countries.

Gadinis, S. (2013). The Financial Stability Board: The New Politics of International Financial Regulation.
        Texas International Law Journal, 48(2), 157-175.




                                                       46
Galbraith, James (2014). The End of Normal: The Great Crisis and the Future of Growth. Simon & Schuster.

Gallego, F., & Loayza, N. (2001). Financial Structure in Chile: Macroeconomic Developments and Microe-
        conomic Effects. In Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Comparison of Banks,
        Markets, and Development, 299-346. MIT Press.

Garcia, E., & Dalla, I. (2005). The Role of Supranational Institutions in Local Currency Bond Markets: The
        Experience of the ADB and the IDB. Infrastructure and Financial Markets Review, 11(1). Inter-Ameri-
        can Development Bank.

Garcia-Kilroy, C., & Silva, A. C. (2011). Reforming Government Debt Markets in MENA. Policy Research
        Working Paper No. 5611. World Bank Publications.

Garcia-Kilroy. (2014, Draft). Infrastructure Project Bonds: Policy Challenges for Domestic Fixed Income Markets
        in EMEs. Mimeograph.

Genesis Analytics. (2013). Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development in Africa: End of Program Eval-
        uation.

Gerschenkron, A. (1962). Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective. Harvard University Press.

Glen, J. D. (1994). An Introduction to the Microstructure of Emerging Markets. IFC Discussion Paper No. 24.
         World Bank Publications.

Global Capital. (2014). Green bonds: Getting Investors Out of Bed for the Climate.

Gozzi, J. C., Levine, R., Peria, M. S. M., & Schmukler, S. L. (2012). How Firms Use Domestic and International
         Corporate Bond Markets. Policy Research Working Paper No. 6209. World Bank Publications.

Gray, R. D., Hoskote, M., Kumar, A., S., & Ruster, J., von Klaudy, S. (1997). Mobilizing Domestic Capital
        Markets for Infrastructure Financing. International experience and Lessons for China. World Bank Dis-
        cussion Paper No. 377. World Bank Publications.

Grimminger, A. D., & Di Benedetta, P. (2013). Raising the Bar on Corporate Governance: A Study of Eight Stock
      Exchange Indices. World Bank Publications.

Guadamillas, M., & Keppler, R. (2001). Securities Clearance and Settlement Systems: a Guide to Best Practices.
      Policy Research Working Paper No. 2581. World Bank Publications.

Hafeman, M. (2009). Asset Structure for Insurers. Primer Series on Insurance No. 5. World Bank Publica-
      tions.

Halac, M., Schmukler, S. L., Fernández-Arias, E., & Panizza, U. (2004). Distributional Effects of Crises: the
        Financial Channel. Economía, 5(1), 1-67.

Harwood, A. (Ed.). (2000). Building Local Bond Markets: an Asian Perspective. World Bank Publications.

Harwood, A., & Konidaris, T. (2014). SME Exchanges in Emerging Market Economies: A Stocktaking of Devel-
      opment Practices. Mimeograph.




                                                       47
Harwood, A., & Smith, B. L. (Eds.). (1997). Sequencing?: Financial Strategies for Developing Countries. Brook-
      ings Institution Press.

Harwood, A., Litan, R. E., & Pomerleano, M. (Eds.). (2010). Financial Markets and Development: the Crisis in
      Emerging Markets. Brookings Institution Press.

Hassler, O., & Walley, S. (2012). Mortgage Liquidity Facilities. World Bank Publications.

Helleiner, E. (2012). The Limits of Incrementalism: the G20, the FSB, and the International Regulatory
        Agenda. Journal of Globalization and Development, 2(2).

Herrera-Pol, D. (2013). Emerging Bond Markets: No Longer the Next Frontier. In The Euromoney Interna-
       tional Debt Capital Markets Handbook 2014, 41-46.

Hinz, R. P. (Ed.). (2010). Evaluating the Financial Performance of Pension Funds. World Bank Publications.

Holzmann, R. (2009). Aging Population, Pension Funds, and Financial Markets: Regional Perspectives and Global
      Challenges for Central, Eastern, and Southern Europe. World Bank Publications.

Humphrey, D. B. (1995). Payment Systems: Principles, Practice, and Improvements. World Bank Technical Pa-
     per No.260. World Bank Publications.

IEG (OED, Operations Evaluation Department) (1998). OED Review of Bank Assistance for Financial Sector
       Reform. World Bank Publications.

IEG (Independent Evaluation Group) (2006). Financial Sector Assessment Program: IEG review of the Joint
        World Bank and IMF Initiative. World Bank Publications.

IEG (2006). IEG Review of World Bank Assistance for Financial Sector Reform. World Bank Publications.

IEG (2006). Pension Reform and Development of Pension Systems: an Evaluation of World Bank Assistance. World
        Bank Publications.

IEG (2011). MIGA's Financial Sector Guarantees in a Strategic Context. World Bank Publications.

IFC (International Finance Corporation). (2004). Strategic Directions.

IFC (2008). Securities Markets: Advisory Services - A2F Product. Presentation.

IFC (2010). Corporate Governance Manual Second Edition.

IFC (2010). Local Currency Financing Using Derivatives. Presentation. IFC Treasury.

IFC (2011). Securities Markets: Advisory Services - A2F Product. Presentation.

IFC (2012). Risk Taking: A Corporate Governance Perspective. World Bank Publications.

IFC (2014). Proposed Bond Issuance Program for Local Currency Capital Markets Development in Strategically Im-
        portant Countries.

IFC (2014). Road Map FY15-17: Implementing the World Bank Group Strategy.



                                                      48
IMF (2001). IMF Reviews Experience with the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) and Reaches Conclu-
       sions on Issues Going Forward. International Monetary Fund.

IMF (2003). Guidelines for Public Debt Management. International Monetary Fund.

IMF (2004). Evaluation of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). Issues Paper. International Mone-
       tary Fund.

IMF (2005). Development of Corporate Bond Markets in Emerging Market Countries. In Financial Stability
       Report, 103-141. International Monetary Fund.

IMF (2014). Review of the Financial Sector Assessment Program—Further Adaptation to the Post-Crisis Era. Inter-
       national Monetary Fund.

IMF, & World Bank (2000). Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)—A Review: Lessons from the Pilot and
       Issues Going Forward. International Monetary Fund.

IMF, & World Bank (2001). Progress Report on the Bank-Fund Financial Sector Liaison Committee (FSLC).
       World Bank Publications.

IMF, & World Bank (2003). Financial Sector Assessment Program—Review, Lessons, and Issues Going Forward.
       International Monetary Fund.

IMF, & World Bank (2005). Financial Sector Assessment Program—Review, Lessons, and Issues Going Forward.
       International Monetary Fund.

IMF, & World Bank (2009).The Financial Sector Assessment Program After Ten Years: Experience and Reforms
       for the Next Decade. International Monetary Fund.

Imran, K., & Khalil, S. (2012). Contribution of Financial Development in Poverty Reduction through Indus-
        trial Growth. International Journal of Asian Social Science, 2(5), 567-576.

Iorgova, S., & Ong, L. L. (2008). The Capital Markets of Emerging Europe: Institutions, Instruments and Inves-
        tors. IMF Working Paper No. 08-103. International Monetary Fund.

Jalil, A., & Feridun, M. (2011). Long-Run Relationship Between Income Inequality and Financial Develop-
          ment in China. Journal of the Asia Pacific Economy, 16(2), 202-214.

James, E. (1994). Averting the Old Age Crisis. World Bank Policy Research Report. World Bank Publications.

Jeanneney, S. G., & Kpodar, K. (2011). Financial Development and Poverty Reduction: Can there Be a Ben-
       efit without a Cost?. The Journal of Development Studies, 47(1), 143-163.

Kay, J. (2012). The Kay Review of UK Equity Markets and Long-term Decision Making. European Corporate
         Governance Institute Final Report.

Kim, D. H., & Lin, S. C. (2011). Nonlinearity in the Financial Development–Income Inequality Nexus. Jour-
        nal of Comparative Economics, 39(3), 310-325.

King, R. G., & Levine, R. (1993). Finance, Entrepreneurship and Growth. Journal of monetary Econom-
        ics, 32(3), 513-542.



                                                      49
Knaack, P. (2014). Global Financial Regulatory Reform and Government Networks: Issues of Governance and Cap-
       ture. Paper presented at the FLACSO-ISA Conference.

Kumar, A, & Wilton, D. (1995). The Emerging Asian Bond Market: China. World Bank. June.

Kumar, A., Jun, K., Saunders, A., Selwyn, S., Sun, Y., Vittas, D., Wilton, D. (1995). China's Emerging Capital
       Markets. Financial Publishing Asia Pacific. Financial Times and World Bank.

Kumar, A. (1997). The Regulation of Non-Bank Financial Institutions USA, European Union and Other Countries.
       World Bank Discussion Paper No. 362. World Bank Publications.

Kusuma, K. A., Silva, A. C. (2014). Sukuk Markets: A Proposed Approach for Development. Policy Research
      Working Paper No. 7133. World Bank Publications.

Laeven, L. (2014, Draft). The Development of Local Capital Markets: Rationale and Challenges. Mimeograph.

Lester, R. (2009). Introduction to the Insurance Industry. Primer Series on Insurance No. 1. World Bank Publi-
         cations.

Lester, R. (2014). Insurance and Inclusive Growth. Policy Research Working Paper No. 6943. World Bank
         Publications.

Levine, R. (2002). Bank-Based or Market-Based Financial Systems: Which Is Better?. Journal of Financial In-
        termediation, 11(4), 398-428.

Levine, R. (2005). Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence. Handbook of Economic Growth, 1, 865-934.

Listfield, R., & Montes-Negret, F. (1994). Modernizing Payment Systems in Emerging Economies. Policy Re-
         search Working Paper No. 1336. World Bank Publications.

Litan, R. E. (2003). The Future of Domestic Capital Markets in Developing Countries. Brookings Institution
        Press.

Litan, R. E., Pomerleano, M., & Sundararajan, V. (Eds.). (2002). Financial Sector Governance: the Roles of the
        Public and Private Sectors. Brookings Institution Press.

Loayza, N. V., & Ranciere, R. (2006). Financial development, financial fragility, and growth. Journal of
        Money, Credit and Banking, 1051-1076.

Loladze, T. (2014). Select Country Practices in Primary Market Regulation of Corporate Bonds: Analysis and Im-
       pact of Hybrid Offer Regimes. World Bank Publications.

Merton, R. C., & Bodie, Z. (1995). A Conceptual Framework for Analyzing the Financial Environment. In
       The Global Financial System: A Functional Perspective, 3-31. Harvard Business School Press.

Merton, R. C., & Bodie, Z. (2005). The Design of Financial Systems: towards a Synthesis of Function and
       Structure. Journal of Investment Management, 3(1), 1-23.

Miyajima, K., Mohanty, M. S., & Chan, T. (2014). Emerging Market Local Currency Bonds: Diversification
       and Stability. Emerging Markets Review.




                                                       50
Nenova, T. (2010). Expanding Housing Finance to the Underserved in South Asia: Market Review and Forward
      Agenda. World Bank Publications.

O’Connor, S. (2006). Development of a National Payment System: Some Lessons Learned. Access Finance No. 9.
      World Bank Publications.

Odhiambo, N. M. (2010). Is Financial Development a Spur to Poverty Reduction? Kenya's Experience. Jour-
      nal of Economic Studies, 37(3), 343-353.

OECD (1998). Capital Market Development in Transition Economies: Country Experiences and Policies for the Fu-
      ture. OECD Publisher.

OECD (2004). OECD Principles of Corporate Governance 2004. OECD Publisher.

Opazo, L., Raddatz, C., & Schmukler, S. L. (2014). Institutional investors and long-term investment: evidence
       from Chile. World Bank Publications.

Otker-Robe and Podipiera, Anca Maria (2013) The Social Impact of Financial Crises. Policy Research Paper,
       World Bank

Pagano, M. (1993). Financial markets and growth: an overview. European economic review, 37(2), 613-622.

Palacios, R. J. (1996). Averting the Old-Age Crisis: Technical Annex. Policy Research Working Paper No. 1572.
        World Bank Publications.

Papaioannou, M. G., Das, U. S., Pedras, G., Surti, J., & Ahmed, F. (2010). Managing Public Debt and its Finan-
       cial Stability Implications. International Monetary Fund.

Pargendler, M. (2014). Corporate Governance in Emerging Markets. In Oxford Handbook of Corporate Law
       and Governance. Oxford University Press.

Panizza, U. (2014). Financial Development and Economic Growth: Known Knowns, Known Unknowns,
       and Unknown Unknowns. Revue d'Économie du Développement, 2, 35-65.

Perez-Moreno, S. (2011). Financial Development and Poverty in Developing Countries: a Causal Analy-
       sis. Empirical Economics, 41(1), 57-80.

Piketty, Thomas (2014). Capitalism in the 21st Century. Belknap Press.

Pollner, J. D. (1999). Using Capital Markets to Develop Private Catastrophe Insurance. Viewpoint Note No. 197.
         World Bank Publications.

Raddatz, C., & Schmukler, S. L. (2008). Pension Funds and Capital Market Development: How Much Bang for
       the Buck? Policy Research Working Paper No. 4787. World Bank Publications.

Rajan, R. G., & Zingales, L. (2003). The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial Development in the Twen-
        tieth Century. Journal of Financial Economics, 69(1), 5-50.

Rajan, R.G. and Zingales, L. (2009), Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists. Princeton University Press.




                                                      51
Ratha, D., & Ketkar, S. (2007). Development Finance via Diaspora Bonds. In a Presentation to the ASSA An-
        nual Meetings in Chicago, IL.

Reichelt, H. (2014). Green Bonds Market Tops $20 Billion, Expands to New Issuers, Currencies & Structures. Re-
        trieved at http://blogs.worldbank.org/climatechange/green-bonds-market-tops-20-billion-ex-
        pands-new-issuers-currencies-structures

Rewilak, J. (2013). Finance is Good for the Poor But it Depends Where You Live. Journal of Banking & Fi-
       nance, 37(5), 1451-1459.

Rocha, R. (2011). Financial Access and Stability: a Road Map for the Middle East and North Africa. World Bank
        Publications.

Rojas-Suarez, L. (2014). Towards Strong and Stable Capital Markets in Emerging Market Economies. BIS Papers
        No. 75, 13-20.

Rudolph, H. P., & Rocha, R. R. (2007). Competition and Performance in the Polish Second Pillar. World Bank
      Working Paper No. 107. World Bank Publications.

Sienaert, A. (2012). Foreign Investment in Local Currency Bonds Considerations for Emerging Market Public Debt
        Managers. Policy Research Working Paper No. 6284. World Bank Publications.

Silva, A.C., García-Kilroy, C. (2013).Development of deeper more liquid local currency bond markets. In
         The Euromoney International Debt Capital Markets Handbook 2014, 5-10.

Silva, A.C., Oliveira de Carvalho, L., & Ladeira de Medeiros, O. (2010). Public Debt: the Brazilian Experience.
         World Bank and National Treasury (Brazil).

Sophastienphong, K., Mu, Y., & Saporito, C. (2008). South Asian Bond Markets: Developing Long-Term Finance
       for Growth. World Bank Publications.

Stehm, J. (1996). Clearance and Settlement Systems for Securities: Critical Design Choices in Emerging Market
        Economies. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 321. World Bank Publications.

Stewart, F. (2014). Proving Incentives for Long-Term Investment by Pension Funds The Use of Outcome-Based
        Benchmarks. Policy Research Working Paper No. 6885. World Bank Publication.

USC DPMG (University of Southern California Development Portfolio Management Group) (2014). The
      Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative (FIRST): Phase II Evaluation. World Bank.

Valickova, P., Havranek, T., & Horvath, R. (2014). Financial Development and Economic Growth: A Meta‐
       Analysis. Journal of Economic Surveys.

Van Agtmael, A. (2007). The Emerging Markets century: How a New Breed of World-Class Companies Is Overtak-
       ing the World. Simon and Schuster.

Vitols, S. (2001). The Origins of Bank-Based and Market-Based Financial Systems: Germany, Japan, and the
         United States. In The Origins of Nonliberal Capitalism: Germany and Japan in Comparison, 171-199.

Vittas, D. (1996). Pension Funds and Capital Markets: Investment Regulation, Financial Innovation, and Govern-
         ance. Viewpoint Note No. 71. World Bank Publications.



                                                       52
Vittas, D. (1999). Pension Reform and Capital Market Development:" Feasibility" and" Impact" Precondi-
         tions. World Bank Publications.

Vittas, D. (Eds.). (1992). Financial Regulation: Changing the Rules of the Game. World Bank Development
         Studies. World Bank Publications.

Watanabe, M. (1998). New Directions in Asian Housing Finance: Linking Capital Markets and Housing Finance.
      International Finance Corporation. World Bank Publications.

Wolff-Hamacher, S. (2007). Local Currency Bond Issues by International Financial Institutions. Working Paper
       prepared in connection with CGFS Publications No. 28, Deutsche Bundesbank.

World Bank (2002). Methodology for the Assessment of Securities Clearance and Settlement Systems. Western
       Hemisphere Payments and Securities Clearance and Settlement Initiative Working Paper No. 2.
       World Bank Publications.

World Bank (2006). Developing India’s Corporate Bond Market. World Bank Publications.

World Bank (2007). Developing the Domestic Government Debt Market: From Diagnostics to Reform Implementa-
       tion. World Bank Publications.

World Bank (2007). Managing Public Debt: From Diagnostics to Reform Implementation. World Bank Publica-
       tions.

World Bank (2012). Infrastructure Strategy Update FY2012-2015: Transformation through Infrastructure.

World Bank (2012). Rethinking the Role of the State in Finance. Global Financial Development Report 2013.

World Bank (2013). Multi-Country ECA Mortgage Funding Platform: International Mortgage Securitization
       Company, IMSCO. White Paper, Prepared under the Russia Financial Sector TA / AAA Program.
       World Bank.

World Bank (2013). Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC), Thailand. World Bank Publica-
       tions.

World Bank (2013). Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC), Vietnam. World Bank Publica-
       tions.

WB (2013). Share Offerings of State-Owned Enterprises on Equity Markets: A Review of Recent Emerging
       Market Trends. World Bank Publications.

World Bank (2014). A Multipronged Integrated Approach to the Development of Securities Markets: Deep Dive.

World Bank (2014). Global Financial Development Report 2015: Long-Term Finance Concept Note. Approach
       Note. Mimeograph.

World Bank (2014). Pension Funds and Private Equity Unlocking Africa’s Potential. World Bank Publications.

World Bank (2014). Request for Fund for Global Infrastructure Facility. Board Paper.




                                                      53
World Bank (2014). The Financial Sector Assessment Program: Addressing the Needs of Emerging Markets and
       Developing Economies (EMDEs). World Bank Publications.

World Bank (2015). Financial Developing Report. Development Economics (DEC) Vice Presidency. World
       Bank Publications.

World Bank, & IMF (2001). Developing Government Bond Markets: A Handbook. World Bank Publications.

Yermo, J. (2004). Pension Reform and Capital Market Development: Background Paper for Regional Study on So-
       cial Security Reform. World Bank.




                                                     54
Attachment 2

Evaluation Design Matrix
 Evaluation questions     Information      Information        Data              Data analysis          Limitations
                          required         sources            collection        methods
                                                              methods
 Overarching questions
     1. Has the WBG been relevant, effective and efficient in supporting the development of client countries’
         domestic capital markets, and in using capital market instruments in client countries to support real sector
         development?
 Specific Questions - Relevance of Objectives
 1. Have WBG capital market interventions been relevant to client countries?

 a.   Were the inter-     Information      Country            Downloading       Content / text         CAS / CASCR may
      ventions based      on strategic     Assistance         relevant          analysis, to assess    not reflect all
      on their Country    fit between      Strategies         documents         the extent to which    activities especially
      Assistance          capital          (CAS), their       from WBG /        capital markets        as some may have
      Strategies?         markets          Completion         IEGCC             interventions          been undertaken
                          activities and   Reports            databases.        reflected priority     (outside the Bank
                          country          (CASCR)                              issues according to    budget). CAS may
                          development      (embedded in                         the relevant           have only
                          priorities.      follow up                            documents.             generalized
                                           CASs), and                                                  descriptions of overall
                                           IEG Reviews                                                 financial sector
                                           (CASCR-Rs)                                                  development
                                                                                                       strategies as
                                                                                                       opposed to specific
                                                                                                       elements of capital
                                                                                                       markets strategies.
 b.   Were the inter-     Information      FSAPs, FSAP        Access to         Content and text       Infrequency of
      ventions based      on capital       follow-ups,        FSAP              analysis to assess     FSAPs, non-
      on financial sec-   market           country-level      database and      the extent to which    availability for some
      tor knowledge,      development      financial sector   review of its     capital markets        countries. Ad hoc
      diagnostics and     and              strategies         reports,          interventions          nature of financial
      strategies?         sequencing       outside the        Access to         reflected identified   sector strategies. Ad
                          in the           FSAP program.      country           priority issues        hoc nature of
                          context of an    Financial sector   financial         according to the       research on some
                          overall          strategies         strategies /      FSAP/financial         topics only.
                          financial        where              relevant          sector strategy/
                          sector           available.         research from     relevant research.
                          development      Relevant           internal and
                          strategy.        research.          external online
                                                              sources.




                                                              55
Evaluation questions     Information      Information       Data               Data analysis          Limitations
                         required         sources           collection         methods
                                                            methods
Relevance of Design
2. To what extend did the intervention focus on the right issues and provide appropriate and adequate solutions to clients’
    needs?
a. Did interven-        Time               Documents          Download of WBG Content /              Only partial
    tions build on      sequences of       related to the     documents and        Sequence          availability of
    prior achieve-      diagnosis and      specific project databases,             analysis and      documents.
    ments and was       outcomes           or program,        supplementary        comparison        Incomplete time
    support sus-                           FSAP, financial interviews with         over time         sequences.
    tained over                            sector             TTLs / country       between
    time?                                  strategies, as     clients where        successive
                                           well as            possible             points of
                                           documentation especially in the         interventions
                                           on specialized context of field
                                           diagnosis tools visits.
                                           (e.g. corporate
                                           governance:
                                           ROSCs) where
                                           available,
                                           project/
                                           program
                                           documents,
                                           advisory
                                           works, IFC
                                           Board
                                           documents for
                                           its
                                           investments.
b. Was support ap- Interlinkages           Documents          Review of relevant Content             Details on wider
    propriately         between the        related to the     documents;           analysis, focus context and linkages
    linked to other     intervention       specific project interviews with        on relationship not always available
    areas of the fi-    undertaken         or program, AS TTLs / country           between           if interventions are
    nancial sector?     and other          / AAA - FSAP, clients where             different areas   specifically focused
                        areas of           financial sector possible.              of financial      on individual
                        financial sector strategies, as                            sector reform     segments.
                        reform             well as                                 (e.g., banking /
                        proposed as        documentation                           capital markets
                        priority.          on specialized                          reform, and
                                           diagnosis tools                         linkages
                                           (e.g. corporate                         between e.g.
                                           governance:                             corporate and
                                           ROSCs) where                            government
                                           available,                              bond market
                                           project/                                development,
                                           program                                 primary vs
                                           documents,                              secondary
                                           advisory                                market
                                           works, IFC                              development
                                           Board                                   for housing,
                                           documents for                           etc.).
                                           its
                                           investments.



                                                            56
Evaluation questions     Information     Information        Data             Data analysis           Limitations
                         required        sources            collection       methods
                                                            methods
c.   Did the WBG en-     Level of          Project /         Review of relevant Content              Information not
     gage strategi-      engagement        program / AS / documents;             analysis and        always available
     cally with the      and response      AAA               interviews with     analysis of         especially if elapsed
     right country       among country     documents,        TTLs / country      survey              time is long.
     counterparts?       counterparts      ISRs and back clients where           information
                                           to office         possible.           with TTLs to
                                           memos if                              the extent
                                           available,                            collected.
                                           interviews with
                                           TTLs and with
                                           country staff in
                                           the context of
                                           field visits.
Effectiveness:
3. To what extent did WBG intervention achieve their objectives, primary or secondary, relevant to capital market
     development?
a. What was            Outcomes of       Variety of          Downloading and      Data analysis      Mixed availability.
     achieved in       WBG actions       sources:            analysis of          over cross
     terms of domes-                     analysis of         relevant data.       section and
     tic capital mar-                    market data on Review of any             time series.
     ket develop-                        local capital       available EvNotes, Analysis of TTL
     ment, relative to                   markets in          IEG RRs, etc.        interview data.
     WBG and client                      terms of the
     objectives and                      depth and
     relevant finan-                     evolution
     cial sector re-                     following WBG
     search, diagnos-                    interventions –
     tics and                            adjusted for
     strategies?                         overall market
                                         growth.
b. What was            Market            WBG data –          Downloads of         Content            Mixed availability,
     achieved in the   evolution         supervision         internally and       analysis, data     limited number of
     use of capital    following WBG and completion externally                    analysis using     case study countries.
     market instru-    interventions.    reports,            available data.      methods such
     ments for fi-                       subsequent          TTL interviews,      as difference-
     nancing real                        diagnostics,        interviews with      in-difference,
     sector develop-                     externally          other market         etc. Analysis of
     ment, in terms of                   conducted           participants. Site   questionnaires
     sustained,                          evaluations,        visits and country   and field visit
     demonstrative                       external            case studies         surveys.
     or catalytic ef-                    databases and
     fects?                              information
                                         sources e.g.
                                         Bloomberg etc.
                                         Field visits




                                                           57
Evaluation questions      Information     Information        Data              Data analysis           Limitations
                          required        sources            collection        methods
                                                             methods
Work Quality and Organizational Efficiency
4. Was the WBG capital market work undertaken effectively in terms of internal and external quality control and
   coordination?
a. Has the WBG        Review of          WBG staff and Downloading of            Content             Data collection is
   met internal       project /          clients           relevant              analysis of         difficult especially
   work quality       program                              documents,            documents,          with regard to getting
   standards in       documents,                           Interviews and        field visit data    enough feedback for
   preparation, im- implementation                         surveys               and                 representative
   plementation       supervision                                                questionnaire       sampling. Limited
   and supervision, reports,                                                     responses           number of country
   and leveraged      completion                                                                     case studies.
   synergies          reports as
   through coordi-    available, TTL
   nation?            interviews and
                      surveys, client
                      interview,
                      interviews with
                      management
                      of relevant
                      departments.
                      Field visit data.
b. Were activities    Review of          Donor             Collection of         Text analysis,      Donor feedback not
   consistent /       donor priorities documents,          relevant reports      category            available for all policy
   complementary      and donor          project reviews and donor               building,           areas
   with donor en-     funding            undertaken by interviews
   gagement and                          ESMID,
   was funding                           FIRST, etc.
   consistently
   available?
c. Were WBG mon- Information on Project /                  Review of             Review of           Early interventions
   itoring and eval- the results         program AS /      documents and         results             had no results
   uation standards frameworks           AAA               TTL discussions       frameworks to       frameworks and
   adequate for ac- and monitoring documents.                                    assess good         current ones still do
   countability and and evaluation Completion                                    practice, review not for e.g. WB AAA.
   learning and has arrangements         reports where                           of data on          Cannot compare
   WBG manage-        for the            available.                              results             earlier and later
   ment used the      intervention, on External                                  achieved, and       results frameworks
   resulting infor-   the information reviews.                                   review of use       as expectations have
   mation to im-      collected, and     Discussions                             of such data.       changed over time.
   prove perfor-      the use made       with TTLs on                                                Limited information
   mance?             of such            use of such                                                 on use of results
                      information        information.                                                data.




                                                             58
Attachment 3

Portfolio Selection: WB and IFC Lending and Analytic and Advisory Services
In determining relevant World Bank Group interventions for the support of capital market
development, the present evaluation looks across World Bank and IFC investments, advisory
work (Advisory Services for the IFC – AS, and Analytical and Advisory Activities for the World
Bank – AAA) , and treasury issuance. The portfolio review however does not include treasury
issuance, which refers to the funding side of WBG activities, and does not constitute a part of
WBG lending or advisory activities.

The identification of a relevant portfolio focuses on projects approved between fiscal year 2004
and fiscal year 2014, and the evaluation presents data by approval year. For IFC investments only,
data are presented by the commitment year. It includes both direct and indirect interventions to
support capital market development, where direct interventions refers to activities aimed at sup-
porting the strengthening of capital markets instruments as a part of countries’ financial sector
development (bonds, equities and asset backed securities), investors (insurance or pension funds)
and capital markets infrastructure (payments and securities clearance and settlement, and the
strengthening of corporate governance). It also includes projects in the real sector that indirectly
support client countries’ capital market development through the use of, or support for the use
of, capital markets instruments (e.g., through the issue or purchase of corporate bonds or provi-
sion of guarantees for bonds, asset backed securities, etc.). The review leaves out projects that
were terminated, dropped, or are still in the pipeline.

The identification of relevant projects was uniquely complex from certain perspectives. A first
reason is the heterogeneity of products relevant to capital market development – e.g., insurance,
pensions, payments systems or housing finance projects, are intrinsically very different in terms
of how they contribute to capital market development. This limited the usefulness of global cri-
teria, such as global word searches, as relevant words differed by product segment. A second
major complication was conceptual – the identified segments of projects in areas such as pay-
ments systems, insurance, pensions, housing etc., and much of IFC lending rarely had capital
market development as a primary objective, although it was often a secondary or ancillary objec-
tive, to varying degrees. For example, the primary objective of Bank pension projects generally
relates to old age security, but many seek to establish multi-pillar systems, where the second and
third pillars constitute private funded pools of funds available to support capital markets invest-
ments, and where the sound investment of such funds may be an overall element of the project.
Thus projects have a continuum of involvement in market development, and the selection of a
cut-off point for inclusion or exclusion involves judgment and is not absolute.

System Information: Sector codes. Due to the difficulty of using a global approach, a starting
point for the screening of relevant projects from the eligible universe began with the use of the

                                                59
Bank and IFC sector classifications available in the Bank’s Business Warehouse (BW) and IFC’s
Management Information System (MIS).52 For IFC, the initial portfolio included projects in the
following sectors: Securities Markets, Housing Finance, Insurance, Collective Investment Vehi-
cles and Distressed Assets (DARP).53 On the WB side, projects with any weighting to the WB
sectors Capital Markets, Housing Finance, or Non-Compulsory Pensions and Insurance were in-
cluded as relevant to capital market development (Table 3.1).

Table 3.1 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Sectors Included in Capital Markets Review
Portfolio

                                                                  Sector                                 Sector
                 Topic                           WB Sector                         IFC Sector
                                                                  Code                                   Code
      Collective Investment Ve-                                            Collective Investment Vehi-   P
      hicles                                                               cles
      Distressed Assets                                                    Distressed Assets             O-FB
      Bond Market Advisory           Capital Markets              FK       Securities Markets            O-I
      Housing                        Housing Finance              FC       Housing Finance               O-E
      Insurance                      Non-Compulsory Pensions      FD       Insurance                     O-J
                                     and Insurance
      Pensions                       Non-Compulsory Pensions      FD       Contractual Savings and       O-JE
                                     and Insurance                         Pensions
      Capital Market Regulation      Capital Markets              FK       Securities Markets            O-I
      or Development


      Payments, clearance, and       Payments, Settlements, and   FG       Market Infrastructure         O-IB
      settlement                     Remittance Systems
Source: IEG analysis.
Notes: Sector codes refer to preceding sectors




52The World Bank and IFC not only have different sector codes but also, different underlying systems for
project classification. IFC uses a nested approach in which each project has a single sector classification
with three levels of specificity. For example, a project related to asset backed securities in Colombia
would have the primary sector classification Finance & Insurance (‘O’) a secondary sector classification,
within that, of Housing Finance (‘O-E’), and a tertiary sector, also within that, of Secondary Mortgage
Institutions (‘O-E-B’). In contrast, WB projects are assigned up to five, separate sector classifications, not
nested, which can be assigned any percentage weights by relevance, that add up to 100 percent. One
major implication is that WB projects can be cross listed in different sectors, whereas IFC projects cannot
be. Since projects may belong to more than one category, the table below shows them in their major
category, but this does not preclude them from also belonging to a second area.
53 Another relevant category, Asset Management companies, was omitted from the scope of the present

evaluation, as it will be included in a forthcoming evaluation of IFC mobilization.

                                                             60
Supplementary System Information: Product codes, flags and clusters. The sector code filter
also had limitations as an exclusive approach, both due to insufficient granularity, and in the case
of IFC, the nested approach. Supplementary system information was therefore used. Thus with
regard to IFC’s investment products, portfolio identification required the identification of those real
sector investment projects which had used or supported the use of a capital markets instruments.
The identification by sector code was therefore supplemented by IFC’s identifications by product
codes, attached to projects, not included in the MIS database.54 Relevant product codes selected
were those for asset-backed securities (ABS), bonds, and guarantees. Use was also made of system
flags in the MIS database for IFC advisory services. Thus corporate governance related advisory
services in the IFC may be identified by a ‘governance flag’ in the advisory service database.

Word searches. These were attempted as a third filter for relevant projects, to help to limit the
error inherent in the sector classification based approach. First, global word searches were at-
tempted, using a ‘standard set’ of terms relevant to capital markets. Second, word searches were
used within product clusters, to identify the part of the spectrum of a product area that was rele-
vant for capital market development. Global word searches proved to be of limited usefulness,
as described above, though within certain product segments, such as bond market advisory ac-
tivities, word searches helped to identify projects for which no sector codes or           systems
flags exist, as well as to eliminate projects that were of limited relevance to capital     market
development (Table 3.2).

Annex Table 3.2 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Word Search Terms

     Capital Markets     Bond Market        Housing            Insurance          Pension      Payments
 Bond                  Government Se-   Bond               Life Insurance   Pillar Two      Security
                       curity
 Security              Public Bond      Security           Investment       Pillar II       Securities

 Credit Rating         Corporate Bond   Securities         Invest           Pillar 2        Clearance

 Secured Trans-        Bond Market      Asset-backed                        Pillar Three    Settlement
 action
 Listed Company        Bond Issue       Secondary Mort-                     Pillar III      Depository
                                        gage
 Investment Index                                                           Pillar 3        Counterparty

 Crop Receipt                                                                               DvP

 Distressed Asset                                                                           Delivery versus
                                                                                            Payment
Source: IEG.



54See IFC Investment Product Schema. IFC IQ (Information Quality) group.
http://ifcint.ifc.org/APPS/IPS/InvProdSchema.nsf/HomeForm?Readform



                                                          61
Individual Screening. Fourth, IEG team members screened projects identified through the pre-
ceding three approaches in order to remove any projects that seemed unlikely to be relevant, and
also, to fine tune the categories under which certain projects were classified. In the case of some
segments of the portfolio such as IFC investments, each project document had to be screened (e.g.
to eliminate ‘guarantees’ of bank loans rather than of bonds. In other segments, such as FIRST
funded WB projects which are typically small and focused, a title search generally provided the
needed information.

Consultations with Project Teams. A final step in identifying the relevant portfolio was consul-
tations with project teams. In conjunction with discussions aimed at understanding the
nature of the work of individual teams, feedback was solicited on the proposed portfolio of
projects related to their specific areas of expertise. This process had a significant effect on the
selection of the final portfolio. In areas such as WB and IFC corporate governance, decisions were
made to focus on policy (WB ROSCs) and legal and regulatory aspects (IFC). In other instances,
project teams highlighted core sets of projects that were particularly relevant, allowing the port-
folio to be trimmed of others. A list of persons consulted is appended (Attachment 6).

The portfolio includes 1071 projects across IFC and WB advisory and investment work, broadly
grouped in the following areas: instruments and issuers; investors; and capital market
infrastructure such as clearance and settlement systems (legal and regulatory systems, payments,
clearance, settlement and corporate governance) (Annex Table 3). In the table below, projects are
not double counted even if they contribute to more than one segment. Broad based market devel-
opment projects relevant to a range of segments are grouped under the capital markets develop-
ment category. Finally, the portfolio is presently identified to include a select number of real sec-
tor projects that introduced the use of capital markets to fund World Bank Group real sector
activities. Funding of real sector activities also underpins some segments of the Treasury portfo-
lio, and is separately described.

In conclusion, while every effort was made to identify a relevant group of projects / investments
/ advisory services for evaluation, conceptual and practical challenges were significant, and some
residual type I and type II error is possible. Judgment had to be exercised for conceptual issues.
As the review advances and more project documents are examined, the portfolio of relevant
projects will continue to evolve and be further clarified.




                                                 62
    Table 3.3 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: WB and IFC Lending and Advisory Ser-
    vices (2004-2014)

                                                                  IFC         IFC                       WB
                                                                                         WB AAA                    Total
                                                                  AS      Investments                 Lending
     Capital Markets Projects Identified                           87         421           476         87         1071

     1. Developing Capital Markets Instruments
     IFC - Private Equity and Investment Funds1                       7      288                                    295
     IFC - Securities Instruments support to Investments2                     59                                     59
     WB / IFC Bond Markets Advisory 3                             13                        81           21         115
     WB / IFC Housing and Mortgage securities                     21          46            63           17         147

     2. Supporting Capital Market Investors
     Insurance                                                        8       24            92           26         196
     Pensions                                                                               34            6          40

     3. Building Capital Markets Infrastructure
     Capital Market Regulation, Supervision                           1                     23           1           25
     Capital Market Development incl. FSAP, ROSC follow               3       2             52           4           61
     up
     Payments / securities' clearance and settlement / securi-        2       2             18           3           25
     ties exchanges4
     Corporate Governance5                                        32                        73           3          108

      4. Using Capital Markets to Support Real Sector In-
      vestment
      Financing Infrastructure6                                                                   40           6     46
      (Memo item: IFC - Securities Instruments support to In-                     (59)                              (59)
      vestments)7
     Source: IEG.
Notes: Projects / Advisory Services (AS) and Analytical and Advisory Activities (AAA) approved between July 2003 and June 2014.
For IFC the table only includes projects Completed or still in the Portfolio; excludes Projects Dropped, Terminated, or not yet
approved (Pipeline)
1. Investment funds here include 23 Distressed Assets (DARP) projects
2. Projects identified by search of Product codes for ABS, Bonds, and Guarantees of Bonds, and further by review of project
documents
3. Includes 41 Gemloc, 11 ESMID projects, 14 projects identified together with FABDM team, 13 recommended by GFMDR team
and additional projects based on word search criteria
4. For WB, based on sector classification payments (FG) and capital markets (FK). For IFC, includes sector Market Infrastructure
(O-IB). Also includes 11 projects recommended by GFMDR, and word search.
5. Included 31 IFC AS regional projects with Legal and Regulatory components, as well as 45 WB ROSCs
6. An additional six projects in this area are included in IFC - Securities Instruments support to Investments
7. Repeated here for reference (but not double counted) as these investments also support real sector investment. They include
six projects that support infrastructure.




                                                                 63
Attachment 4

Country Distribution of the Capital Markets Portfolio
The process of identifying individual countries for in-depth review in the portfolio began with
the project selection process discussed in Attachment 3. Based on the list of projects selected, the
countries or regions in which these projects were conducted were identified, and the frequency
of occurrence in each country was identified. After an initial count for all projects, the process
was repeated with two further iterations: (i) omitting the IFC collective investments; and (ii)
looking only at the most recent six years of our eleven year time period. The reason underlying
the first additional filter is the numerical preponderance of the collective investment vehicle
(funds) category in the portfolio, which could distort overall findings, in terms of the im-
portance of other areas of intervention. The second filter, of the most recent time period, was in-
cluded because obtaining information on older projects is frequently a challenge in field visits.
The results of these filters are described in Annex Table 4.1.

Results show that on average a relatively small number of countries benefitted from a large num-
ber of projects across all areas of the spectrum of capital markets activities. Ten countries ac-
counted for 357 projects in the full portfolio, or around a third of the total. IEG analysis shows
that this proportion does not change significantly if the filters above are applied. There is a lim-
ited difference in proportions or rankings between the full portfolio and the list without the
funds category, presumably reflecting the fact that close to half (44 percent) of all the funds pro-
jects were regional or global projects and did not have a country focus. Indeed the top ten coun-
tries are the same for both groups, and so are 24 of the top 25. As regards the second filter, there
is some change in the geographical focus of the portfolio reflecting changing priorities over
time. Africa and Latin America saw a higher proportion of the projects in the second half of the
period than in the first half while Eastern Europe had fewer. These trends are evident at the
country level with Nigeria and Kenya rising into the top ten while the other eight countries re-
mained the same. Of the top 25, 21 remain the same.




                                                64
Annex Table 4.1 Capital Markets Portfolio by Country
                               Full portfolio              Excl. CIV countries             2009-2014 only
                        No of Coun-      No of pro-   No of Coun-    No of projects   No of Coun-   No of pro-
                           tries           jects         tries                           tries        jects
 Only one project            32              32            33              33             35            35
 2-5 projects                43             136            45             143             37           124
 6-10 projects               16             121            14             104              8            57
 11-20 projects              10             147            14             219              9           137
 21-30 projects               6             151             2              50              2            46
 Over 30 projects             4             206             2              79              1            49
 Total Countries            111             793           110             628             92           448
 Regional projects                          191                            93                          126
 Global projects                             87                            55                           63
Source: IEG analysis.



At the same time, it is noteworthy that there is a long tail of countries where just one (32 coun-
tries) or two (20 countries) interventions have been made. The bulk of these (43) take the form of
WB advisory work. Most are in countries that are too small for a meaningful capital market, or
are at low income levels.

In terms of WBG institutions, interventions by the IFC are the most concentrated (86 percent in
the top 25 countries on the investment front, and 70 percent for advisory services). The World
Bank’s lending is less concentrated, and its advisory services even more diverse, (65 percent and
58 percent respectively). In terms of sectors, some sectors had a noticeably higher country con-
centration in terms of interventions. For example, the housing sector, or IFC’s collective invest-
ment funds, are particularly concentrated, whereas the payments sector had over half of its
work scattered across a wide range of countries that did not belong to the top 25 (Annex Tables
4.2 and 4.3). In order to select at least fifty (or the maximum available if less than fifity) WBG in-
terventions in capital markets for each thematic sector, desk review portfolios will include inter-
ventions in a number of countries beyond the top 25, to adequately reflect sectors where inter-
ventions have been more scattered, such as pensions and payments. On this basis, a total of 64
countries are represented in the portfolios reviewed.55 As shown in Annex Table 4.2, the top 25
countries account for 550 of the 793 country focused projects (69 percent), and the 64 countries
that enable adequate coverage of all areas of the portfolio account for 683 out of the 793 country
focused projects (86 percent). Moving from the top 25 to the longer list of 64 increases coverage
only 4 percent in e.g., IFC Investment Funds, or 5 percent in Housing, where the interventions




55A full list of these countries by frequency and their distribution of projects by sector is given in Annex
Table 4.3.

                                                      65
were highly concentrated. But in Pensions and Payments, the percentage of the portfolio cov-
ered increases from 38 percent to 83 percent, and from 28 percent to 80 percent, respectively.

Annex Table 4.2. IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification:
Country Concentration of WB and IFC Lending and Advisory Services (2004-2014)
                                                         Top 25         64 Se-         64 Selected    Regionally
                                       Top 25
                                                        Countries       lected          Countries      focused
                                      Countries
                                                                       Countries
                                       (Nos.)             (% total)                     (% total)      (% total)
                                                                        (Nos.)
  Investment Funds                          143             48%          152              52%            44%
  IFC Securities Instruments                 41             69%           51              86%             8%
  Bond Market Advisory                       53             46%           67              58%            37%
  Housing                                   117             80%          125              85%             8%
  Insurance                                  59             39%           76              51%            22%
  Pensions                                   15             38%           33              83%            18%
  Capital Market Regulation                  10             40%           17              68%            20%
  Capital Market Development                 33             54%           41              67%            20%
  Payments                                    7             28%           20              80%            20%
  Corporate Governance                       46             43%           68              63%            13%
  Infrastructure                             26             57%           33              72%            28%
  Grand Total                               550             51%          683              64%            26%
Source: IEG analysis.



Annex Table 4.3 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: 64 Selected Countries - WB Lending,
IFC Investments, and Advisory Services (2004-2014)
                          Secur-                                               Cap Mkt       Pay-                                   Treas-
                Invest-    ities     Bond                                      Regula-      ments,     Corp        Infra-             ury
                 ment     Instru-    Market       Hous-       Insur-   Pen-    tion and     Settle-   Gover-       struc-            Issu-
   Country      Funds     ments     Advisory       ing         ance    sion      Dev’t       ment     nance         ture    Total    ance
 India             35         9         3           23           2                  3                    2            5      82        19
 China            26         1          3                         3      1         5                     3            3      45       12
 Mexico            9         2          1          24             1      2                                            2      41      135
 Colombia          9         5          5           8             3      1         4                     1            2      38       47
 Brazil           10         1          3           6             5      2                               2                   29       86
 Russian Fed-      9         6          2           2             2      1         4            1        2                   29      247
 eration
 Vietnam           6         3          3                         2                4                     5            3      26
 Indonesia         3         1          1           5             6      3         1                     1            2      23
 Egypt, Arab       5                    2           8             3                2                     2                   22
 Republic of
 Peru              1         1          1           5           10       2                      1                     1      22        2
 Nigeria           3         1          4           6                    1         3                     1                   19       21
 Turkey            5         6          3                         2                                                   3      19      158
 Kenya             2         1          4           4             1                1                     1            4      18


                                                                  66
                          Secur-                                       Cap Mkt     Pay-                               Treas-
                Invest-    ities     Bond                              Regula-    ments,     Corp    Infra-             ury
                 ment     Instru-    Market    Hous-   Insur-   Pen-   tion and   Settle-   Gover-   struc-            Issu-
 Country        Funds     ments     Advisory    ing     ance    sion     Dev’t     ment     nance     ture    Total    ance
Morocco             5                   4         2                         2        2         2               17         1
South Africa       4         4          2        3        2                                                    15      440
Ukraine            1                             4        3                1         1         4               14
Pakistan           3                    1                 2                2         1         3               12
Saudi Arabia                                     5        2                1                   3               11        1
Serbia                                  3        1        2                3                   2               11
Thailand           3                    2                 2                                    3        1      11        1
Azerbaijan                              2        2        1                2                   3               10
Bangladesh         3                                      2                1                   3                9
Ghana                                            6        1                                    2                9       10
Kazakhstan                              2        3                1        1         1         1                9
Sri Lanka          1                    2                 2       1        3                                    9
Philippines        3                                      1       1                            1        2       8
Romania                      4                   1                         1                   1        1       8       12
Albania                                 1                 2       2                            1                6
Costa Rica                              1                 1       1        3                                    6        1
Tanzania                     1          1        4                                                              6
Uruguay                                 4                                                               2       6        4
West Bank          1                                              1        3                   1                6
Boznia and                                                                                     5                5
Herzegovina
El Salvador        1         2                            1                                    1                5
Lebanon                                                                    2         1         2                5
Rwanda             1                                      3                          1                          5        1
Zambia                       1                            1                1                   1        1       5        4
Jamaica                                 3                                            1                          4
Jordan                                           2        1                          1                          4
Macedonia,                                                                                     4                4
former Yugo-
slav Republic
of
Moldova                                                   1                1         1         1                4
Nepal              1                                                       1                   1        1       4
Oman                         1                            1                2                                    4
United Arab        1                    2        1                                                              4
Emirates
Bahrain                                 1                 1       1                                             3
Afghanistan                                               1                          1                          2
Bhutan                                                            1                            1                2
Botswana                                                          1        1                                    2        2
Dominican                                                                            2                          2        1
Reublic
Ethiopia                                1                 1                                                     2


                                                         67
                               Secur-                                                   Cap Mkt       Pay-                                     Treas-
                   Invest-      ities       Bond                                        Regula-      ments,         Corp      Infra-             ury
                    ment       Instru-      Market      Hous-        Insur-    Pen-     tion and     Settle-       Gover-     struc-            Issu-
   Country         Funds       ments       Advisory      ing          ance     sion       Dev’t       ment         nance       ture    Total    ance
 Hungary                                                                          2                                                      2        21
 Madagascar           1                                                          1                                                       2
 Montenegro                                                                      1                                    1                  2
 Namibia                          1                                                                        1                             2
 Seychelles                                                             1                                  1                             2
 Syrian Arab                                                            1                                  1                             2
 Republic
 Yemen, Re-                                                                      1                                    1                  2
 public of
 Fiji                                                                            1                                                       1
 Guyana                                                                          1                                                       1
 Mali                                                                            1                                                       1
 Myanmar                                                                                                   1                             1
 Niger                                                                           1                                                       1
 Trinidada                                                                       1                                                       1
 and Tobago
 Turkmeni-                                                                                                 1                             1
 stan
 Total              152          51           67            125        76       33          58            20         68         33     683     1226
Source: IEG analysis.



These countries include all income groups, though the lower and upper middle income countries
account for the majority (Annex Table 4.4). Only nine of the countries whether among the 25 or
among the 64, are included in the G20 and belong to the Financial Stability Board. Thus the Bank
reflects the position of a large number of non-G20 countries in the area of capital market devel-
opment.

Annex Table 4.4 Desk Review Portfolio by Country Income Level
        Country              IFC AS            IFC                WB AAA        WB               Total             % Total 
        Groups                               Invest‐                          Lending 
                                              ment 
 25 Countries                                                                                                          
 High Income                       6                   13                              21              40             7%
 Upper Middle                     17                   86               22            125             250            45%
 Lower Middle                     24                   94               25             90             233           42%
 Low Income                        2                   17                2              6              27             5%
 Total 25                         49                  210               49            242             550           100%
                                                                                                                       
 64 Countries:                                                                                                         
 High Income                       7                   23               26             2               58            8%
 Upper Middle                     24                  131              121            30              306           45%


                                                                        68
    Country                                    IFC AS               IFC                 WB AAA                 WB               Total            % Total 
    Groups                                                        Invest‐                                    Lending 
                                                                   ment 
 Lower Middle                                          27                   98                    115                      28        268          39%
 Low Income                                             2                   10                     32                       7         51           7%
 Total 64                                              60                  262                    294                      67        683          100%
Source: IEG

Even with the larger group of 64 countries, as shown in Figure 4.1Error! Reference source not
found., there is a very high proportion of countries with relatively shallow financial markets,
whether in terms of credit and banking systems, or equity capital mark indicators. Due to their
clustering at the bottom left corner, market ‘maturity’ does not provide a criterion for sample
selection.

 Figure 4.1 Financial System Maturity: Desk Portfolio Review Countries
                                         150
                                                                                                                                  South Africa

                                                                                                     Thailand
                                                                               China
           Financial Market Indicator:




                                         100
                 Credit/GDP (%)




                                                                     Lebanon


                                                                                  Morocco
                                                                                                                  Jordan
                                                               UAE
                                                    Hungary                            Brazil
                                                    Namibia
                                          50
                                   Costa Rica
                                                           Bangladesh        Russia           India
                                                                                         Colombia
                                        FYR MacedoniaRomania Oman
                                              Kazakhstan        El Salvador
                                                                Kenya                Pakistan
                                                                        Peru                        Philippines
                                                      Sri Lanka                  Trinidad & Tobago
                                   Uruguay                          Mexico     Jamaica
                                      Tanzania
                                           Ghana          Zambia
                                              Nigeria

                                          0
                                                0                     50                100               150                                         200
                                                              Capital Market Indicator: Market Capitalization/GDP (%)

 Source: IEG
 Note: Based on 34 countries in the list of portfolio review countries for which both pairs of data are
 available. Indicators are averages of three years’s data from 2010 to 2012.




                                                                                                   69
Countries selected for field visits will include five to six from this group, reflecting a number of
additional criteria but with additional purposive elements. Such additional purposive elements
include regional balance (each country in a different WBG region); a significant capital markets
portfolio that reflects different types of interventions (different leading sectors, and including
both the WB and IFC, and both lending / investment as well as AAA and advisory work); and
an inclusion of countries along different segments of the income scale - as well as financial market
maturity, to the extent possible.

One further consideration to be taken into account for the selection of countries, and especially
field visit countries, is the extent to which the WBG has been active in issuing local currency
bonds in local currencies of client countries. WBG Treasury bond issues have followed an even
more pronounced pattern, in terms of country concentration, relative to the distribution of the
lending / investment and advisory services portfolio, with an extremely large concentration in
certain markets (the top 4 currencies account for three quarters of total issues), but a long tail of
countries in which there have been only a few issues (Annex Table 4.5). However, in this case,
more issues are not necessarily of greater interest, as they are likely to represent straightforward
funding operations. For the portfolio review, clusters of currencies / countries will be selected in
each region, that include pioneer one off issues as well as countries with more frequent transac-
tions. And to the extent possible, countries selected for field visits will also include those where
there has been some issuance activity by the WB / IFC. In the final selection, consideration will
also be given to regional balance across the six WBG regions, together with practical considera-
tions in terms of organizing field visits, etc.




                                                 70
Annex Table 4.5 IEG Capital Markets Evaluation - Local Currency Bond Issues by the WBG
(2004-2014)

                               IFC     IFC Treas-      WB      WB Treas-
                                                                           Total # Is-
        Currency of Issue   Treasury    ury US$     Treasury    ury US$                  Total US$ mil
                                                                             sues
                            # Issues      mil       # Issues      mil
     South African Rand         69       2,988           356     9,680         425          12,668
     Brazilian Real            112       3,600           130     6,101         242           9,701
     Turkish Lira               79       2,901            72     3,629         151           6,530
     Mexican Peso               16         502           100     2,774         116           3,276
     Russian Ruble              11         523            72     1,826          83           2,348
     Chinese Yuan                6       1,011            13      281           19           1,292
     Chilean Peso                8         836             3      412           11           1,248
     Malaysian Ringgit                                    25      999           25            999
     Korean Won                  1         132            23      774           24            906
     Indian Rupee                2          39            11      834           13            872
     Colombian Peso              1          99            27      705           28            804
     Polish Zloty                                         21      662           21            662
     Nigerian Naira              1          76            20      546           21            622
     Romanian Lei                                         12      497           12            497
     Hungarian Forint            1          47            19      299           20            347
     Saudi Riyal                                           1      267             1           267
     Ghanaian Cedi               1          12             9      199           10            211
     Moroccan Dirham             1         117                                    1           117
     Zambian Kwacha              1          29             3       84             4           112
     Uruguayan Peso              1          10             1      100             2           110
     Central African CFA         1          46                                    1            46
     Franc
     Peruvian Sol                2          45                                    2            45
     West African CFA            2          44                                    2            44
     Franc
     Thai Baht                                             1       41             1            41
     Botswana Pula                                         2       40             2            40
     Costa Rican Colon           1          40                                    1            40
     Ugandan Shilling                                      2       25             2            25
     Rwandan Franc               1          22                                    1            22
     Hong Kong Dollar                                      1      19.354          1            19
     Dominican Republic          1          10                                    1            10
     Peso
     Armenian Dram               1           5                                    1              5
     Grand Total               320      13,132           924    30,796       1,244          43,929
Source: IEG analysis.



                                                    71
Attachment 5

Preliminary Portfolio Review


This preliminary portfolio analysis aims at providing an overview of the World Bank Group’s
interventions that supported capital market development, both directly and indirectly, over the
period FY04-14. In terms of instruments of intervention, this comprises IFC investments and ad-
visory services, and World Bank lending and non-lending technical assistance, and advisory ser-
vices (AAA).

WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO CAPITAL MARKETS
The World Bank Group has supported the development of their client countries’ capital markets
through a sizeable portfolio of advisory and capacity building effort, together with financial sup-
port through IFC investments and World Bank loans. The present portfolio review focuses on the
portfolio of the most relevant interventions, detailed in Attachment 3, and is subject to its caveats.
In addition, it must be pointed out that much of the discussion below is in terms of numbers of
interventions, since the majority were advisory services, where the value of the activity has lim-
ited meaning. Additionally, activities (loans, investments and advisory services) are sometimes
programmatic in nature, which can lead to some inflation in numbers of interventions.

IEG’s preliminary portfolio analysis identified 87 advisory activities supported by the IFC and
476 items of AAA from the WB. On the investment side, IFC approved 421 projects that supported
the development of capital markets. While there have been more IFC investments than World
Bank loans (421 to 87), WBG loans are much bigger on average, reflecting their intrinsic nature,
lending support to governments instead of individual private firms ($27 m on average for IFC
compared to $188 m on average for the World Bank). A large part of IFC investment in terms of
numbers (288) took the form of investment funds, including 23 debt and asset recovery projects
(DARP), which supported the development of private equity.56 IFC’s investment funds amounted
to $6.69 billion in value, and DARP contributed another $837 million. Another 59 investments
with a total commitment value of $2.52 billion introduced the use of securities instruments (asset
backed securities, bonds or bond guarantees) to support IFC investments across a wide range of
sectors. Eighty seven relevant World Bank lending projects were identified.

A large proportion of the interventions were regional or global in focus, as opposed to projects
focused on individual countries. For the portfolio as a whole, regional or global projects account


56IFC’s asset management company (AMC) activities are not included in this review because they are
primarily intended as resource mobilization tools, and also because they are expected to be the subject of
an upcoming IEG evaluation scheduled for FY17.



                                                    72
for 29 percent of the total numbers of projects. This is particularly true of sectors such as collective
investments, where 44% of projects by numbers or 57% by value were regional or global in focus.
Bond market advisory work was the next most concentrated in regional work at 37% while sectors
such as housing (8%) were much more focused on specific countries. The regional focus was es-
pecially unusual for IFC Investments as outside investment funds, regionally focused projects
accounted for only 10% of the 154 IFC investments in the portfolio.

MIGA’s involvement in activities supporting the development of capital markets has been rela-
tively small over this period, although some half dozen relevant guarantees were identified, over
the period from fiscal year 2004 through 2014. Given its limited involvement, MIGA is excluded
from the scope of the evaluation.57 Putting together lending and advisory services, WBG inter-
ventions amount to a total of 1071 in the identified portfolio.


Box 7. MIGA Contributions to Capital Market Development
The mission of MIGA is to promote foreign direct investment into developing countries. MIGA fulfills its mission by providing
political risk insurance guarantees to private sector investors and lenders. These guarantees protect investments against non-
commercial risks and can help private investors obtain access to funding sources with improved financial terms and conditions.

Some MIGA projects have a capital markets dimension, although these are very limited in number. Over the ten year period
reviewed, the following projects were identified, involving a capital markets product and an international investor, with MIGA
enhancing the value of the product through its political risk guarantee.

         $10.2 million (2007) and $75 million (2006) guarantees against transfer and convertibility restrictions on investments
          made in securitized portfolios of residential mortgages originated in Kazakhstan.
     $99 million (2012) to support a cross-currency swap agreement between the government of Senegal and an interna-
          tional bank against non-honoring of sovereign obligations. That swap agreement hedged the currency exposure of the
          government related to a $500 million bond issued in 2011.
     $10.1 million (2005) to the parent company of a Latvian mortgage company to protect against transfer restrictions and
          expropriation of funds related to an investment in a mortgage-backed securitization.
     $575 million in 2014 against the risk of non-honoring of sovereign obligations by the Hungarian Exim bank, on its
          offshore notes issues.
     $66.5 million guarantee to cover the risks of transfer restrictions and expropriation on parent funding for a local cur-
          rency securitization of trade receivables by a bank in Brazil.
     $107.6 million in political risk insurance covering an international bond issue by a highway authority in the Dominican
          Republic.
Sources: IEG.




57For MIGA, these capital markets projects total $948 million over FY04-14, of which $575 is a single non-
honoring sovereign obligation in FY14 (Hungary). As a percentage of total MIGA guarantees over this
period these six operations represent 4.6% - but only 1.8% excluding the Hungary project in FY14. For IFC
over the same period, capital markets projects represented 9.4% of total IFC investments. Inter alia, MIGA
has been the subject of a comprehensive recent IEG evaluation, although support to capital markets was
not its focus. See: MIGA’s Financial Sector Guarantees in a Strategic Context (IEG, 2011).

                                                               73
EVOLUTION OVER TIME
During this period, World Bank Group support to capital markets activities fluctuated, without
a clear trend. In terms of lending and investments, there was a sharp increase in response to the
2008 financial crisis, especially in 2009 and 2010. After the crisis years, there was a fall-off in fiscal
year 2011, before resuming a slow growth trend through 2014. The number of advisory projects
undertaken by the IFC has declined in recent years (from an average of 13 per year from 2005
through 2009 to an average of 5 a year from 2010 through 2014). Conversely, the number of capital
markets-related AAA projects has increased significantly over time (reaching 63 in 2014 from 34
in 2004). This may reflect the addition of sources of funding such as the FIRST fund, which fi-
nanced a large number or small and discrete advisory activities for the WB.


 Figure 5.5 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: WB Lending, IFC Investments, WB AAA,
 and IFC Advisory Services (2004 to 2014).
                              $ m                      FY                     Count
                     5,000                                                             70
                                                                                       60
                     4,000
                                                                                       50
                     3,000                                                             40
                     2,000                                                             30
                                                                                       20
                     1,000
                                                                                       10
                         0                                                             0
                              FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14

                                    IFC Investment (LHS)          WB Lending (LHS)
                                    IFC AS (RHS)                  WB AAA (RHS)

                             Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse



REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF CAPITAL MARKETS INTERVENTIONS

Globally, the World Bank Group’s interventions supporting client countries’ capital markets, as
identified in the IEG portfolio, supported 111 countries. Seventy nine countries had more than
one intervention, and 69 percent of all capital markets interventions were concentrated in the top
twenty five countries (see Attachment 4). Figure 5.2 depicts the distribution by total number of
interventions per country, indicating particularly strong support to a group of middle income
countries, but also, a large number of projects across a very wide spectrum of countries, including
302 country specific interventions in lower middle income countries and 78 in lower income
countries.




                                                       74
 Figure 5.6. Distribution of the World Bank Group’s Support for Capital Markets (Numbers of
 Projects / Advisory Services per Country)




 Source: IEG.
 Note: Each country received one point for each intervention in the following categories: IFC Investment, IFC
 Advisory Services, World Bank Lending, World Bank AAA.


Distribution of WBG Portfolio by Segments of Activity

Support for capital market development was provided through a number of different sectors,
reflecting different market segments. Brief descriptions of the nature of the WBG portfolio in
major segments follow below.




                                                        75
     IFC’S INVESTMENT FUNDS

Figure 5.3 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: IFC’s Collective Investment Vehicles

             $ m                                  FY                             Count                      $ m       Region
    2,000                                                                                   50       2000

                                                                                            40       1500
    1,500
                                                                                            30
    1,000                                                                                            1000
                                                                                            20
      500                                                                                            500
                                                                                            10

         0                                                                                  0          0
              FY04
                      FY05
                             FY06
                                    FY07
                                           FY08
                                                  FY09
                                                         FY10
                                                                FY11
                                                                       FY12
                                                                              FY13
                                                                                     FY14                    AFR EAP ECA LCR MNA SAR World
                                                                                                                Country Regional World
                     Value (LHS)                  No of Investments (RHS)                                       Funds   Funds    Funds

Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse
Note: Includes all IFC collective investment vehicles as well as distressed asset relief (DARP) projects



     IFC’s collective investment vehicles, commonly known as funds, take a variety of forms. In the
     context of capital markets development, we are interested in private equity funds, wherein a set
     of investors (known as the limited partners) provide capital in the form of equity to a fund man-
     ager (known as the general partner) to invest in target companies. The nature of those companies
     determines the nature of the fund, which could be restricted by geography, sector or strategy. In
     the funds that we are interested in, the investments are most often made in the form of private
     equity, which means that the companies are privately held and have not issued public shares.
     Just as public equity markets are a significant part of capital markets, private equity markets also
     play an important role in capital market development, especially for young and relatively small
     enterprises. Importantly, in addition to providing capital, private equity investors often contrib-
     ute to their investee companies through mentoring activities. If successful, these private compa-
     nies can be the source of initial public offerings whereby they list their shares on the public mar-
     ket. By allowing investors to diversify risk, private equity funds attract scarce capital to risky
     ventures.

     Over the period FY 2004-14 IFC invested in a total of 221 private equity funds, with an additional
     26 investments made in foreign and domestic mutual funds, 23 investments made in distressed
     assets management companies and 18 investments in fund management companies. Of the total
     $7.5 billion committed, $5.3 billion was in private equity funds, with the remainder divided about
     equally between the other three categories.




                                                                                                76
Regionally, almost 24 percent of the total committed amount was invested in funds with a man-
date that extends beyond a single region, although these investments represent only 10 percent
of the total number of investments. AFR, EAP and LCR are the three most represented regions in
the fund portfolio, each accounting for nearly 20 percent of the number of projects. MNA is the
least represented region in the portfolio, accounting for only 6 percent of the total committed
amount and 8 percent of the number of investments.

The IFC’s Debt and Asset Recovery Program (DARP) was a crisis response initiative, rekindled
in 2009, that evolved into a mainstream business in 2012. DARP invests in funds and companies
that manage and restructure pools of distressed banking system assets. Its equity is used to pur-
chase distressed assets at a discount from financial institutions, who benefit from being able to
receive cash for assets that have likely already been written off and which they are ill prepared to
manage. In addition, the program offers complementary technical advisory services for nonper-
forming loan and risk management programs. DARP investment instruments are a mix of debt,
quasi-equity, and equity. From a capital markets perspective, the value of DARP is that it is
funded in large part by private equity investments At origination, the program was expected to
reach $4 billion–$7 billion, with IFC contributing up to $1.6 billion and other IFIs and private
sector partners investing about $5 billion over three years. Through FY14, total IFC commitments
have been $905 million, invested in 23 funds with the program continuing to expand. To date,
about half the total project commitments have been in LAC, with another third of the total in East
Asia.

IFC – REAL SECTOR INVESTMENTS USING BONDS, BOND GUARANTEES OR ASSET BACKED SECURITIES –

IFC investment activities related to capital markets development also include non-financial sec-
tor investments that involve capital markets instruments, including bonds, asset-backed securi-
ties and securities guarantees. Fifty nine IFC investment projects were identified to have rele-
vance for capital market development during the period from fiscal year 2004 through 2014.
Bonds were the most frequently used of the three instrument types, representing 64 percent of
the number of capital markets instruments investments and 77 percent by volume. Guarantees
were used much less frequently, representing 20 percent of the total number of investments, and
they tend to be smaller in amount and represented only 10 percent of total commitment volume;
note that these guarantee figures do not include short-term guarantees, such as the Global Trade
Finance Program. Asset-backed securities, which transform a pool of risky assets into more stable
securities, were infrequently used, accounting for only 15 percent by number and 13 percent of
volume.




                                                77
 Figure 5.4 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: IFC’s Investment using Bonds, Guarantees or
 Asset Backed Securities (2004-2014) (Nos)
                                     IFC Investments by Products
                            Count                                       $ mil                               By Industry
                       15                                                   800
  Number of projects




                                                                                600                    Manufacturing
                                                                                                         /Services
                       10                                                                                   13           Commercial 
                                                                                400                                        Bank
                                                                                                    Infrastructure,         27
                                                                                                           6
                       5                                                              Securities 
                                                                                200    Markets
                                                                                          2
                                                                                        Rental &              Microfinance
                       0                                                        0                                  8
                                                                                        Leasing
                             FY04FY05FY06FY07FY08FY09 FY10FY11FY12FY13FY14                             Non‐Bank
                                                                                            1
                                GT (LHS)                     Bond (LHS)                                   2
                                ABS (LHS)                    Commitment (RHS)                              Number of investments
 Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse
 Note: IFC investments here include its collective investment vehicles (private equity and portfolio funds), as well as its distressed asset
 management (DARP) portfolio.



The level of investment activity and the product composition varied widely across different in-
dustry groups. It was by far the most common in the financial services industry group, where it
accounted for 68 percent of total such investments by number of projects and 66 percent by vol-
ume, with bonds alone accounting for nearly half of total volume. The Infrastructure industry
group accounted for 10 percent of projects and 20 percent of volume, while the manufacturing,
agribusiness and services industry group accounted for 22 percent of projects and 14 percent of
volume. Use of asset-backed securities was dominated by the financial services industry group,
which accounted for 81 percent of that product’s use by project count and volume over the
period.

Only one investment in this category was global, and three others were regional. The ECA region
had the most investments (17), followed by LCR (13). Out of 22 countries with projects in this
category, 13 countries received a single investment. India accounted for the largest number of
projects (9), all of which were bonds, followed by Russia and Turkey with 6.

SUPPORTING BOND MARKET DEVELOPMENT – WB AND IFC ADVISORY SERVICES AND WB LOANS

One of the most significant areas of WBG support to capital market development has been
through support for the development of domestic bond markets. Domestic government bonds in
particular have received a lot of support not only because of their integral role funding the gov-
ernment’s borrowing requirements and thus in public debt management, but also due to their
core function in providing a yield curve that offers a risk-free benchmark for the pricing of risk
in other assets. The Bank’s portfolio of interventions has evolved over time, from support to mid-
dle income countries such as Brazil and Turkey that have now established deep, liquid domestic


                                                                            78
public debt markets, towards the development of private bond markets in such countries, in tan-
dem with improving domestic government bond markets in poorer developing economies.

 Figure 5.5 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Support to Bond Market Development (2004-2014)
 (Nos)
                                             By FY & Regions                 By WB/IFC Major Funders
                               Count
                          20                                                                  IFC AS Other, 9
                                                                                                        ESMID IFC, 4
     Number of projects




                          15                                                  WB                        ESMID WB, 7
                                                                            Lending
                          10                                                  21


                          5                                                WB AAA        GEMLOC, 
                                                                            Other          30
                                                                             39
                          0                                                           FIRST
                                                                                        5

                                AFR    EAP   ECA   LCR   MNA   SAR   OTH                      Number of interventions

 Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse




The identified portfolio included 81 WB advisory projects, 13 IFC advisory services, and 21 WB
lending projects. Thirteen of the WB lending projects were broader DPLs that included compo-
nents for bond market development. A large proportion of the advisory services offered were
linked to special financing facilities, including prominent trust funded activities. These advisory
projects were all conducted by the Capital Markets group in the Finance and Markets global prac-
tice, which is a joint IFC / WB unit. Thus separation of some of these interventions into ‘IFC’ or
‘World Bank’ is notional to some extent. A large proportion of the earlier projects were funded
by the GEMLOC program which accounted for the largest number of advisory service interven-
tions; 41 in all.58 More recently the portfolio has included eleven ESMID financed programs (four
notionally under the IFC and seven labeled WB advisory programs).59 Another five advisory ser-
vices in this area were financed by FIRST, a trust fund established initially for funding follow up
to FSAP recommendations, but later extended to include a wide spectrum of financial sector

58 The Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond Program (Gemloc) is a World Bank Group (WBG)
initiative that supports local currency bond market development in emerging market countries (EMCs) to
increase their investability and attract domestic and international investment. Gemloc had three separate
elements: a global emerging markets bond index, a private investment manager, PIMCO, and funding for
advisory services provided by the World Bank aiming to strengthen emerging local bond markets.
59 The Efficient Securities Markets Institutional Development (ESMID) program, also a joint World Bank

/IFC program for bond market development, with the additional element of focusing support
particularly on the development of local non-government bond markets to improve financing for key real
sectors.

                                                                      79
work.60 Together, these three programs cover two-thirds of the WBG advisory projects in this
area.

Overall, these interventions have increased in recent years, averaging 13 per year in the last five
years of the period versus 8 per year in the first 5 year under review. The decline in the number
of projects in regions such as East Asia has been more than made up for by an increase in activity
in Latin America but also, Africa. In addition, this area has a relatively large number of globally
focused projects, primarily focused on research and analytics, as opposed to country focused
technical assistance.

Within the country focused portion of the portfolio, 53 of the 73 interventions belonged to the top
25 countries in the overall IEG portfolio. Twenty one of the top 25 countries had bond market
support, and overall, the portfolio spans just 34 countries, one with up to 5 projects (Colombia).

SUPPORTING BOND MARKET DEVELOPMENT – WB AND IFC TREASURY LOCAL CURRENCY BONDS

IBRD and IFC both issue bonds on a regular basis in a variety of currencies and markets as part
of their funding requirements. Each has undertaken some issuance in client countries’ currencies,
in some cases, directly in their domestic markets. Some local currencies now have well developed
international markets for bonds denominated in those currencies and so issuance in those curren-
cies represents as much a funding cost decision as it does a market development issue. Examples
include the South African rand, which represented 3 percent of total IFC bond issuance over the
period and which was an important source of funding for the IBRD as well.

Issuance in a local currency, even if in the international market, can be an important market de-
velopment tool. Such issues have the potential of contributing to the development of benchmarks,
extending the yield curve, and providing low risk opportunities for both global institutional in-
vestors to gain exposure to these currencies, and to tap into growing local savings and pension
funds in client countries, thereby also expanding the pool of investors in local currency bond
markets.

During the period 2005-2014, IBRD issued a total of $30.8 billion equivalent in local currencies.
IBRD has consistently issued more than US$1 billion annually in local currencies since 2007, with
issuance peaking at $5.6 billion in FY10, when there was a total of 146 bonds issued in local cur-
rency in 18 different currencies. As a percentage of total issuance, local currency issues peaked in
FY08 at 23 percent of the total. IFC issued a total of $13.1 billion equivalent in local currencies
during the same period. For IFC, local currency issuance peaked in value at $3.2 billion in FY14,
with a total of 59 issues in 10 different currencies representing 20 percent of total issuance volume




60   Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening initiative.



                                                      80
in that year. Local currency issuance peaked as a percentage of total issuance at 34 percent of the
total in FY07.


 Figure 5.6 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: IBRD and IFC Local Currency Bond Issues
 (2005-2014)
                         Nos              Local Currency Bond Issuance             %
                       160                                                             40
                       140                                                             35
                       120                                                             30
                       100                                                             25
                        80                                                             20
                        60                                                             15
                        40                                                             10
                        20                                                             5
                         0                                                             0
                               FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14
                                IFC LCY Issuance (LHS)        IBRD LCY Issuance (LHS)
                                IFC % LCY/Total (RHS)         IBRD % LCY/Total (RHS)
 Source: IEG, based on data from WB and IFC Treasurer’s departments



HOUSING FINANCE - SUPPORT TO CAPITAL MARKETS

Housing finance can support the development of capital markets to the extent that it supports the
development of a new tradable asset class of asset-backed securities, and a fortiori if these are
then actively traded. Both IFC and the WB have an active portfolio of work in the housing finance
sector. IEG first identified projects in the housing finance area using sector codes. However, a
large number of such projects, e.g. in the low income housing finance area, have little association
with capital markets development. While the intention was to focus the selection on those projects
that had a secondary mortgage market focus, in some countries, support was given to primary
mortgage market development with the expectation that this would pave the way for secondary
markets to develop. Identification is also an issue with regard to those housing finance projects
that focus on the strengthening of the legal and regulatory framework for housing finance, a pre-
requisite for the development of housing finance markets. The final selection was therefore made
in consultation with the relevant experts in WB and IFC. This includes a set of 17 lending and 63
AAA interventions at the WB, and 46 investments and 21 advisory service respectively in the IFC.




                                                      81
Figure 5.7 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Housing – Mortgage Securities and Secondary
markets

                                   Count                          By FY                                                                               Count           By Region
                              10                                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                       Number of interventions
    Number of interventions




                                                                                                                                                                                  IFC AS
                               8                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                                                                  WB AAA
                                                                                                                                                 20                               IFC Investment
                               6
                                                                                                                                                 15                               WB Lending
                               4
                                                                                                                                                 10
                               2                                                                                                                  5

                               0                                                                                                                  0
                                     FY04
                                            FY05
                                                   FY06
                                                          FY07
                                                                 FY08
                                                                        FY09
                                                                               FY10
                                                                                      FY11
                                                                                             FY12
                                                                                                    FY13
                                                                                                           FY14
                                                                                                                                                       AFR    EAP   ECA   LCR MNA SAR OTH



Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse

         One notable feature in this sector is its high level of country concentration. Thus 80 percent of all
         interventions were in the top 25 countries identified in Attachment 4; partly due to repeat invest-
         ments into certain mortgage companies in the region.61 Looking into the characteristics of IFC
         housing projects, whereas those for primary mortgage institutions were distributed over a wide
         spectrum of countries, those associated with secondary mortgage market development were fo-
         cused on a limited set of countries, especially in the ECA, LCR and MNA regions. This is associ-
         ated with the level of development of existing financial institutions and infrastructure, critical for
         the existence of liquid markets for secondary mortgage securities.

         Over the period from FY04 to FY14, IFC investments in this portfolio suggest some decline, per-
         haps reflecting the global freeze of housing financial markets after the crisis, including some
         losses to the corporation. On the World Bank side, a noticeable change is the geographical shift
         of AAA advisories from SAR, where India was virtually the only client, towards the LCR and
         AFR regions.

         INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS – INSURANCE AND PENSIONS

         Both insurance funds and pension funds can potentially support the development of capital mar-
         kets as they provide large pools of investable funds, which can then purchase either debt or eq-
         uities. Moreover, such funds have the need to match their long term liabilities and assets, so they




          The companies for which the IFC have maintained the share and continuously invested include
         61

         Companhia Brasileira de Securitização and Rio Bravo Securitizadora in Brazil, GSC, Su Casita, and
         Vertice in Mexico, and Titulizadora Peruana Sociedad Titulizadora in Peru.



                                                                                                                  82
are well placed to make long term investments. Paid-in pension funds are necessary for the accu-
mulation of such funds in the pension sector; pay-as-you-go systems would not be able to accu-
mulate investable resources. As with housing finance, not all pensions work in the WB is focused
on the development of investable assets. Indeed, a primary objective is usually related to old age
security or the management of contingent budgetary liabilities. However, most pension fund in-
terventions of the WB seek to set up multi-pillar systems, and the second and third pillars in such
systems (employer and private pillars of paid-in contributions) would deal with issues related to
fund management. In the insurance sector, analogously, life insurance funds (including term life)
would have the potential to accumulate pools of investable funds for capital markets investments.
IEG’s identification of relevant insurance and pensions portfolios also began with a combination
of sector codes and word searches, and was eventually narrowed in focus in consultation with
the relevant departments.

The IEG portfolio for insurance projects and advisory services that include a focus on fund man-
agement and investment identifies 150 interventions in total, associated with capital market de-
velopment: 92 WB AAA, 26 WB lending, and 24 IFC investment projects, and 8 IFC advisory
services. Of those 150, 41 and 37 interventions took place in the LCR and ECA regions respectively
from fiscal years 2004 to 2014, with only 11 and 10 interventions, respectively, in MNA and SAR.
The overall portfolio in terms of the number of interventions in this segment has been increasing,
from an annual average of 10 from 2004 to 2009 to an annual average of 18 for the latter 5 fiscal
years examined (2010 to 2014), largely due to an increase in WB AAA advisory activities, but also,
though to a lesser extent, increased IFC investments.

IEG also identified just 40 interventions in the pension reform area that included a capital market
development component, mostly consisting of 34 WB AAA advisory services, with an additional
6 WB lending projects. IFC has no pension reform activities, due to the nature of its business. The
pattern of geographical distribution is similar to that of insurance, with 11 and 10 interventions
in LCR and ECA, compared to just 3 projects each in MNA and SAR. There is no discernible trend
over time in WB advisory projects. Whereas 4 out of the total of 6 lending projects occurred in
FY04, there was just one each in FY10 and FY12.62




62   The one in FY2010 aimed primarily to stabilize the financial market in Hungary after the financial crisis.

                                                       83
Figure 5.8 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Pension and Insurance Funds (Nos of interventions)

                                                            Pension by FY                                                                            Count                 Insurance by FY
                                   Count
                               7                                                                                                                20
     Number of interventions




                                                                                                                      Number of interventions
                               6
                               5                                                                                                                15

                               4
                                                                                                                                                10
                               3
                               2                                                                                                                 5
                               1
                               0                                                                                                                 0
                                    FY04
                                           FY05
                                                  FY06
                                                         FY07
                                                                FY08
                                                                       FY09
                                                                              FY10
                                                                                     FY11
                                                                                            FY12
                                                                                                   FY13
                                                                                                          FY14




                                                                                                                                                      FY04
                                                                                                                                                             FY05
                                                                                                                                                                    FY06
                                                                                                                                                                           FY07
                                                                                                                                                                                  FY08
                                                                                                                                                                                         FY09
                                                                                                                                                                                                FY10
                                                                                                                                                                                                       FY11
                                                                                                                                                                                                              FY12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FY13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FY14
                                                                                                                                                             IFC AS                                    WB AAA
                                                    WB AAA                      WB Lending
                                                                                                                                                             IFC Investment                            WB Lending

                                                                              Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse



    CAPITAL MARKETS REGULATION, SUPERVISION AND DEVELOPMENT

    IEG’s portfolio includes a number of projects targeting relatively broad based capital market en-
    hancement. These fall into two general categories, those focused primarily on regulation and su-
    pervision or those focused on development and growth. Across both these areas, WB advisory
    services were by far the most common form of intervention, accounting for 23 out of the 25 regu-
    latory reforms and 52 of the 61 interventions for broad-based capital market development. The
    prevalence of WB advisory work is not surprising as such reforms draw upon the expertise of the
    Bank, more than on its financial resources, and generally require government partnership for im-
    plementation.

    Beyond bank budget (BB), one important source of funds for these interventions has been the
    FIRST program. FIRST funded 14 of the 25 regulation and supervision projects and 13 of the 61
    broad based development projects. This proportion is high considering that FIRST only started
    funding WB executed projects during its second phase, beginning in 2007. Since then, FIRST
    funded 41 percent of the projects in these areas.

    A fairly regular stream of around 8 activities for capital markets have been approved each year.
    There has been an evolution over time in the location of these projects. EAP accounted for 23
    percent of such projects between FY04 and FY09, with ECA tying for the largest share. However,
    from 2010 through 2014, only 8 percent were in Asia. Sub-Saharan Africa saw the largest increase,
    rising from 11 percent of projects to 18 percent. This shift away from Asia (17 to 13 percent) and




                                                                                                                 84
          toward Africa (15 to 18 percent) mirrors the trend within the entire capital market development
          portfolio.


 Figure 5.9 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Capital Market Regulation

                                 Count                    By FY                                                                          By FY & Region
                                                                                                                               Count
                            12                                                                                            15




                                                                                                Number of interventions
  Number of inverventions




                            10
                            8                                                                                             10

                            6
                            4                                                                                              5

                            2
                            0                                                                                              0
                                  FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14

                                         WB FIRST                     WB AAA
                                         WB Lending                   IFC AS                                                       AFR   EAP     ECA      LCR
                                         IFC Investment                                                                            MNA   SAR     OTH

Source: IEG, based on data from WB and IFC Treasurer’s departments

          Country coverage is fairly broad. The 69 country focused projects covered 37 countries. Twenty
          seven countries had 1 or 2 projects and no country had more than 5 (China). The top 25 countries’
          share was 50 percent.

          MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE – PAYMENTS SYSTEMS

          In collaboration with the WB Payments systems group, IEG identified a subset of WBG interven-
          tions in the payments system area, which had relevance for securities clearance and settlement.
          Although the payments infrastructure as a whole is relevant for the first segment of the finaliza-
          tion of a trade, those WBG interventions that look at the delivery versus payments of securities,
          as well as depository and counterparty arrangements, were of particular interest.

          Only 25 projects were thus identified by IEG; a very small part of the overall capital markets
          portfolio (less than 3 percent in terms of numbers of interventions). Over 70 percent of the port-
          folio is concentrated in WB advisory services (18 out of 25 interventions). The payments segment
          has a regional distribution which is different from the rest of the capital markets portfolio, as
          projects are widely dispersed and are not concentrated in the top 25 countries. Only 6 out of the
          20 country focused projects were in these countries. Payments and securities clearance projects
          included 5 projects Middle East, North Africa as well as Eastern Europe, Central Asia but only 1
          in Asia. Even in these regions, projects were in several small countries, such as the Dominican
          Republic, which together with Morocco were the only countries with more than 1 project, as well
          as Myanmar and Jordan. Work in this area appears to have picked up significantly in recent years;

                                                                                           85
    16 of the 25 projects enumerated here were approved in 2013 or 2014. In part, this reflects in-
    creased client recognition of this subject’s importance. With the financial crisis calling into ques-
    tion the central role of banks, laying the ground work for markets to increasingly serve the role
    of primary financial intermediary has become a higher priority in frontier markets. One other
    possible explanation for the observed increase in recent years in that institutional memory is
    stronger regarding those projects. Since this area does not have a clear World Bank sector code,
    IEG was more reliant on the project team for identifying these projects, compared to other areas.


  Figure 5.10 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Payments and Securities Clearance and Settlement (2004-
  2014)

                                                                 Count    By Region
                                                             5
                                   Number of interventions




                                                             4

                                                             3

                                                             2

                                                             1

                                                             0
                                                                  AFR EAP ECA LCR MNA SAR OTH
                                                                     IFC AS         WB AAA
                                                                     IFC Investment WB Lending

Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse




    The WB has also undertaken a number of assessments of payments and settlement systems based
    on the CPSS-IOSCO principles, frequently undertaken as a part of a Financial Sector Assessment
    Program (FSAP). Over this period, 20 percent of total FSAPs (29) included technical annexes on
    financial infrastructure. In 14 of the 27 countries covered these were updates of previous FSAPs,
    though 12 of the initial assessments had taken place prior to the period of analysis.

    MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE – CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

    Good corporate governance facilitates the listing and trading of companies and protects the rights
    of investors, especially minority shareholders, in these companies, thus helping to broaden the
    base of the market. Both the WB and IFC have clusters of staff focused on the improvement of
    corporate governance. On the WB side, the program is focused on three areas: corporate govern-
    ance evaluations at a national level (as part of the Reports on the Observance of Standards and
    Codes, frequently undertaken as a part of a Financial Sector Assessment Program), as well as
    specialized program areas on corporate governance at banks, and in state owned enterprises. Of


                                                                             86
these, the first area (ROSC assessments) was deemed to be of relevance to capital market devel-
opment. At IFC, much of the corporate governance work is undertaken on individual firms, as
part of the due diligence process associated with IFC’s investments. However, an important part
of IFC’s work is also focused on technical assistance for corporate governance, especially in the
area of legal and regulatory reform. This is the segment that was considered relevant to the pre-
sent evaluation.


Figure 5.11 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Number of Corporate Governance
Interventions (2004-2014)
                                Count                        By FY                                                                                Count       By Region
                           12                                                                                                                35                            WB ROSC




                                                                                                                   Number of interventions
 Number of interventions




                           10                                                                                                                30                            WB AAA
                                                                                                                                             25                            IFC AS
                            8
                                                                                                                                             20                            WB Lending
                            6
                                                                                                                                             15
                            4                                                                                                                10
                            2                                                                                                                 5
                            0                                                                                                                 0
                                 FY04
                                        FY05
                                               FY06
                                                      FY07
                                                             FY08
                                                                    FY09
                                                                           FY10
                                                                                  FY11
                                                                                         FY12
                                                                                                FY13
                                                                                                       FY14




                                                                                                                                                    AFR   EAP ECA   LCR MNA SAR OTH


Source: IEG, based on IFC MIS data and WB Business Warehouse




 On this basis, IEG identified a total of 108 relevant corporate governance interventions over the
period FY04-14. Fourteen of these 108 are still active, while the rest are closed. Virtually all took
the form of advisory services - 32 by the IFC, and 73 by the WB. Only 3 were WB lending projects.
Forty five of the 73 WB AAAs are ROSCs – Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes
for corporate governance. There is a high level of regional concentration: seventy percent of the
108 projects were in 3 regions: ECA (33 percent), EAP (20 percent), and MNA (19 percent). These
interventions were located in 56 countries, and 22 countries had more than 1 (2 to 5) interventions.
Around half (46 out of 108, or 43 percent) were in the top 25 countries identified in Attachment 3.
The total number of projects per fiscal year has shown a declining trend from FY04 to FY14.




                                                                                                              87
        SUPPORTING REAL SECTOR INVESTMENT: INFRASTRUCTURE

        Fifty two WBG projects were identified as having core capital markets infrastructure components.
        These included 40 AAA and 6 lending projects supported by the World Bank and six IFC invest-
        ment projects that utilized securities instruments to support infrastructure development.63 The
        number of these WBG activities was relatively stable during the period FY04-12, averaging about
        3 projects per year but has risen sharply since FY13 to an annual average of 13 projects. Almost
        half of the projects are equally distributed between the AFR & EAP regions while the MNA region
        accounts for only a very small share of capital market activities for infrastructure development.
        There were 5 projects in India, 5 regionally focused on Africa, and 5 that were globally focused.


Figure 5.12 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Infrastructure

                                   Count                        By FY                                                                                Count     By Region
                              14                                                                                      Number of interventions   12
    Number of interventions




                              12                                                                                                                10                          IFC Investment
                              10                                                                                                                8                           WB AAA
                               8
                                                                                                                                                6                           WB Lending
                               6
                                                                                                                                                4
                               4
                               2                                                                                                                2

                               0                                                                                                                0
                                    FY04
                                           FY05
                                                  FY06
                                                         FY07
                                                                FY08
                                                                       FY09
                                                                              FY10
                                                                                     FY11
                                                                                            FY12
                                                                                                   FY13
                                                                                                          FY14




                                                                                                                                                      AFR EAP ECA   LCR    SAR MNA OTH



Source: IFC MIS extract data, WB Business Warehouse

        World Bank lending interventions for infrastructure were focused mainly on creating an enabling
        environment for the development of capital markets to provide financing for infrastructure
        development. The main areas of support included lending for the development of capital markets
        regulatory frameworks and for the development of bond markets to provide medium and long


        63The process for selecting the relevant World Bank Group infrastructure and capital market
        interventions began by identifying all World Bank activities with both capital market related sector codes
        (FC, FD, and FK) and infrastructure related sector or theme codes. For IFC activities, capital market
        relevance was determined by sector classification while infrastructure involvement was indicated by the
        infrastructure flag found in the MIS for AS and by the infrastructure Cluster Department for
        Investments. Based on the list of projects created, a core group of infrastructure capital market projects
        was selected by eliminating projects whose primary focus was on other areas of capital market
        development. IFC investment projects that utilized securities instruments to support infrastructure
        development were also included.



                                                                                                                 88
   term financing for infrastructure projects. The bulk of the support was in the form of providing
   general advisory services on use of bond finance or guarantees (seminars, background papers,
   policy notes), with little in the way of specific hands-on technical assistance, (e.g., amendments
   to the legal framework) or practical transactional support (e.g., finding market partners, such as
   underwriting banks or potential investors). Activities were concentrated in a few countries/re-
   gions.

   SUPPORTING REAL SECTOR INVESTMENT THROUGH TREASURY ISSUES: ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL BONDS

   Since 2008, both the IBRD and the IFC have undertaken a growing number of bond issues that
   are associated with the financing of an identified part of their real sector activities. Such ‘theme’
   bonds include, prominently, ‘green bonds’ associated with the financing of a set of projects gen-
   erating a direct environmental benefit – renewable energy, energy efficiency and climate change
   adaptation – as well as social impact bonds, associated with a specific social benefit – social hous-
   ing, financial inclusion, health or education. Green and social bonds are innovative tools for re-
   sponsible investors, enabling them to earmark investments according to the environmental or
   social benefits expected from the underlying projects.


 Figure 5.13 IEG Capital Markets Portfolio Identification: Green Bonds and Theme Bonds

                                    $ m              By Calendar Year
                          3000
                          2500
                          2000
                          1500
                          1000
                              500
                               0
                                      FY08    FY09   FY10   FY11   FY12   FY13   FY14

                                             WB Green       IFC Impact      IFC Green
Source: IEG, WBG Treasuries


   IBRD issued its first green bonds in 2008 in Swedish krona for a total amount of about US$300
   million equivalent to Swedish institutional investors. Since its first green bond issuance, IBRD
   has so far raised over US$7 billion equivalent in green bonds through 77 transactions in 17
   currencies. IFC has also played a pioneering role in developing the green bond market. Since its
   inaugural issue in 2010, IFC has raised US$3.7 billion through its green bond program, including
   the first benchmark-sized green bonds issued in February and November 2013 (for US$1 billion
   each).


                                                            89
As an example of a social bond, IFC started a bond program to help fund its Banking on Women
program, which supports women-owned small and medium enterprises. Roughly one-third of
all SMEs in emerging markets are owned by women but often lack access to credit. The Banking
on Women bond program was initiated with a 5-year dual tranche bond denominated in Aus-
tralian dollars and Turkish Lira that raised US$165 million equivalent from Japanese investors in
2013.

A final product illustrated here is the WBG’s recently introduced tool for risk management, as an
innovative way to provide for disaster relief, through its Catastrophic Risk (cat) Bonds (see Box
5.1).


Box 5.1 Supporting Risk Management in the Real Sector: Catastrophic Risk (CAT) Bonds
Catastrophe bonds (cat bonds) are a risk management tool, wherein the bond’s coupons, and principal depending on its struc-
ture, are not paid in the case of a predefined high risk event. The government that issues the cat bond can then use the funds
that would have gone to debt service for disaster relief. Thus, cat bond schemes mitigate fiscal risks stemming from the trigger
event. Even though the instrument is useful for emerging market countries to manage disaster risks, the lack of knowledge, ca-
pacity, and experience with them in emerging economies reduces their use. The World Bank Group has helped fill this market
gap by assisting in cat bond issuance in countries vulnerable to natural disasters, notably, in Mexico and the Caribbean.

In a typical cat bond scheme, the sponsor sets up a special purpose vehicle (SPV) that issues the cat bond. The SPV manages
the proceeds by investing them in highly rated assets and using the returns to pay coupons. In addition, the sponsor pays the
equivalent of an insurance premium to the bond holders via the SPV. If the predefined event does not occur, at the maturity, the
principal is refunded to the investors. In the case the trigger event occurs, the SPV is liquidated and disbursed to the sponsor.
For investors, there is no credit risk for the principal, and correlation with traditional asset classes is limited. Together with the
enhanced yield, they provide attractive investment opportunities. The benefits for the sponsors include the possibly lower insur-
ance cost, fixed for multiple years.


                                                                        Flows
                                       Insurance                                                          Principal
                 Sponsor               premium                           SPV                              Premium     Investors
                                                                                                          & Return
                                        Principal
                                                                                                          Principal
                                                                                              Principal
                                                            Principal
                                                                         Principal
                                                                                     Return




                                                                                                                      Initial transaction
                                                           High Quality                                               Flow w/o event
                                                              Assets                                                  Flow at event
                                                                                                                      Flow at maturity
                                                                                                                      w/o event

The first emerging market country to operate a cat bond program was Mexico in 2006 after the increase of reinsurance costs due
to Hurricane Katrina. Its second issuance was under the MultiCat program the World Bank Treasury established in 2009. Again
in 2012, the Mexican government renewed the insurance scheme. The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF)



                                                                         90
is an example of the World Bank’s new approach, where the Bank issues cat bonds on its own and uses a catastrophe swap
between the CCRIF and WB to mirror the terms of the cat bond. Under that scheme, called Capital-at-Risk-Note, when the re-
ferred event triggers, the principal loss of the cat bond is absorbed by the WB, and at the same time the WB pays the equivalent
to the pool.

The cat bond insurance scheme can be applied to anything parametrically measurable, and such bonds have been used to in-
sure against risks of longevity/mortality, etc. The Bank’s Treasury department is now discussing the insurance of risks such as
pandemics through such vehicles.

It should be noted that the Bank also offers a Development Policy Loan (DPL) with a Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option
(CAT DDO); another initiative by the WB for disaster risk management, launched in 2008. The CAT DDO works as a line of con-
tingent credit so that the sponsors spend it for disaster relief. The facility has been approved for middle income countries such as
the Philippines, Costa Rica, Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Panama, Peru, and Sri Lanka to deal with the natural disaster
risks. The CAT DDO is a loan facility not involving securities markets.

Sources: IEG, Artemis (2014).
Notes: Taiwan, China used the cat bond scheme to insure against earthquake risks in 2003, and the California Earthquake
Authority, a privately funded and publicly managed entity, launched it as early as 2001. In recent years, Louisiana and the
government of Turkey issued cat bonds in 2012 and 2013 respectively.




                                                                91
Attachment 6
Preparatory Consultations / Meetings with the WBG
    Topics                     Individuals                   Department
    Overviews                  Alison Harwood                GFMDR – Capital Markets
                               Michel Noel                   GFMDR - NBFI
                               Ravi Vish                     MIGA
                               Mario Guadamillas             GFMDR
                               Augusto de la Torre           LCRCE
                               Sergio Schmukler              DEC
                               Thierry Tressell              DEC
                               Consolate Rusagara            FIRST
                               Jorge Patino                  FIRST
                               Caroline Goldie               CGESH
    IFC Investments            William Haworth               CFGST
                               Jean-Marie Masse              GCSVP
                               Xavier Jordan                 CFGCM
                               Josep Julia                   CFGAM
                               David Wilton                  IFC
    Bond / Equities Markets    Anderson Caputo Silva         GFMDR
                               Ketut Kusuma                  GFMDR
                               Abha Prasad                   GFMDR
                               Catiana Garcia-Kilroy         GFMDR
                               Tanya Konidaris               GFMDR
    Housing                    Douglas Grayson               IFC Housing
                               Simon Walley                  WB Housing
    Insurance                  Julie Dana                    Disaster Risk Insurance
                               Craig Thorburn                GFMDR
    Pensions                   Heinz Rudolph                 GFMDR
                               Fiona Stewart                 GFMDR
    Payments and Settlements   Massimo Cirasino              GFMDR
                               Maria Teresa Chimienti        GFMDR
    Corporate Governance       Darren Hartzler               CRKCG
                               Caroline Bright               IFC Housing
                               Alex Berg                     GFMDR
                               Sunita Kikeri                 GFMDR
    Treasury Operations        Doris Herrera-Pol             World Bank Treasury
                               George Richardson             World Bank Treasury
                               Miguel Navarro-Martin         Fin Advisory and Banking
                               Donald Sinclair               WB Treasury
                               Phillip Anderson              FABDM
                               Laura Tlyae                   WB Treasury
                               Andrew Cross                  CTCGK
                               Keshav Gaur                   CTCGN
                               Evelyn Hartwick               CTCGK
                               Shida Zhang                   IFC Treasury
                               Esohe Denise Odaro            IFC Treasury
                               Simon Bell                    Impact Bonds/ MNA Region
    Infrastructure             Bayo Oyewole                  Global Infrastructure Facility
                               Ana Carvajal                  GFMDR
 
                               Katherine Baragona            Global Infrastructure Facility



                                                        92
