                                          96528
Middle East and North Africa Region
April 2015




                       Maximizing the
                       World Bank Group’s Impact
                       in the Middle East and
                       North Africa
Middle East and North Africa Region
April 2015




                       Maximizing the
                       World Bank Group’s Impact
                       in the Middle East and
                       North Africa
     Copyright © 2015

     The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank Group
     1818 H Street, NW
     Washington, DC 20433, USA

     All rights reserved

     First printing: March 2015
     Manufactured in the United States of America

     Photo credits:
     The Kasbah of the Udayas (Arne Hoel/World Bank)
     Cairo Skyline (Miguel de Corral/World Bank)
     Regional Partnerships (Laura Shen/World Bank)
     Souk in the Moslem Quarter of Jerusalem’s Old City (Arne Hoel/World Bank)
     Gaza Child (Olivier Lavinal/World Bank)
     Yemeni Worker (Dana Smilie/World Bank)
     Market in Djibouti (Dana Smilie/World Bank)
     Egyptian Woman’s Handcrafts (Laura Shen/World Bank)

     The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this note are entirely those of the
     authors and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, or its affiliated organi-
     zations, or to members of its board of executive directors or the countries they represent. The
     World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this publication and accepts
     no responsibility whatsoever for any consequence of their use. The boundaries, colors, denom-
     inations, and other information shown on any map in this volume do not imply on the part of
     the World Bank Group any judgment on the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
     acceptance of such boundaries.




ii
                                                                                  Contents

Foreword . .............................................................................................. v

Acknowledgements . ............................................................................. vii

                          .................................................................. ix
Abbreviations and Acronyms.

Executive Summary................................................................................ xi

I.	 The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the
	 Middle East and North Africa............................................................. 1
     The Current Engagement of the World Bank Group in the Middle East and
     	 North Africa.......................................................................................... 3
     The Strategic Relevance of Partnerships for the Middle East and
     	 North Africa Region............................................................................... 13
     Summary of Portfolio.................................................................................. 17
     Overview of IFC Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa............................ 23
     Overview of MIGA Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa........................ 27

II.	 Overview of the Middle East and North Africa Portfolio
	 by Global Practice........................................................................... 29
     Leveraging Global Knowledge to Support the Middle East and North Africa................ 31
     Agriculture Global Practice........................................................................... 33
     Education Global Practice............................................................................. 37
     Energy and Extractives Global Practice............................................................. 41
     Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice............................................. 45
     Finance and Markets Global Practice................................................................ 49
     Governance Global Practice........................................................................... 55
     Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice................................................. 61
     Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice....................................... 65
     Poverty Global Practice................................................................................ 69
     Social Protection and Labor Global Practice....................................................... 73
     Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice.............................................. 77
     Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice........................................................ 83
     Transport and ICT Global Practice................................................................... 85
     Water Global Practice.................................................................................. 91




                                                                                                                  iii
     III.	 Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities
     	 in the Middle East and North Africa ................................................. 95
          Climate Change.......................................................................................... 97
          Decentralization....................................................................................... 101
          Disaster Risk Management.......................................................................... 105
          Fragility, Conflict, and Violence.................................................................... 109
          Fuel Subsidy and Social Safety Net Reforms...................................................... 117
          Gender.................................................................................................. 125
          Governance and Service Delivery in Health and Education.................................... 131
          Private Sector Development and Job Creation................................................... 137
          Public-Private Partnerships ......................................................................... 143

     References.......................................................................................... 147




iv   Contents
                                                                  Foreword


T    he World Bank Group has recently adopted its new operating model aimed at facili-
     tating knowledge sharing at the global level and harnessing international insights to
inform regional and local solutions. Through the Global Practices structure and the close
linkages between IBRD, IDA, IFC, and MIGA, the World Bank Group will make sure to
maximize its engagement and impact across the world.
Under this new framework of engagement, our collective challenge is to better deliver
and increase support to the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) countries. This is
especially critical in the MENA region, which is undergoing complicated transitions
marked by social unrest and economic vulnerabilities, as well as by open conflicts with
regional and global reverberations. In order to respond to the immediate needs gener-
ated by the current crises, but also to promote reforms and foster medium- to long-term
investments, the World Bank Group seeks to chart a new path forward. In partnership
with governments, development institutions, and civil society organizations across the
region and globally, the purpose of our joint engagement is to facilitate inclusive growth
and convene change in fragile middle-income countries in order to unleash the MENA
region’s full potential.
To deliver, we need to ask ourselves fundamental questions including: What should the
objectives of the World Bank Group be in the region given how pivotal the Middle East
and North Africa is for global stability and prosperity? How can the World Bank Group
maximize its impact in the region? How do we address the deep governance issues that
are muting private sector development and job creation? How can economic and social
development best lay the groundwork for the advent of peace?
This report, Maximizing theWorld Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa, is
part of the ongoing discussion to answer these critical questions.Through the lens of each
of the Global Practices and Cross-Cutting Solutions Areas, the report details the cur-
rent engagement of the World Bank Group in the MENA region. While not exhaustive,
the report also highlights some of the most critical cross-sectoral challenges the region
faces, including fragility and conflict, private sector development and job creation, sub-
sidies and social safety nets, gender, governance and service delivery in health and edu-
cation, climate change, public-private partnerships, decentralization, and disaster risk
management.




                                                                                               v
     Though the report does not answer the fundamental questions previously posed, its
     pages provide insights into how the World Bank Group has engaged in the region to date
     and gives perspectives of how to tailor our strategy moving forward. Ultimately, this
     report emphasizes that because the MENA region is at a critical stage in its history, the
     World Bank Group should play a unique role to contribute to building a more prosper-
     ous future for the region.




     Hafez Ghanem
     Vice President
     Middle East and North Africa Region
     The World Bank




vi   Foreword
                                      Acknowledgements


T     his report was inspired by the commitment of the World Bank Group to strengthen
      its engagement and address the key challenges faced by countries in the Middle
East and North Africa. It was developed by a core team under the leadership of Franck
Bousquet, Senior Regional Advisor of the MNA Region, who was aided by Miguel de
Corral (Junior Professional Associate, MNAVP) and Maya El-Azzazi (Senior Program
Assistant, MNAVP), as well as Olivier Lavinal (Special Assistant to the Regional Vice
President, MNAVP), Janmejay Singh (Senior Strategy and Operations Officer, MNAVP),
and Laura Johnson (Consultant), in drafting, editing, and consolidating the report. The
report would not have been possible without the invaluable inputs from numerous
colleagues throughout the World Bank Group, including MNA Program Leaders and
Practice Managers of the Global Practices. The team would like to thank them for their
commitment and close collaboration on numerous inputs for this report. Special appre-
ciation is extended to Hafez Ghanem, Regional Vice President for the Middle East and
North Africa Region; Gerard Byam, Director of Strategy and Operations for the Middle
East and North Africa Region; and Keith Hansen and Nena Stoiljkovic, Vice Presidents of
the Global Practices, for their support and guidance on this initiative.
Section I was developed by the team led by Franck Bousquet. The initial note on key
challenges and opportunities in the region benefitted from the guidance of Shantayanan
Devarajan (Chief Economist, MNACE), Olivier Lavinal, and Janmejay Singh. Haleh Bridi
(Regional Programs and Partnerships Director, MNARS), Hayat Taleb Al-Harazi (Pro-
gram Officer, MNARS), and Thomas Djurhuus (Lead Partnership Specialist, MNARS)
drafted the note on partnerships. Joseph Fizzarotti (Resource Management Officer,
BPSGR) contributed to the note on the summary of the Middle East and North Africa
portfolio. Serena Cavicchi (Strategy Officer, CGEDR) drafted the note on IFC under
the guidance of Rapti Goonesekere (Principal Economist, CGECF). Persephone Econo-
mou (Research Officer, MIGEC) drafted the note on MIGA under the guidance of Paul
Antony Barbour (Senior Risk Management Officer, MIGEC) and Edith Quintrell (Direc-
tor, MIGOP).
Section II was developed by the following Practice Managers of the various World Bank
Group Global Practices working on the Middle East and North Africa Region: Steven
Schonberger (Practice Manager, Agriculture and Water), Harry Patrinos (Practice Man-
ager, Education), Charles Cormier (Practice Manager, Energy and Extractives), Benoit
Blarel (Practice Manager, Environment and Natural Resources), Aurora Ferrari (Practice
Manager, Finance and Markets), Hisham Waly (Practice Manager, Governance), Yolanda



                                                                                          vii
       Tayler (Practice Manager, Governance), Enis Baris (Practice Manager, Health, Nutrition,
       and Population), Auguste Tano Kouame (Practice Manager, Macroeconomics and Fis-
       cal Management), Christina Malmberg (Practice Manager, Poverty), Yasser El-Gammal
       (Practice Manager, Social Protection and Labor), Nina Bhatt (Practice Manager, Social,
       Urban, Rural and Resilience), Najy Benhassine (Practice Manager, Trade and Competi-
       tiveness), Carlo Rossotto (Lead ICT Policy Specialist, Transport and ICT), and Olivier
       Le Ber (Practice Manager, Transport and ICT). The team is also very grateful to Preeti
       Ahuja (Manager, MNADE) and Harsh Sahay (Consultant, MNADE), for their assistance
       in reviewing and consolidating inputs on portfolio information.
       Section III was primarily written by both MNA Program Leaders and Practice Manag-
       ers working on the MNA Region. Great appreciation goes to Kamel Braham, Andrea
       Liverani, and Philippe de Meneval (Program Leaders, MNCO1); Haneen Sayed, Peter
       Mousley, and Husam Beides (Program Leaders, MNCO2); Balakrishna Menon, Gustavo
       Demarco, and Sahar Nasr (Program Leaders, MNCO3); Bjorn Phillip and Samira Hillis
       (Program Leaders, MNCO4); and Hana Brixi and Paul Moreno-Lopez (Program Lead-
       ers, MNCO5) for their insights and dedication in preparing this report. The note on cli-
       mate change was written by James Close (Director, GCCD1), Benoit Blarel, and Charles
       Cormier. The note on decentralization was written by Balakrishna Menon and Andrea
       Liverani with inputs from Bjorn Phillip, Hisham Waly, and Nina Bhatt. The note on disas-
       ter risk management was written by Andrea Zanon (Senior Disaster Risk Management
       Specialist, GSURR). The note on fragility, conflict, and violence was written by Spyr-
       idon Demetriou (Senior Operations Officer, GCFDR) under the guidance of Kanthan
       Shankar (Practice Manager, GCFDR). The note on gender was written by Nina Bhatt
       under the guidance of Caren Grown (Senior Director, GCGDR). The note on gover-
       nance and service delivery in health and education was written by Hana Brixi with inputs
       from Enis Baris, Harry Patrinos, and Hisham Waly. The note on private sector develop-
       ment and job creation was written by Sahar Nasr with inputs from Philippe de Meneval,
       Najy Benhassine, Andrei Mikhnev (Practice Manager, GTCDR), Simon Bell (Practice
       Manager, GFMDR), and Bernard Funck (Lead Economist, GMFDR). The note on pub-
       lic-private partnerships was written by Aijaz Ahmad (Senior Public Private Partnership
       Specialist, GCPDR) under the guidance of Clive Harris (Practice Manager, GCPDR).
       The note on subsidies and social safety nets was written by Husam Beides and Gustavo
       Demarco with inputs from Yasser El-Gammal, Charles Cormier, Bernard Funck, and Lili
       Mottaghi (Economist, MNACE).
       Finally, the team would like to thank the Global Practice and Cross-Cutting Solution Area
       Senior Directors and Directors, MNA Country Directors, as well as Idah Z. Pswarayi-
       Riddihough (Director of Operations, GPSOS), Jeffrey Lewis (Chief Economist, GPSCE),
       Jeffrey Waite (Advisor to the Vice President, GPSVP), Rita Jupe (Principal Communica-
       tions Officer, ECRGP), and Ana Luna Barros (Senior Communications Officer, ECRGP)
       for their strong support of this initiative.



viii   Acknowledgments
         Abbreviations and Acronyms

AAA	     Analytical and Advisory Activities
CEM	     Country Economic Memorandum
CCSA	    Cross-Cutting Solutions Area
CDD	     community-driven development
CPF	     Country Partnership Framework
CSO	     civil society organization
DPL	     Development Policy Loan
DRM	     Disaster Risk Management
E4E	     Education for Employment
ESW	     Economic and Sector Work
FAO	     Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FCV	     Fragility, Conflict and Violence Cross-Cutting Solutions Area
FDI	     foreign direct investment
GCC	     Gulf Cooperation Council
GDP	     gross domestic product
GFDRR	   Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GHG	     greenhouse gas
GNI	     gross national income
IBRD	    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICT	     information and communications technology
IDA	     International Development Association
IDP	     internally displaced person
IFC	     International Finance Corporation
IFI	     international financial institution
IMF	     International Monetary Fund
IPCC	    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IT	      information technology
IUWM	    integrated urban water management
MDB	     Multilateral Development Bank
MENA	    Middle East and North Africa region
MFM	     Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management Global Practice
MIGA	    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MNA	     Middle East and North Africa Region (World Bank department)
MSME	    micro, small, and medium enterprises
NGO	     non-governmental organization



                                                                         ix
    NPL	   Non-performing Loan
    PEFA	  Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
    PFM	   Public Financial Management
    PforR	Program-for-Results
    PPI	   Private Participation in Infrastructure
    PPP	   Public-Private Partnership
    RAS	   Reimbursable Advisory Services
    RDPP	  Regional Development and Protection Programme
    SABER	 Systems Approach for Better Education Results
    SCD	   Systematic Country Diagnostic
    SME	   small- and medium-sized enterprise
    SOE	   state-owned enterprise
    SURR	  Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice
    UHC	   universal health coverage
    UN	    United Nations
    UNHCR	 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
    WBG	   World Bank Group




x   Abbreviations and Acronyms
                                       Executive Summary



T    his report provides an overview of the World Bank Group’s engagement in the
     Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, highlighting the new operat-
ing model of the World Bank Group. In particular, the report provides insight on the
key challenges and strategic engagement of each sector (Global Practice) in MENA and
details some of the key cross-cutting challenges that countries face. This report serves as
a basis to convene international thought leaders, as well as internal and external stake-
holders, in the context of developing a new strategy for the Middle East and North Africa
region later this year.
The Middle East and North Africa is at a critical historical juncture, and the Bank
has a vital role to play in helping the region lay the foundation for stability and
shared growth. The region faces three challenges in particular: (a) long-standing distor-
tions that have generated jobless growth and poor service delivery as well as low financial
access and inclusion; (b) severe imbalances that threaten macroeconomic stability; and
(c) deep political and social tensions, at times escalating into violent conflict.
The World Bank Group’s current engagement supports four key pillars: (a)
strengthening governance; (b) ensuring economic and social inclusion; (c) cre-
ating jobs; and (d) accelerating sustainable growth. Progress on these pillars can
be made through a two-pronged approach focused on addressing the immediate needs
arising from humanitarian crises throughout the region while also giving sustained atten-
tion to the investments and reforms needed for medium- and long-term development.
This two-pronged approach is necessary to help governments cope with immediate pres-
sures on already fragile institutions and at the same time develop long-term strategies
to address deep-seated issues that have hindered inclusive growth and prosperity for
decades.
In 2013, at the request of the Arab Governors and the G8, the World Bank Group,
along with other international financial institutions and members of the Arab
Coordination Group, launched a Scaling Up Initiative to support the countries of
the Middle East and North Africa region. In this context, the World Bank Group has
increased its financial assistance to countries of the region: US$3 billion in fiscal 2011,
US$3.7 billion in fiscal 2012, US$3.9 billion in fiscal 2013, US$4.2 billion in fiscal 2014,
and a projected US$4–5 billion in fiscal 2015. Through a strategy of close engagement
with members of the Arab Coordination Group, the volume of jointly financed invest-
ment projects has reached an estimated US$3.9 billion in 2013–14 and is increasing.


                                                                                               xi
      Despite this scaling up of financial assistance, many of the challenges in the region
      remain. These challenges are complex and cross-sectoral in nature. This report
      details nine specific cross-cutting challenges: climate change; decentralization; disaster
      risk management; fragility, conflict and violence; fuel subsidies and social safety nets;
      gender; governance and service delivery in health and education; private sector develop-
      ment and job creation; and public-private partnerships.While these are some of the most
      critical challenges faced by countries throughout the region, there are other important
      cross-cutting themes that also need to be addressed moving forward, such as lagging
      regions and citizen engagement.
      In addition to the aforementioned cross-cutting challenges in the region, the
      new operating model has produced several examples of cross-sectoral collabora-
      tion through various operations in MENA. In the Maghreb, for instance, a number of
      decentralization and local service projects benefitted from the collaboration of various
      Global Practices—Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience (SURR); Water; Governance;
      Transport and ICT; and Trade and Competitiveness. The Bank’s Emergency Response
      in Gaza also presents an example of how different Global Practices—Water, Energy
      and Extractives, and SURR—jointly delivered in a fragile, post-conflict environment.
      In Egypt, transformational engagements such as the Agricultural Land Reclamation
      project draw from the expertise of several Global Practices, focusing on investments
      across sectors. Furthermore, several Global Practices—Governance; Education; Health,
      Nutrition and Population; Macro and Fiscal Management; and Trade and Competitive-
      ness—have worked together to advance Reimbursable Advisory Services in the MENA
      region. Recently, in March 2015, eight Global Practices and the IFC were mobilized for
      the Egypt Economic Development Conference, supporting key sectors such as energy,
      agriculture, low-income housing, sanitation, private sector development, tourism, trans-
      port, and social protection. Ultimately, these are illustrative examples that highlight the
      importance of continued collaboration across Global Practices, especially as many of the
      key challenges in the MENA region are cross-sectoral in nature.
      Looking ahead, responding to the changing realities on the ground, the World
      Bank Group is rethinking its regional strategy in order to maximize its impact
      in the Middle East and North Africa. This new strategy, which is currently under
      preparation, will aim to step up the Bank Group’s engagement in the region in order to
      achieve shared growth and prosperity, as well as work with partners to convene change
      in the region. Through this approach, the World Bank Group can better mobilize the
      international community and pave the way for lasting economic and social development
      in the region, which is a global public good.




xii   Executive Summary
                         I.
    The World Bank Group’s
 Current Engagement in the
Middle East and North Africa




                               1
        The Current Engagement of the World Bank
         Group in the Middle East and North Africa


Regional Context

S   ince the onset of the Arab Spring in 2011, the Middle East and North Africa region
    has been in an unprecedented period of flux. Most countries in the region have expe-
rienced considerable political and social changes as well as significant economic volatility.
The region is currently at a crossroads, where transformational gains built on the ideals
of the Arab Spring could be realized, or where fragility and instability could become the
long-term norm. Over the last year, there has also been a quantum uptick in conflict and
violence in the region, which is having global reverberations.
In some countries, most notably Tunisia, the political space has opened up, paving the
way for inclusive governance. Other countries, however, have witnessed significant polit-
ical instability and increased social divisions following the events of 2011. In countries
such as Syria and Iraq, this instability has boiled over into violent conflicts that have
effectively destabilized the region, with massive outflows of refugees exerting pressure
on neighboring states with limited means and already weakened public services. On the
other hand, most resource-rich states throughout the region have been relatively stable,
but they continue to face significant medium- and long-term structural challenges, as
well as immediate concerns due to the declining price of oil.
Many countries of the region face three challenges in particular, which if left unad-
dressed, threaten their stability and prosperity:
•	 Long-standing distortions that generated jobless growth, poor service delivery, and
   low financial access and inclusion
•	 Severe imbalances that threaten macroeconomic stability
•	 Deep political and social tensions, at times escalating into violent conflict

In terms of the World Bank Group’s twin goals, the Middle East and North Africa region
has been making significant progress. The region has already met the 3 percent target for
ending extreme poverty, although the fact that 12 percent of the population continues to
live on US$2 or less per day indicates that a significant number of people are vulnerable




                    The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa   3
            Absolute Poverty at US$1.25 and US$2.00 per day: Middle East and
Figure 1.1. 
            North Africa Region, 1990–2000
    25
                                                                                Headcount rate (US$1.25 per day)
                                                                                Headcount rate (US$2 per day)
    20


    15


    10


     5


    0
            1990         1993         1996         1999         2002         2005         2008         2010


Source: PovCalNet, World Bank 2014.




               to falling into extreme poverty. Moreover, while the incomes of the bottom 40 percent
               of the population have been growing faster than the average of the population as a whole,
               the middle class has remained stagnant which, coupled with the inequality of opportu-
               nities and the broader issue of social and political exclusion, was a significant catalyst for
               the demonstrations that led to the Arab Spring.
               Furthermore, although gross domestic product (GDP) growth was strong over the last
               decade, it was often accompanied by crony capitalism practices and a prevailing sense
               that privilege—known as wasta—was the most important determinant for employ-
               ment. Recent research has also shown that politically connected firms have crowded
               out job-creating small- and medium-sized enterprises through various policies, including
               trade and foreign investment restrictions and stifling regulatory environments (Schiff-
               bauer et al. 2014).
               Youth have been hit particularly hard by this difficult social and economic environment.
               Most notably, the lack of private sector jobs and a stagnant public sector have limited
               opportunities for youth. At 30 percent, youth unemployment in the Middle East and
               North Africa region is the highest in the world, amplified by the fact that youth repre-
               sent a sizeable demographic in the region.Young women face even greater challenges in
               finding employment, with unemployment rates close to 50 percent in some countries.
               In macroeconomic terms, most countries in the Middle East and North Africa are fac-
               ing deteriorating fiscal balances, high public debt, and low investor confidence, all of
               which threaten fiscal stability. Contributing to this is the continued existence of energy
               subsidies that are unsustainable and that in fact, benefit the wealthiest sectors of society.


4              Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
            Gallup Poll Question: “In general, do you mostly agree or
Figure 1.2. 
            disagree with the following statement: Knowing people in high
            positions is critical to getting a job (Wasta)?”
          120


      100


          80
Percent




                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage of those who agreed
          60
                                                                                                                                                                                 with the above statement
                                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage of those who
          40                                                                                                                                                                     disagreed with the above statement

          20


           0
                Morocco
                          Egypt
                                  Lebanon
                                            Saudi Arabia
                                                           Jordan
                                                                    Syria
                                                                            Yemen
                                                                                    United Arab Emirates
                                                                                                           Algeria
                                                                                                                     Bahrain
                                                                                                                               Iraq
                                                                                                                                      Kuwait
                                                                                                                                               Libya
                                                                                                                                                       Qatar
                                                                                                                                                               Sudan
                                                                                                                                                                       Tunisia




Source: Gallup Poll 2013.



The overall spending on subsidies is staggering, with the Middle East and North Africa
accounting for 48 percent of the world’s total energy subsidies.Thus, one of the principal
challenges that governments throughout the region will face in the coming years is tran-
sitioning away from economic models anchored in strong state subsidies.
Governance remains a central challenge, especially in countries transitioning from
authoritarian governments to more open and inclusive forms of governance. Public sec-
tor reform and the agenda regarding the devolution of powers to subnational govern-
ments have characterized the post-Arab Spring debate and are an ongoing source of
tension.
In addition to the aforementioned challenges, the conflicts across the region have fueled
mass instability, especially due to the significant numbers of refugees and internally dis-
placed persons, destruction of infrastructure, and staggering death tolls. Since 2011,
the conflicts and unrest in Egypt, Tunisia, Syria, Yemen, and Libya have affected over 10
million people, with a cost of around US$168 billion—19 percent of their combined
GDP (Devarajan et al. 2014). The conflicts in Syria, Gaza, and Iraq have been particularly
devastating. In Syria, United Nations estimates place the death toll at over 191,000. Over
half of the population has been displaced, and 75 percent of the population has fallen into
poverty, with 54 percent falling into extreme poverty. The conflict in Gaza has resulted
in a collapse of the local economy, with massive destruction to infrastructure, housing,


                                                             The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa                                                                            5
            Youth Unemployment (percent), Middle East and North Africa Region
Figure 1.3. 

     West Bank and Gaza
     United Arab Emirates
                     Tunisia
     Syrian Arab Republic
              Saudi Arabia
                      Qatar                                                      Unemployment, youth female
                  Morocco                                                        Unemployment, youth male
                   Lebanon
                     Kuwait
                     Jordan
         Iran, Islamic Rep.
          Egypt, Arab Rep.
                    Bahrain
                     Algeria
                               0     10           20       30         40         50            60    70


Source: World Bank Development Indicators 2014.



                and educational and medical facilities. In Iraq, as a result of the emergence of ISIS—also
                known as ISIL—and its control of large territories, significant numbers of people have
                been displaced and trade has been severely obstructed across the Middle East. Libya has
                also experienced severe conflict and instability, posing security threats to neighboring
                countries in North Africa. The ongoing conflict in Yemen has undermined the progress
                achieved in the National Dialogue and further accentuated the precarious security situ-
                ation across the region.
                While these political, societal, economic, and security challenges are not unique to
                the Middle East and North Africa region, their ubiquity and intensity have created an
                extraordinary moment in the recent history of the Middle East and North Africa. Nev-
                ertheless, the region has tremendous potential for growth and prosperity going forward.
                Some countries in the region have taken remarkable steps toward realizing this poten-
                tial. In Tunisia, a new constitution has been adopted, and leaders have taken the path
                of compromise, inclusiveness, and pluralism as they look to consolidate their nascent
                democracy. The region also has the extraordinary benefit of having a young population of
                100 million people, which is largely well educated, has the ability to mobilize via social
                media, and ultimately aspires to build more just and prosperous societies. The dyna-
                mism of its youth combined with its proximity to European and Asian markets, natural
                resources, and fertile lands, present exciting opportunities for making significant strides
                in the Middle East and North Africa, especially if they are matched with visionary lead-
                ership, sound economic policies, and a culture of openness and dialogue.




6               Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
         The Regional Effect of the Syrian Conflict
Map 1.1. 




Source: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (December 2014).



The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the
Middle East and North Africa: Responding to Crises and
Promoting Long-Term Prosperity
The World Bank Group has focused on four key pillars: (a) strengthening governance, (b)
ensuring economic and social inclusion, (c) creating jobs, and (d) accelerating sustainable
growth.
Making progress on these pillars requires cross-sectoral solutions to complex and
long-standing issues. The World Bank Group is focused on addressing the immediate
needs arising from humanitarian crises throughout the region, such as Syria’s refugee
crisis and Gaza’s reconstruction, while also giving sustained attention to the investments
and reforms needed for medium- and long-term development. This two-pronged
approach consists of helping governments cope with immediate pressures
on already fragile institutions and, at the same time, developing long-
term strategies to address deep-seated issues that have hindered inclusive
growth and prosperity for decades.



                       The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa   7
    Addressing the Fragility Challenge in the Middle East and North Africa
    Responding to the        The human and economic impact of the conflict on the already weakened economy of
    impact of the Gaza       the Palestinian territories calls for rethinking new ways not just to reconstruct Gaza, but
    conflict                 to build a viable economy for the Palestinian territories. Along with the United Nations
                             and the European Union, the World Bank has assisted the Palestinian Authority conduct
                             a rapid assessment of recent damage in the water, electricity, and municipal sectors and
                             prepared an emergency response package of US$62 million, which includes support in all
                             three sectors as well as emergency budget support.
    Addressing spill-over    In neighboring countries, the Bank is assisting with the assessment of the socioeconomic
    effects of the Syrian    impact of the influx of refugees. In Jordan and Lebanon, the Bank is also responding
    conflict                 through emergency operations, including grants to communities hosting refugees aimed
                             at strengthening the capacity of local governments, and with medium- to long-term
                             investment projects to provide infrastructure in key sectors such as municipal services,
                             solid waste management, water, electricity, and transport. Ultimately, the Bank has
                             provided US$170 million (and leveraged an additional US$145 million in parallel financing
                             and donor grants) to assist Jordan and Lebanon in strengthening their institutional
                             resilience and mitigating the impact of significant refugee inflows.

                Thus, the World Bank Group’s engagement is crucial in fragile and con-
                flict-affected situations, in countries undergoing political transitions, and in other
                seemingly stable countries that continue to face the challenges of high unemployment,
                                       sluggish private sector growth, and weak delivery of public ser-
     The World Bank’s current          vices. In fragile and conflict affected situations, in particular,
     engagement supports a two-        the World Bank Group is continuing to assist governments and
     pronged approach focused on       people build systems and services that will strengthen resilience
     helping governments cope with     going forward.
     immediate pressures on already
     fragile institutions and, at the
                                            During this extraordinary time in the region, the World Bank
     same time, developing long-
                                            Group has an opportunity to be at the forefront of helping gov-
     term strategies to address deep-
                                            ernments tackle immediate challenges and adopt reform-minded
     seated issues that have hindered
                                            policies needed to strengthen their institutions, empower
     inclusive growth and prosperity
                                            citizens, and achieve inclusive and lasting growth. Through
     for decades.
                                            cross-sectoral engagements, the World Bank Group can have a
                                            transformational impact in the following areas: (a) enhanc-
                                            ing service delivery; (b) creating jobs, improving the investment
                  climate, and facilitating regional integration; (c) achieving subsidy reforms and strength-
                  ening social safety nets; and (d) promoting more open, transparent, and accountable
                  societies.

                 Enhancing Service Delivery
                 Many of the grievances voiced during the Arab Spring—which continue today—are
                 focused on the weak public services provided by governments. While citizens have
                 demanded effective educational systems, efficient healthcare systems, clean drinking
                 water, reliable energy, and modern and resilient infrastructure, states have been unable,
                 in many cases, to provide such services over the last decade. Moreover, citizens through-
                 out the region have expressed significant dissatisfaction with service delivery, as well



8                Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
as low levels of trust in state institutions. Going forward, helping governments pro-
vide these basic services to citizens will be crucial, both for building stronger and more
credible institutions and for reaching the most underprivileged
people and regions. This means not only providing greater access
                                                                         Citizens hold their governments
to citizens, but also fostering more accountable and efficient gov-
                                                                         accountable for delivering basic
ernance of basic public services.
                                                                             public services and promoting
                                                                             inclusive growth that crowds-in
 reating Jobs, Improving the Investment Climate, and
C
                                                                             all sectors of society. In fact,
Facilitating Regional Integration
                                                                             recent history in the region
In order to create the millions of jobs needed and significantly        serves as a reminder that the
increase growth rates, reforms and investments are paramount to         alternative to inclusive gov-
foster private sector-led growth. Most notably, the World Bank          ernance is often social unrest
Group is focusing on investing in new small- and medium-sized           and in extreme cases, violent
enterprises and advancing greater employer-driven skills devel-         conflict. Going forward, greater
opment. In this regard, partnering with the International Finance       direct engagement with citizens
Corporation (IFC), as was done for the first Education for              is of paramount importance.
Employment (E4E) investment project, is crucial. Also important
are efforts at advancing key projects focused on improving the
investment climate in order to create a more dynamic private sector; meeting energy
needs in a sustainable and low-carbon manner; and investing in large infrastructure
projects aimed at creating jobs, improving trade, and connecting lagging regions to a
larger infrastructure network. This is especially important for the Middle East and North
Africa, which is one of the least globally and regionally integrated regions in the world.
Although home to 5.5 percent of the world’s population and 3.3 percent of the world’s
GDP, the region’s share of non-oil world trade is only 1.8 percent. To this end, fostering
greater regional integration is a critical long-term strategic objective. Removing trade
barriers will contribute enormously to long-term development in the region. A recent
World Bank report estimated that greater economic integration in the Middle East could
generate as much as US$30 billion (World Bank 2014b). Building on this agenda across
the region in coordination with the IFC and regional partners is essential to foster long-
term growth, stability, and prosperity. Although developing a comprehensive agenda for
the Middle East and North Africa may be a long-term objective, there are a number
of actions that can be taken in the short-term to lay the ground for greater regional
integration.

Achieving Subsidy Reforms and Strengthening Social Safety Nets
For decades, unsustainable and large subsidies have been the norm for governments
throughout the region. The Middle East and North Africa region represents 48 percent
of global energy subsidies, while only accounting for 5.5 percent of the global population
and 3.3 percent of global GDP. In hydrocarbon-exporting countries, energy subsidies



                     The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa              9
     exceed 10 percent of GDP, and across the region subsidies crowd out public spending
     in areas such as education and health. Moreover, these subsidies have not focused on
     the poorest populations—in fact, they have benefitted the wealthier sectors of society
     (Devarajan et al. 2014). In the current environment of high fiscal deficits and tense social
     environments, transitioning away from large subsidies will be difficult but is critical for
     governments—both in the short and long term. This would not only allow governments
     to allocate more resources to the improvement of public services, but would also con-
     tribute to the creation of a dynamic, employment-intensive economy. Furthermore, due
     to the recent plunge in crude oil prices, there is a renewed need and unique opportunity
     to pursue crucial energy subsidy reforms (Devarajan and Mottaghi 2015). To this end,
     the World Bank is providing support to governments to reform costly and regressive sub-
     sidies while ensuring that the most vulnerable groups receive adequate basic services and
     continue to be supported by a reliable social safety net through targeted cash transfers.

     Promoting More Open, Transparent, and Accountable Societies
     As has been demonstrated since the onset of the Arab Spring, citizens hold their gov-
     ernments accountable for delivering basic public services and promoting inclusive
     growth that crowds-in all sectors of society. In fact, recent history in the region serves
     as a reminder that the alternative to inclusive governance is often social unrest and, in
     extreme cases, violent conflict. Going forward, open and accountable institutions and
     greater citizen engagement remain critical. Moreover, in countries such as Morocco and
     Tunisia, decentralization­—or the devolution of powers to subnational governments—has
     been a central issue. With this in mind, the World Bank is committed to helping govern-
     ments promote more open forms of governance and assisting local governments improve
     service delivery. Ultimately, this will be key to empowering citizens and unleashing the
     immense potential that exists throughout the region.

     Way Forward
     Four years after the extraordinary events that captivated the attention of the world, the
     Middle East and North Africa region is at a crossroads. Incredible transformational gains
     could be made, building on the expectations and aspirations of the region’s youth, or
     instead social upheaval and instability could become the norm, threatening progress for
     decades to come.
     Looking ahead, responding to the changing ground realities, the World Bank Group is
     rethinking its regional strategy in order to maximize its impact in the Middle East and
     North Africa. This new strategy, which is currently under preparation, will aim to step
     up the World Bank Group’s engagement in the region in order to achieve shared growth
     and prosperity, as well as work with partners to convene change in the region. Through




10   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
this approach, the World Bank Group can better mobilize the international community
and pave the way for lasting economic and social development in the region, which is a
global public good.
Going forward, the World Bank Group’s role will continue to be critical in assisting gov-
ernments and people to strengthen institutions, creating more opportunities for social
and economic empowerment, and ultimately, building a more prosperous future for the
Middle East and North Africa.




                    The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa   11
            The Strategic Relevance of Partnerships for
               the Middle East and North Africa Region


    T     he Arab Governors of the World Bank asked that the Bank “greatly intensifies its
          efforts to help mobilize external financing from other partners in support of the transi-
    tion countries in economic crisis… Arab countries and regional IFIs are ready to work closely
    with the Bank in this regard.”
    The Deauville Partnership (Finance Ministers of G8, Gulf Cooperation Coun-
    cil, transition countries, and Turkey) requested a determined effort and asked that
    the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, Islamic Development Bank, and other
    international financial institutions prepare a report to “urgently consider further financial
    support, policy advice, and capacity building to assist Arab countries in transition (ACTs)
    with economic stability, job creation, and growth.”
Due to the historic and ongoing period of change in countries throughout the Middle
East and North Africa, the region is in need of significant financial resources, both to
meet immediate pressures and to undertake necessary medium- and long-term invest-
ments. The International Monetary Fund reports that US$60–70 billion annually are




The Presidents of the Islamic Development Bank and the World Bank Group sign agreements to coordinate efforts on education
(October 2014).


                           The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa                     13
                 Arab Coordination Group—World Bank Co-Financing Levels
     Figure 1.4. 
                 (US$ million)
               2,500


               2,000

                                             1,171
               1,500
                                                       997
                                                                   World Bank
               1,000
                                                                   Arab Coordination Group

                                             1,066
                500
                                                       718
                                    14
                           0        19
                   0
                         2011     2012      2013      2014


     Source: World Bank.




     needed just to sustain current growth levels in countries undergoing transition1 (IMF
     2014a). In this context, it is critical for the Bank, as well as international partners,
     to look beyond the dire challenges of the present to mobilize and earnestly engage in
     partnerships with other multilateral and bilateral partners to scale-up support for the
     region—both in fiscal terms as well as through capacity building—in order to have a
     greater impact through larger programmatic operations. Given the strategic importance
     of this endeavor, a dedicated Partnerships Unit supports this function in the Middle East
     and North Africa Region.
     In 2013, the World Bank, along with other international financial institutions (IFIs)
     and members of the Arab Coordination Group2 launched a Scaling Up Initiative to
     address the requests from the Bank’s Arab Governors and the Deauville Partnership and
     to support the countries of the Middle East and North Africa region. In this context, the
     World Bank Group has increased its financial assistance to countries of the region: US$3
     billion in fiscal 2011; US$3.7 billion in fiscal 2012; US$3.9 billion in fiscal 2013; US$4.2
     billion in fiscal 2014; and a projected US$4–5 billion in fiscal 2015.
     Through a strategy of close engagement with members of the Arab Coordination Group,
     the volume of jointly financed investment projects jumped from US$34 million in


     1. Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Tunisia, and Yemen. (Libya does not face financing needs.)
     2. The Arab Coordination Group is comprised of: the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), the
     Abu Dhabi Fund for Development (ADFD), the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (AFESD), the Arab
     Gulf Program for United Nations Development Organizations (AGFUND), the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF), the Islamic
     Development Bank (IsDB), the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED), the Saudi Fund for Develop-
     ment (SFD), the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), and the Qatar Fund for Development (QFD).




14   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
2011–12 to an estimated US$3.9 billion in 2013–14. A new impetus for the region is to
now take this partnership further toward jointly identifying investment projects, techni-
cal assistance, and knowledge-related activities early on upstream, and monitoring and
reporting aspects downstream. To this end, the establishment of a joint working group
to further solidify and consolidate efforts at the country-level is
under discussion.                                                    The volume of jointly financed

Similarly, through the IFI Coordination Platform,3 the Bank is          projects jumped from US$34

also working with other IFIs to complement overall efforts in           million in 2011–12 to an esti-

the region by furthering coordination at the country and sector         mated US$3.9 billion in 2013–14.

levels, joining policy dialogue efforts, and exploring flagship sec-
tors where work can be jointly undertaken to deliver impactful projects. For instance,
in order to scale-up financial resources for Egypt and in preparation of the March 2015
Egypt Economic Development Conference, the Bank held discussions with European
financial institutions to solicit co-financing for scalable Bank-funded projects.
Partnerships and the mobilization of co-financing are of particular importance to the
Middle East and North Africa region. Therefore, it is crucial for the World Bank Group
to continue to build on the strong momentum that has been generated with various part-
ners, particularly the Arab Coordination Group.




3. The IFI Coordination Platform was created in support of the Deauville Partnership and includes some Arab Coordina-
tion Group members (AFESD, AMF, IsDB, and OFID) as well as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD), the European Investment Bank (EIB), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the African Development Bank (AfDB).



                          The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa                 15
                                                                                       Summary of Portfolio
                                                                                                  Middle East and North Africa

 In terms of scaling-up, the World Bank Group has significantly increased its financial
 support and crowded-in the funding of partners, directing it toward key high-profile
 projects. To this end, the IBRD/IDA/IFC lending base has almost tripled.

             IBRD/IDA/IFC Lending Base (figures in US$ billion)
 Figure 1.5. 

                         6                                                                                     5.3
                                     IFC
                         5
                                     IBRD/IDA                                                                   1.4
                                                                              4.0
                         4
       US$ billion




                                                                               1.6
                         3
                                            2.0
                         2                                                                                      3.9
                                            0.7
                                                                               2.4
                         1
                                            1.3
                         0
                                     FY03–09 average                     FY10–14 average            FY15–17 average projections

 Source: World Bank.


 Figure 1.6. World Bank Group Commitments in MENA
                                    IBRD/IDA/TF
               20                   IFC                                                                           18.4    400
                                    MIGA                                                              17.5
                 18                                                                                               0.8     350
                                    # of projects (IBRD/IDA/TF)                                        0.8
                 16                                                                        15.1
                                                                  13.4         14.2                                       300
                 14                                                                        0.9                    4.3
                                                       12.4                    0.8                     4.3
                             10.4                                 0.4
Volume ($bn)




                                                                                                                          250
                 12                        10.3        0.5
                                                                                           4.3
                 10          0.7                                  3.5          4.1                                        200
                                           0.7         3.2
                             2.7           2.8
                     8                                            164                                 169         167     150
                                                       159                     156         157
                     6       147           140
                                                                                                                          100
                     4
                                                                                                                          50
                     2
                             7.0           6.8         8.7        9.5          9.3         10.0       12.3        13.2
                     0                                                                                                    0
                             FY08          FY09       FY10        FY11         FY12        FY13       FY14    FY15 (Q2)

 Source: World Bank
 Note: MIGA data reflects gross exposures




                                             The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa        17
                 It is important to note that the new operating model has produced several exam-
                 ples of cross-sectoral collaboration through various operations in MENA. In the
                 Maghreb, for instance, a number of decentralization and local service projects benefitted
                 from the collaboration of various Global Practices—Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience
                 (SURR); Water; Governance; Transport and ICT; and Trade and Competitiveness. The
                 Bank’s Emergency Response in Gaza also presents an example of how different Global
                 Practices—Water, Energy and Extractives, and SURR—jointly delivered in a fragile,
                 post-conflict environment. In Egypt, transformational engagements such as the Agri-
                 cultural Land Reclamation project draw from the expertise of several Global Practices,
                 focusing on investments across sectors. Furthermore, several Global Practices—Gov-
                 ernance; Education; Health, Nutrition and Population; Macro and Fiscal Management;
                 and Trade and Competitiveness—have worked together to advance Reimbursable Advi-
                 sory Services in the MENA region. Recently, in March 2015, eight Global Practices and
                 the IFC were mobilized for the Egypt Economic Development Conference, supporting
                 key sectors such as energy, agriculture, low-income housing, sanitation, private sector
                 development, tourism, transport, and social protection. Ultimately, these are illustrative
                 examples that highlight the importance of continued collaboration across Global Prac-
                 tices, especially as many of the key challenges in the MENA region are cross-sectoral in
                 nature.



            Middle East and North Africa Region Active Portfolio Total Commitments
Figure 1.7. 
            by Global Practice (figures in US$ million; percentage of total amount)

          Country Mangement Unit Managed*: 1,288, 10%
                                                                    Agriculture: 114, 1%

                                                                                     Energy and Extractives: 3,780, 28%
                         Water: 2,212, 17%




Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience: 975, 7%                                               Education: 223, 2%
                                                                                             Environment and Natural Resources: 88, 1%
                                                                                  Finance and Markets: 1,236, 9%
                   Transport and ICT: 1,871, 14%
                                                                             Governance: 54, 0%
                         Trade and Competiveness: 61, 0%                    Health, Nutrition, and Population: 156
                          Social Protection and Labor: 732, 6%            Macro Economics and Fiscal Management: 500, 4%
                                                   Poverty: 2, 0%


Source: “MNA Monthly Portfolio Report,” January 2015.
Note: *Three projects are managed by country management units: (a) Yemen MAF Support Project, (b) West Bank and Gaza
PRDP TF, and (c) Libya-SPF Transitional




18               Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
            Middle East and North Africa Region Active Portfolio
Figure 1.8. 
            Total Commitments by Country (figures as percentage of
            total commitments)




Source: “MNA Monthly Portfolio Report,” January 2015.




            Country Management Unit Active Commitments by Global Practice
Figure 1.9. 
            (figures in US$ million)


              MNCO1
Morocco, Tunisia, Libya


              MNCO2
  Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan


              MNCO3
Egypt, Yemen, Djibouti


             MNCO4
  West Bank and Gaza

                          0       1,000      2,000       3,000      4,000       5,000        6,000         7,000

                              Agriculture                            Poverty
                              Energy and Extractives                 Social Protection and Labor
                              Education                              Trade and Competitiveness
                              Environment and Natural Resources      Transport and ICT
                              Finance and Markets                    Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience
                              Governance                             Water
                              Health, Nutrition and Population       CCSA Managed
                              Macro and Fiscal Management            CMU Managed


Source: “MNA Monthly Portfolio Report, January 2015.
Note: *Three projects are managed by country management units: (a) Yemen MAF Support Project, (b) West Bank and Gaza
PRDP TF, and (c) Libya-SPF Transitional Assistance.




                          The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa            19
                The World Bank’s total knowledge products in fiscal 2015 amount to 223, including
                60 Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS). RAS have been growing rapidly, reflecting a
                strong demand from clients for our knowledge services.

                             Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products by Global Practice
                Figure 1.10. 
                             (figures by total number of knowledge products;
                             percentage of total number)
                                                       Water: 5; 2%   Agriculture: 5; 2%
                                  Transport and ICT: 21; 10%             Education: 12; 5%
                                                                                 Energy and Extractives: 17; 8%
                     Trade and Competiveness: 16; 7%
                                                                                  Environment and Natural Resources: 4; 2%

                          Social, Urban, Rural and                                   Finance and Markets: 28; 13%
                                  Resilience: 15; 7%


                Social Protection and Labor: 24; 11%

                                                                                Governance: 32; 15%
                                            Poverty: 14; 6%
                                                                      Health, Nutrition, and Population: 9; 4%
                                           Macro Economics and
                                       Fiscal Management: 17; 8%

                Source: World Bank.




     Reimbursable Advisory Services in the Gulf Cooperation Council
     Technical cooperation between the World Bank and countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council
     (GCC) began over forty years ago with advisory services to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and
     expanded over time to cover the other GCC countries - Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, and the
     United Arab Emirates. The World Bank, through RAS, and upon demand, delivers advisory ser-
     vices including technical assistance and implementation support in its areas competence.
     In recent years, cooperation witnessed significant growth in the domains of governance, edu-
     cation, health, private sector development, environmental management, and transport. Also,
     cooperation at the GCC regional level was initiated with the GCC Secretariat General and with
     the GCC Organization for Industrial Consultations on better management of the environment
     and waterways, and on establishment of the GCC railway network.
     This cooperation is beneficial to both the GCC countries and the World Bank. GCC countries
     strive to learn from the Bank’s global knowledge and operational experience in economic devel-
     opment, rely on its objective advice, and benefit from its ability to facilitate dialogue among stake-
     holders. The World Bank also benefits from its experience in supporting development efforts in
     the GCC to further enrich its global experience, gain more exposure to the development chal-
     lenges of high and middle income countries, and deliver global public goods.
     In 2014, the size of the GCC RAS program exceeded US$20 million and is expected to be around
     US$30 million in 2015.


20              Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
             Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) Revenue Trends
Figure 1.11. 
             in the Middle East and North Africa (in US$ million)


30                                                                                     27.7
25
                                                                       20.6
20
                                          14.3         15.9
15                        12.3
          10.7
10
 5
 0
         FY09            FY10             FY11        FY12             FY13            FY14

Source: World Bank.
Note: Business Warehouse data as of November 2014. Includes productized and other RAS-related costs.




             Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) Program by
Figure 1.12. 
             Global Practice (figures as percentage of total multi-year
             agreement amount)

                                   Water: 3%
                                                     Agriculture: 2%
                 Transport and ICT: 10%
                                                               Education: 14%

     Trade and Competiveness: 9%
                                                                    Energy and Extractives: 6%

       Social, Urban, Rural and                                    Environment and Natural Resources: 3%
                  Resilience: 6%
                                                                   Finance and Markets: 9%
Social Protection and Labor: 18%

                                                               Governance: 13%

                        Macro Economics and          Health, Nutrition, and Population: 4%
                       Fiscal Management: 3%


Source: World Bank.




                         The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa     21
                                      Overview of IFC Engagement in the
                                          Middle East and North Africa


A     midst increasing challenges of steep oil price declines, continued economic and
      political volatility, and low investor confidence, IFC is maintaining a flexible strat-
egy in the region of promoting private sector development in order to fuel growth and
job creation. Key strategic pillars to achieve this are supporting investments in infra-
structure (especially power and renewable energy), strengthening financial institutions
and increasing access to finance, reducing skills mismatch with private sector needs, and
fostering entrepreneurship. IFC’s engagements are also aimed at easing the constraints to
doing business through investment climate reforms and by fostering regional integration
through South-South investments, especially from GCC and Asian investors.
Within this overarching strategy, key priorities include helping the public and private
sectors in the region tackle the critical energy gap that constrains private sector pro-
ductivity. Renewable energy (hydro, wind, and solar), transmission and distribution in
sectors with meaningful reforms, and gas-to-power based generation will all be areas of
focus in many MENA countries. Given the need to promote job creation and entrepre-
neurship, IFC will try to increase its interventions in the services and the information
and communications technology sectors, especially in the areas of tourism, retail, hospi-
tality (including green buildings), broadband, venture capital, and private equity funds.

Summary of IFC Program in the Middle East and North Africa1
Despite the difficult external environment, IFC remains the leading inter-
national finance institution for delivering a package of investment and advisory
services to the private sector in the Middle East and North Africa. To date, IFC’s total
commitments since January 2011 amount to US$6 billion, of which about US$2.5 bil-
lion has been mobilized from other investors. IFC has played a counter-cyclical role in
the region and significantly scaled up in fiscal 2012 and 2013 with record high invest-
ments in response to the regional turmoil. Fiscal 2014 was a challenging year given the
renewed political and security uncertainties across the region.
In fiscal 2014, IFC investments totaled close to US$1.8 billion (including
US$486 million in mobilization from other investors) in the Middle East
and North Africa to bolster the region’s private sector and support job cre-
ation. IFC continued to: (a) focus on increasing access to finance with around US$349


1. Investment totals exclude Afghanistan/Pakistan program, which falls within the Middle East and North Africa in IFC.




                          The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa                  23
     million of investments to support micro-, small-, and medium-sized enterprises; (b)
     ramp up its infrastructure investments, which totaled around US$571 million, with a
     particular focus on renewable power and transport; and (c) support manufacturing and
     services investments in key sectors, including vocational training and affordable housing.
     IFC also maintained its efforts toward promoting greater inter- and intra-regional invest-
     ments through several South-South investments. IFC’s advisory services engagements
     included investment climate reforms (e.g., investment code and simplified business
     procedures); microfinance; and small- and medium-sized enterprise support for risk
     management, product diversification, increased financial inclusion for women, infra-
     structure public-private partnerships (including airports and solid-waste management);
     and increased support toward regional resource efficiency as well as renewable energy
     operations across the region.
     The fiscal 2015 pipeline builds on the growing program in renewables and
     maintains a focus on supporting small- and medium-sized enterprises
     through investments in financial intermediaries. So far in fiscal 2015, IFC has
     committed a total of US$410 million in long-term finance, including a US$208 million
     debt financing package for seven solar PV projects in Jordan, US$60 million in Egyptian
     centers to support job creation, US$60 million equity in Bank Audi, and around US$7
     million in MPEF III in Tunisia to increase access to finance for small- and medium-sized
     enterprises. In the Maghreb, Morocco is planning events with the Africa region to deepen
     regional integration and capitalize on opportunities in financial markets, agribusiness,
     health, and affordable housing. Given the volatile security environment, particularly in
     some of the fragile and conflict-affected situations, potential opportunities in the power
     and manufacturing sectors have been delayed.

     High Impact Engagements in Fiscal 2014
     •	 Mobilization of Tafila Wind, a US$221 million debt package (of which US$152
        million was from the European Investment Bank, the OPEC Fund for International
        Development, the Europe Arab Bank, and the Netherlands Development Finance
        Company) to support the development of a 117 MW wind farm in Jordan. The proj-
        ect is the country’s first wind farm and the first private wind project to reach financial
        close in the Middle East and North Africa region outside of Morocco.
     •	 US$10 million investment in a new venture capital fund, Wamda Ventures I LP,
        which will focus on the technology sector in the Middle East and North Africa.
     •	 Equity investment of US$100 million in ACWA Power to help the Saudi-based
        company significantly increase the amount of power it generates from renewable
        sources and meet a growing energy demand throughout the Middle East and North
        Africa.




24   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
•	 A commitment of US$3 million as an equity investment in the West Bank’s Pal-
   estine Growth Capital Fund, managed by the Abraaj Group, to help provide
   long-term financing to a range of small- and medium-sized enterprises. IFC will
   also provide the fund with specialized advice on best practices to help improve
   sustainability.
•	 Investment of US$50 million in a leading Moroccan home builder, Alliances
   Group, to increase supply of quality affordable housing and create jobs. Alliances
   Group plans to build 110,000 affordable housing units—a crucial project in a coun-
   try that needs an estimated 840,000 homes.
•	 Support for Al Kuraimi Islamic Microfinance Bank in Yemen, with a com-
   prehensive set of capacity-building measures, including product diversification into
   small- and medium-sized enterprises and housing finance, risk management and gov-
   ernance, strategic planning, and human resources.
•	 Assessment of the credit registry of the Central Bank of Tunisia and identifi-
   cation of opportunities for it to better use available data and expand access to finance.
   IFC’s support will help the Central Bank of Tunisia strengthen banking sector super-
   vision and offer data services that will help other banks better manage credit risk.
•	 Investment of US$11 million equity in Luminus to help improve post-secondary
   skills (vocational training) under the E4E umbrella.
•	 An agreement signed by IFC and IBRD to help increase lending to smaller enterprises
   in Jordan. The two agencies will support the Jordan Loan Guarantee Corpora-
   tion as it scales up its lending operations, builds its institutional capacity, increases its
   outreach, and develops new financial products.
•	 IFC-IBRD joint Solid Waste Management project in the Palestinian ter-
   ritories which is expected to benefit 840,000 people in the Hebron and Bethlehem
   Governorates, dramatically improve much-needed sanitation services in the area, and
   reduce GHG emissions by 13,400 tons over seven years.
•	 Help for the Bank of Palestine in scaling up its banking operations for small- and
   medium-sized enterprises in the West Bank and Gaza, especially those owned by
   women, to drive economic growth. IFC will help the bank develop new products and
   services catering to the needs of these small firms.




                     The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa   25
                        Overview of MIGA Engagement in the
                              Middle East and North Africa

Meeting the Challenge of the Times

T    oday’s uncertain world has marked effects on prospects for growth for the Middle
     East and North Africa. Political changes and instability in the region have captured
the world’s attention and reminded investors in particular about the inherent risks of
investing abroad.
Yet the need for investments into the Middle East and North Africa that create jobs and
opportunities is greater than ever. This is an important moment for multilateral organi-
zations like the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) to step up and fill in
gaps that the private sector cannot address. Indeed, MIGA’s political risk insurance can
be an important mitigation instrument for investors and lenders who may be nervous
about maintaining existing investments or have plans to invest in the region that they
would rather not put on hold. MIGA can also help banks by optimizing country limits
management and reducing capital allocations for country risk.
To demonstrate its commitment to the region, the agency has rolled out a flexible plan
to target existing and inbound FDI to ensure that political risk insurance market capacity
is maintained and to bolster the efforts of national export credit agencies. Since 2011,
MIGA has supported new and existing investments in Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
Libya, Morocco, and Tunisia.
MIGA is also increasing efforts to reach out to investors, lenders, and governments
around the world to make it clear that the agency is open for business in the region.
The agency is sharing its global experience of managing political risks—particularly by
reaching out to governments, presenting at conferences on investment, and scaling up
business development efforts.
MIGA’s outstanding exposure in the Middle East and North Africa as of the end of
December 2014 stood at US$822 million. These guarantees have covered investments
in agriculture, power, banking, manufacturing, sanitation services, sewerage systems, oil
and gas, telecommunications, transportation, and tourism. In addition, as of the end of
December 2014, MIGA had an outstanding exposure of US$137 million in six guaran-
tees for projects by companies and banks based in the Middle East and North Africa and
investments in developing countries worldwide. MIGA’s ability to guarantee projects
under Islamic financing structures is another an important component of the agency’s
support to the Middle East and North Africa region.


                    The World Bank Group’s Current Engagement in the Middle East and North Africa   27
               MIGA’s Conflict-Affected and Fragile Economies Facility
               To further encourage foreign investment in conflict-affected and fragile economies,
               including those in the Middle East and North Africa, MIGA has launched a multi-coun-
               try, donor-funded facility that will allow the agency to further expand its business in
               the riskiest of countries. The Conflict-Affected and Fragile Economies Facility uses
               donor-partner contributions and guarantees, as well as MIGA guarantees, to provide an
               initial loss layer to insure investment projects in conflict-affected and fragile economies.
               MIGA anticipates providing aggregate risk mitigation of US$400 million in conflict-
               affected and fragile economies through the use of the facility during its initial years.

               MIGA’s West Bank and Gaza Guarantee Trust Fund
               This trust fund, administered by MIGA on behalf of the Government of Japan and the
               Palestinian Authority, aims at encouraging investments in the West Bank and Gaza (not a
               member of MIGA) by providing political risk insurance to both local and foreign inves-
               tors. The fund is designed to facilitate small- and medium-sized investments, with a spe-
               cial emphasis on projects with high employment-generating capacity.

               MIGA in Iraq
               MIGA welcomed Iraq as a member country in 2008 and signed its first contract of guar-
               antee supporting an investment in 2010. This guarantee of US$5 million backed a Turkish
               company’s investment into a Baghdad plant that manufactures the raw material used in
               beverage bottles. As of the end of December 2014, MIGA had insured three projects in
               Iraq for a total gross exposure of US$17 million.


Selected MIGA Projects in the Middle East and North Africa
                                                                                                   Guarantee
                                                                                 Project            Amount
 Investor/Guarantee Holder                   Project                             Location         (US$ million)
 Deutsche Investitions und                   Egyptian Refining Company           Egypt                23.4
 Entwicklungsgesellschaft mbH
 Alcatel-Lucent International                Regional Telecom                    Iraq                  10.4
 Butec International Ltd. and El Sewedy      Butec Utility Services S.A.L.       Lebanon              35.5
 Elif Global Ambalaj San. ve Tic. A.S.       Elif Global Packaging S.A.E         Egypt                26.4
 Albermarle CorporationUnited States         Jordan Bromine Company Limited      Jordan               199.8
 Société Générale S.A. and BNP Paribas       Passenger-Car Ferry TANIT           Tunisia              217.7
 Adrianus Jacobus Tukker and ZMZM for        Bio ZMZM for Plastic Industries     West Bank              1.8
 plastic industries of the West Bank*                                            and Gaza
*Underwritten through the MIGA-administered West Bank and Gaza Investment Guarantee Trust Fund.




28             Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                                                                        II.
                Overview of the Middle East
                  and North Africa Portfolio
                         by Global Practice




The portfolio data represented in this section is as of January 2015.




                                                                              29
             Leveraging Global Knowledge to Support
                     the Middle East and North Africa
                                                   The World Bank Group’s New Operating Model




T    he Middle East and North Africa region today faces development challenges that are
     vast and pressing—although not without hope for progress. The most significant of
these challenges form the focus of this report and require multi-sector approaches that
mobilize the knowledge and skills accumulated by the World Bank Group (IBRD, IFC and
MIGA), governments, the private sector, other development institutions and partners,
and civil society.
One of the strengths of the Bank Group is its potential for transferring knowledge across
the organization and adapting what we learn from our work in one country to another
country or region. This helps ensure that every client can develop world-class solutions
to its most complex development challenges. The World Bank Group Global Practices
collaborate to synthesize expertise from a variety of sectors, while Cross-Cutting Solu-
tion Areas focus the Bank Group’s efforts and resources in the core areas of jobs; gen-
der; public-private partnerships; fragility, conflict, and violence; and climate change. The
Bank Group’s regional and country teams have deep local knowledge and understanding
of political economy, which ensures that solutions fit the local context and are relevant.
By working together, they make it possible for the World Bank Group to offer its clients
global knowledge for adaptation into local solutions.
This report takes stock of where we are and where we are heading in our efforts in the
Middle East and North Africa Region. The World Bank Group will have to bring its best
collective effort consistently to maximize impact in the Middle East and North Africa.
We are confident that by doing so, we can make a significant difference for the region at
this critical time.




Keith Hansen and Nena Stoiljkovic
Vice Presidents
Global Practices and Cross-Cutting Solutions Areas
World Bank Group




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   31
                              Agriculture Global Practice
                                                               Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 7 projects in 5 countries (Djibouti, Jordan, Morocco,
   Tunisia, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$114 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$36 million

  Figure 2.1. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                                             Djibouti: 9; 8%
                                                           Jordan: 3; 3%

                                                                 Morocco: 11; 9%

                                                                 Yemen: 4; 4%
           Tunisia: 87; 76%




Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 5 products, including 3
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 0 projects in pipeline




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   33
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the Agriculture
     Global Practice in the Middle East and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     Food security policies are a major constraint on the agricultural sector. The MENA
     region has the highest import dependency in the world, with over 60 percent of total food
     consumed coming from outside of the region. Governments have traditionally sought
     to enhance food security through incentives for domestic production of basic food and
     industrial crops. However, these policies and institutions have generally resulted in dis-
     tortions (policies and institutions), which have high fiscal costs and perpetuate produc-
     tion of relatively low value, water-intensive crops, such as grains and fodder. It should be
     noted, though, that analyses and experience have demonstrated the comparative advan-
     tage of most MENA countries in the production of higher value horticulture, fruit and
     dairy products, all of which also generate much higher employment opportunities.
     Both under- and over-nutrition are worsening in the MENA. Malnutrition is a major
     issue which has received relatively little attention in MNA. Yemen stands out in terms
     of under-nutrition with a rate of 40 percent amongst under-five year olds – double the
     poverty rate. In MENA’s middle and high income countries, over-nutrition is a major
     concern with increasing rates of obesity and related diseases. In both cases, MENA lags in
     comparison to other regions in terms of the attention given to nutritional issues.




34   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Poverty reduction requires increased attention to rain-fed
                                                                        Rain-fed areas remain home to
areas. Rain-fed areas remain home to an important share of
                                                                       an important share of the poor
the poor in most countries in the Middle East and North Africa.
                                                                       in most countries in the Middle
However, after several decades of area programs, in the 1990s
                                                                             East and North Africa, and
and early 2000s, governments shifted their focus almost entirely
                                                                       governments are now renewing
to urban areas. MENA governments are now renewing their
                                                                        their focus on these politically
focus on these politically sensitive areas, but strategies for sup-
                                                                                        sensitive areas.
porting these areas remain largely based on social and technical
agronomic/farming system analyses carried out over 20 years
ago. In the intervening period, dramatic social changes resulting from migration and sed-
entarization, as well as the impacts of climate change in terms of rainfall patterns, have
altered both the context and appropriate resiliency options for these areas. It should be
noted that these areas are also where women-headed households represent a high share
of farm enterprises.
Agriculture needs to produce more with less water. Agriculture, while representing a
declining share of overall GDP, remains an important source of employment and exports
in MENA countries, in particular in Yemen, Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia. However, agri-
culture is under increasing pressure to reduce its “water footprint” given intense compe-
tition for this scarce resource for household, industrial and energy uses.

Key Strategic Engagements
Reforming food security strategies. MENA countries need to review their food secu-
rity strategies comprehensively and place them in the context of a “Food Markets”
approach. The trade-offs in terms of fiscal costs, risks and constraints on sectoral growth
and employment need to be assessed relative to a relative shift towards alternative mech-
anisms for achieving assured supplies of strategic agricultural commodities for food and
industrial uses, such as enhanced storage, market mechanisms and contracted overseas
production. In addition, nutrition security (focused on both under- and over-nutrition)
needs to be integrated into policies and standards governing access to food and food
education. While it is recognized that reforms of food security policies confront strong
opposition from vested interests in the farm and non-farm sectors, experience globally,
including in Morocco where partial reforms have been undertaken, demonstrate the
feasibility and benefits of such reforms. Working with partners, including the Trade and
Competitiveness Global Practice, the Agriculture Global Practice is undertaking analyti-
cal work on food security and food markets in Egypt, Morocco,Tunisia, and Saudi Arabia.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice        35
     Enhancing the rain-fed areas agenda. Given the significant on-going social and cli-
     matic changes in rain-fed areas, there is an urgent need for updating both the socioeco-
     nomic and biophysical context as a basis for reviewing policy and investment options
     in MENA. This includes renewed focus on climate-smart applied research and exten-
     sion. MENA’s investment in public research as a percentage of agricultural value-added
     has significantly trailed other regions, including Africa, Asia and Latin America and is
     thus well behind these regions in the use of public-private partnerships and competi-
     tive mechanisms to guide and accelerate research, development, and diffusion. At the
     regional level, the Agriculture Global Practice is developing a rain-fed areas study with
     the Environment Global Practice and the Gender CCSA, combining socioeconomic and
     landscape analysis tools to update stakeholder understanding of the current and antici-
     pated context as the basis for policy and investment design, including recognition of the
     enhanced importance of women-focused approaches.
     Increasing the productivity of water used in agriculture. In order to “produce more
     with less”, the agricultural sector will need to increase productivity, shift to higher value
     products, and develop the required supply chain infrastructure and institutions, which
     will translate into increased incomes and employment opportunities at lower rates of
     water utilization. This requires strengthening farmer organizations as commercial enti-
     ties; supporting technology transfer for higher value and water conserving crops and
     production systems; developing public-private partnership approaches to supply chain
     linkages between agri-business and farmers; developing agricultural/agribusiness skills;
     and ensuring public regulation, standards and infrastructure to support logistics for both
     domestic and international markets. The agenda to support the development of higher
     value agriculture and agribusiness is being pursued in partnership with various Global
     Practices – including Trade and Competiveness and Water – as well as the IFC and the
     Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).




36   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                                Education Global Practice
                                                               Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 9 projects in 5 countries (Djibouti, Jordan, Lebanon,
   West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$223 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$85 million

 Figure 2.2. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                                    Djibouti: 10; 4%
                                                       West Bank and Gaza: 12; 5%




         Yemen: 102; 46%
                                                                 Jordan: 60; 27%




                                                Lebanon: 40; 18%


Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 12 products, including 4
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 3 projects in pipeline (2 approved by the Board of
   Executive Directors) for a total amount of US$105 million




                           Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   37
                                          Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the Education
                                          Global Practice in the Middle East and North Africa

                                          Key Challenges
                                          Poor educational outcomes. While education systems in the MENA region have pro-
                                          gressed considerably from low starting points in the 1960s and 70s, recent investments in
                                          education have still not produced quality educational outcomes. School enrollment rates
                                          are generally high in primary education, but dropout is common in secondary education,
                                          and learning outcomes are low. For example, secondary students in many countries in
                                          the region have performed among the lowest in the world on international learning
                                          assessments, such as the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) or
                                          the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) (figure 2.3). Rote
                                          methods of learning are still common, with group work, creative thinking, and proactive
                                          learning being rare. In addition, early childhood education is generally underdeveloped
                                          in the region.



            Mathematics PISA and TIMSS Performance and GDP/capita (PPP adjusted)
Figure 2.3. 

                                 650



                                 600


                                                                                                                           PISA 2012
                                 550
                                                                                                                           MENA PISA 2012
     Math PISA and TIMSS Score




                                                                                                                           TIMSS 2011

                                 500                                                                                       MENA TIMSS 2011
                                                                                                                           Linear (PISA 2012)
                                                                                                                           Linear (TIMSS 2011)
                                                                                          UAE
                                 450                                           Lebanon
                                                                                          UAE
                                                                    Tunisia
                                                        Jordan                         Bahrain           Qatar
                                 400         West Bank and Gaza Egypt                  KSA
                                                                        Tunisia
                                                               Jordan                                        Qatar
                                                             Morocco                     Oman
                                 350



                                 300
                                    3.0              3.5            4.0               4.5              5.0           5.5               6.0
                                                                              GPD/capita PPP ($) Log




38                                        Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Weak capacity within the education system. Education service delivery in the region
has been hampered by a generally low level of capacity, from the policy-making level to
the qualifications, retention, motivation and performance of teachers. In some countries,
infrastructure is still in need of development, with new schools
needed to accommodate the young population and old schools
requiring renovation or extension. These issues are exacerbated          A common theme throughout
in many countries by regional conflicts, political instability, the        the MENA region is the issue
influx of refugees, and low citizen trust, resulting in fragile edu-      of high youth unemployment
cation systems.                                                            and the inability of the labor
                                                                                market to absorb the growing
Education system outcomes and job market disconnect. A                supply of educated labor force
common theme throughout the MENA region is the issue of high                           participants.
youth unemployment and the inability of the labor market to
absorb the growing supply of educated labor force participants.
Graduates tend to desire public sector jobs, which are limited in number, while private
sector employers express demand for the skills and competencies that the education
system does not sufficiently produce. For instance, the region generally produces more
humanities than science graduates.
High demand for education. With increased youth populations and competition for
jobs, the demand for education, especially at the tertiary level, will be further increasing
across the region. In addition, as the countries move towards expanding life-long learn-
ing opportunities for their populations, the education systems need to consider alterna-
tive financing approaches to absorb the demand.

Key Strategic Engagements
Building a high-quality knowledge base. While each country in the region has its
unique challenges, there are common issues for which education systems can learn from
other countries within the region and globally. The World Bank Education Global Prac-
tice is well placed to provide and share knowledge solutions, particularly in the following
areas:
•	 Tools that focus on results. The Bank’s Systems Approach for Better Education
   Results (SABER) uses evidence-based frameworks to produce comparative data and
   knowledge on education policies and institutions, with the aim of helping countries
   systematically strengthen their education systems. The SABER products, which cover
   many education service delivery topics, have helped countries initiate policy dia-
   logues and produce clear plans for moving forward with their education reforms.
•	 Regional initiatives. Regional cooperation on education initiatives is a key part of
   building capacity and partnerships across the region.




                               Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice           39
     The Arab Regional Agenda for Improving Education Quality (ARAIEQ). A
     multi-stakeholder partnership that has brought “quality of education” to the forefront, and which
     ties many existing regional initiatives and institutions together.
     The MENA Regional Program on Higher Education. A multi-stakeholder strategic part-
     nership centered on delivering knowledge and promoting reforms
     Early Childhood Development for a Better Chance (ECD-4-ABC). Aims to provide an
     evidence base and best practice programs to countries in the MENA region.


               Strengthening education systems. The Bank’s focus in education in the MENA region
               is on supporting reforms to improve education systems for learning for all. This includes,
               for example:
               •	 Skills development. In the competitive labor environment, it is critical for edu-
                  cational systems to deliver the new skills and expertise necessary for graduates to
                  find employment and to succeed. A paradigm shift is needed to move from academic
                  input-based approaches to competency-based outcome approaches in the design and
                  delivery of technical and vocational education and training programs, in particular.
               •	 Exploring new financing tracks. Public-private partnerships (PPP) and other inno-
                  vative measures that can mobilize resources without compromising equity and the
                  quality of education are important measures to increase the financing needed for
                  educational initiatives.




40             Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Energy and Extractives Global Practice
                                                                Middle East and North Africa


 Highlights
 •	 Active Portfolio: 20 projects in 8 countries (Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq,
    Jordan, Morocco, Tunisia, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen)
 •	 Total Commitments: US$3.7 billion
 •	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$1 billion

  Figure 2.4. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                                     Tunisia: 40; 1%
                                                       Djibouti: 12; 0%
                              Yemen: 90; 3%

                 Morocco: 791; 21%


                Jordan: 6; 0%
                    Iraq: 125; 4%
        West Bank and Gaza: 38; 1%
                                                                     Egypt: 2,602; 70%




 Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
 •	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 17 products, including 2
    Reimbursable Advisory Services
 •	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 4 projects in pipeline (3 approved by the Board of
    Directors) for a total amount of US$1 billion.




                             Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   41
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the Energy
     and Extractives Global Practice in the Middle East
     and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     The Middle East and North Africa has 48 percent of the world’s proven oil reserves and
     41 percent of the world’s proven global reserves of natural gas. Hydrocarbons are the
     region’s most important exports and source of foreign currency, and they are its major
     contribution to global economic growth. To this end some of the major challenges in the
     region include:
     Improving financial sustainability. Energy underpricing is pervasive across the
     region, which is eroding the sector’s financial sustainability. Many countries are strug-
     gling to meet the large investment requirements of the sector. Furthermore, regres-
     sive and poorly targeted subsidies are contributing to fiscal imbalances. In 2011, the
     cost of fuel subsidies in the region was approximately US$237 billion or 48 percent of
     world subsidies, equivalent to 8.6 percent of regional GDP or 22 percent of government
     revenues. Bank assistance is thus required throughout the region to achieve key sector
     reforms and improve the financial sustainability of the sector, including by financially
     restructuring or corporatizing many of the vertically integrated monopolies.
     Weak sector governance and service delivery in electricity and extractives. The
     implementation of sector reforms has lagged on issues such as corporatization, trans-
     parency, and accountability. In addition the public sector is the main driver of sector
     development, which puts a huge burden on government finances. Moreover, there is
     an insufficient commercial framework to engage the private sector. Supply interrup-
     tions—specifically for fuel and electricity—are also increasing in several countries and
     are particularly problematic in Egypt, Lebanon, Libya, Jordan, Yemen, and Iraq. Finally,
     there is poor access to electricity (50 percent) in the two IDA countries of the region,
     Yemen and Djibouti.
     Need for diversification of generation mix and energy efficiency. There is an increased
     focus on renewables, as countries in the region are in need of diversification of electricity
     generation for a number of reasons: (a) every Arab country (with the exceptions of Alge-
     ria and Qatar) is short on gas, a direct result of the underpricing of energy, poor incentives
     for investment, and poor planning; (b) for exporters, there is a significant opportunity
     cost of domestic consumption; and (c) for importers, there is a heavy reliance on fossil
     fuel resources and a vulnerability to price shocks. These factors are resulting in increased
     interest and investments in renewable energy. To this end, energy efficiency measures
     need to be scaled up. Furthermore, the Middle East and North Africa is the only region
     where energy intensive use has increased over the past two decades, indicating significant
     inefficiencies.



42   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Regional integration. Regional integration of energy is weak and mainly for emergen-
cies, and could serve to lower costs to consumers and contribute to energy security in
the region.

Key Strategic Engagements
Energy sector is key to Iraq’s economic development. The energy sector (oil, gas and
power) is Iraq’s most significant economic sector: Iraq’s oil sector accounts for over 65
percent of GDP and more than 90 percent of annual budget revenues, whilst the gas and
electricity sectors could contribute significantly to economic growth and diversification,
job creation, as well as increased quality of life and social stability for the Iraqi popu-
lation. As such, the Government of Iraq is interested in exploring World Bank Group
programmatic support for key strategic objectives in the sector.
In response to a request from the Government of Iraq, the Bank is currently preparing
a US$500+ million IBRD financing (for the second quarter of fiscal 2016) to support
reform and investment in Iraq’s electricity distribution sector. This project is focused on
improving the provision of electricity services, reducing the large losses of electricity
in the power system, and reforming Iraq’s electricity sector institutions to improve the
overall performance of the sector.
Championing sector reforms and priority investments in Egypt. Support is being
provided for Egypt’s five-year strategy to eliminate energy subsidies through just-in time
and Transition Fund technical assistance.
Following a request from Government, the Bank is preparing the Egypt Energy Systems
Improvement Project for US$660 million in 2016, which will be submitted to the Board
for consideration. The project’s objectives are: (a) to build much needed transmission
capacity which was one of the drivers of power cuts last summer, and modernize the gov-
ernance of the transmission holding company (EEHC); (b) to support the rehabilitation
of conventional power plants to reduce the consumption of natural gas in power gener-
ation; and (c) to lower energy consumption through the deployment of smart meters.
In preparation for the Egypt Economic Development Conference, the World Bank Group
organized a roundtable of private sector investors in December 2014, and assisted the
Government’s efforts to articulate its energy strategy in March 2015.
Increased Lending in Clean Energy in Morocco. Following the approval of the
Noor-Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power Project in September 2014, the Bank is
in the final stages of preparation for the Clean Energy Project (US$125 million for the
fourth quarter of fiscal 2015), which seeks to support the capacity of the utility to sup-
ply and dispatch clean electricity and to meet the demand of targeted customers more
efficiently.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   43
     Technical assistance on energy solutions for Tunisia. The Bank is providing technical
     assistance to assess the economic viability of the proposed Tunisia-Italy Interconnector,
     and how such a transaction should be structured, and to determine whether additional
     indigenous gas supplies can be discovered and developed within this time horizon.
     Increasing reimbursable technical assistance on energy efficiency in the Gulf
     countries. In Bahrain, the Bank is preparing an energy efficiency strategy and work-
     ing on energy efficiency interventions across six ministries. In Saudi Arabia, the Bank is
     providing advice on selected strategic issues and helping the Saudi Arabian power sector
     strengthen its institutional capacity to develop and implement sector policies that are
     consistent with the country’s overall economic and social objectives.
     Yemen Energy Sector Reforms. Energy sector reforms are currently under discussion,
     and could potentially lead to a donor’s conference of the G8 and the Arab Coordination
     Group.




44   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
  Environment and Natural Resources
                     Global Practice
                                                            Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 15 projects in 6 countries (Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon,
   Morocco, Tunisia, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$88 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$10 million

 Figure 2.5. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)

                                                      Regional: 12; 13%
                 Tunisia: 16; 18%




                                                                 Egypt: 16; 18%

          Yemen: 19; 22%
                                                                Jordan: 3; 3%


                                                      Lebanon: 18; 20%
                     Morocco: 5; 6%


Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 4 products, including 3
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 3 projects in pipeline (2 approved by the Board of
   Executive Directors) for a total amount of US$21 million




                           Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   45
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the
     Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice
     in the Middle East and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     Natural Resources, including water, forests, fisheries, coastal zones, are scarce and
     under threat from man-made or exogenous sources.
     The costs of environmental degradation, which include the costs of air and water
     pollution, are high (US$20 billion or around 3 percent of GDP), and MENA is
     falling behind. Everywhere in the world, the costs of environmental degradation, as a
     share of gross national income (GNI), have fallen by at least 50 percent between 1990
     and 2010, except in the MENA region where it has remained almost the same.
     The quality of life in both urban and rural areas is deteriorating, especially due to
     the fact that livelihoods in rural areas are dependent on natural resources. To this
     end, per-capita costs of environmental degradation remain constant, and deaths attribut-
     able to air pollution have grown between 1990 and 2010.
     Climate change will exert increasing pressures on natural resources and an already
     stressed environment. A warmer, drier, and more variable climate with greater fre-
     quency of extreme events (floods, heat waves, dust storms) will put increasing pressures
     on scarce water, forest and arable land resources, compounding food security concerns.
     Furthermore, sea level rise represents a serious threat to the economies of the MENA
     region (for example, there is over US$50 billion of annual flood damage in Alexandria
     alone due to the failure of flood defenses).
     Lack of effective environmental policies. Certain policies and institutions (such as sub-
     sidized energy, water, and fertilizer; and lax regulations or enforcement) promote envi-
     ronmental degradation, while other policies (such as the absence of disclosure programs
     for pollutants) discourage public demand for a cleaner environment. Ultimately these
     undervalue critical environmental services that would serve to promote water provision
     and regulation, and address the challenges posed by dust storms, heat waves, desertifica-
     tion, and sea level rise.




46   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Key Strategic Engagements
Invest in knowledge services to better document the economic costs and distribu-
tional implications of poor environmental management. This is critical in order to
actively inform World Bank programs, and engage more effectively in policy dialogues
with governments on the need and ways to address environmental challenges.
Engage with Global Practices across theWorld Bank Group on key projects in order
to bring solutions for addressing environmental challenges in a more systematic
fashion. To this end it is crucial to mobilize staff expertise beyond the Middle East
and North Africa region to bring in best practices from around the globe. The Morocco
Green Growth Development Policy Loan (DPL) and the Waste Management DPL are
examples of this approach.
Promoting natural resource management and resilience to address water scarcity
and the challenges posed by climate change. This agenda is a priority in the Middle
East and North Africa, as it is a water-scarce region. It is also central in order to address
poverty and vulnerability in rural areas. Successful interventions will require close coor-
dination with the Water and Agriculture Global Practices as well as the Social, Urban,
Rural and Resilience Global Practice to support the implementation of integrated water
management practices and the decentralization of service delivery and access to assets
(e.g., forests, pastures, and protected areas) in rural areas.
Raising awareness of challenges and environmental threats to fisheries and coastal
zones. These are important economic assets (in terms of livelihoods, tourism, the con-
centration of economic activities, and the existence of main cities along the coast), but
they are threatened by over-exploitation, pollution, and climate change, in particular sea
level rise. Opportunities to raise the level of awareness about the extent of the challenges
and development options in the region will come by bringing in international experi-
ence, and partnering with other Global Practices to develop knowledge products aimed
at addressing the full scope of the issue.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   47
  Finance and Markets Global Practice
                                                              Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 13 projects in 7 countries (Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon,
   Morocco, Tunisia, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$1.2 billion
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$751 million

 Figure 2.6. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                                            Regional: 1; 0%
                        Tunisia: 150; 12%

                     Yemen: 20; 2%
                 Morocco: 55; 5%
                 Lebanon: 30; 2%
                 Jordan: 73; 6%
      West Bank and Gaza: 4; 0%                                     Egypt: 904; 73%




Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 28 products, including
   6 Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 4 projects in pipeline (1 approved by the Board of
   Executive Directors) for a total amount of US$610 million




                           Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   49
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the Finance and
     Markets Global Practice in the Middle East and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     Financial sector stability. Vulnerabilities for the financial sector have emerged from
     the political and economic disturbances affecting the MENA region. The uprisings of
     the Arab Spring have resulted in political and economic shocks have been felt across the
     region. The countries affected directly have seen the strongest impact (Tunisia, Egypt,
     Libya,Yemen, and Syria), but a larger set of countries have been severely affected through
     spillover effects (Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan) and trade disruptions (most MENA countries).
     A number of additional economic and political challenges have added further stress on
     financial systems. For instance, the Eurozone crisis impacted a number of MENA coun-
     tries with strong trade links (Maghreb countries) and lower oil and gas prices have had a
     significant impact on GCC and other oil and gas exporting countries. This has impacted
     the stability of financial systems across the region, through rising non-performing loans
     (NPLs), fiscal imbalances financed by state budgets, and increasing dependency on
     state-financed lending.
     Limited Access to Finance. Most countries within the MENA region are characterized
     by low levels of access to financial services, with even sharper variations by gender, age
     and location. Only 8 percent of total lending goes to micro- small- and medium- enter-
     prises (MSMEs). At 1 percent, microfinance outreach is the lowest of any world region.
     Moreover, only 18 percent of adults have an account at a formal financial institution.


                 Account Penetration—Adults with an Account at a Formal
     Figure 2.7. 
                 Financial Institution (percent)


                  89

                                                                                                  Global
                                                                                                 average
                               55                                                                  50%
                                               45
                                                         39
                                                                      33
                                                                                    24
                                                                                                18



        High-income    East Asia     Europe &      Latin      South        Sub-Saharan Middle East
         economies     & Pacific    Central Asia America &     Asia           Africa    & North
                                                 Caribbean                               Africa

     Source: Demirguc-Kunt and Klapper 2012.




50   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
            Top Twenty Exposures as a Percentage of Total Equity,
Figure 2.8. 
            by World Region
            300

             250         242
                                    223
                                                 213
            200                                                183
                                                                             153          147
             150                                                                                        131
                                                                                                                   100
             100
                                                                                                                                 77
                                                                                                                                            58
             50

              0
                         l


                                    n)


                                                ica



                                                              cil


                                                                           pe



                                                                                           e


                                                                                                        .)


                                                                                                                lia


                                                                                                                            rica



                                                                                                                                            ca
                        nci




                                                                                                      ep
                                                                                         op
                                   tio




                                                                                                                  a
                                                             un




                                                                                                                                        eri
                                                                       uro
                                               Afr




                                                                                                              str
                    ou




                                                                                                                          me
                                                                                                  a, R
                                                                                     Eur
                                 era




                                                          Co




                                                                                                                                       Am
                                                                                                              Au
                                                                      al E
                   nC




                                           rth




                                                                                                                         in A
                                                                                                 ore
                                                                                    rn
                               ed




                                                        ion




                                                                                                                                      rth
                                                                     ntr
                  tio




                                          No




                                                                                   ste
                              nF




                                                                                               n, K




                                                                                                                      Lat
                                                       rat




                                                                                                                                   No
             era




                                                                  Ce


                                                                              We
                                         and
                          ssia




                                                                                           apa
                                                     pe
            op


                         Ru




                                                 oo
                                    ast




                                                                                          a (J
           Co




                                                lf C
                        an,


                                   le E




                                                                                         Asi
       ulf


                    hst




                                               Gu
                                 dd
      n-G


                   zak


                               Mi
  No


                  (Ka
             sia
            al A
        ntr
       Ce
      nd
  ea
 op
Eur




Limited Depth of the Financial Sector. The financial sector across the region is exces-
sively bank-based and undiversified, and there is additionally low competition in the
banking sector. As a benchmark for the financial sector, bank
assets stand at 130 percent of GDP. In addition, other areas play a
                                                                          Most countries within the
marginal role, with the value of the insurance sector being equal
                                                                     MENA region are characterized
to only 5 percent of GDP, and leasing and factoring even less at
                                                                    by low levels of access to finan-
1 percent of GDP. The undiversified character of banking is mea-
                                                                       cial services. Only 18 percent
sured by a loan concentration ratio of 242 percent–the highest in
                                                                      of adults have an account at a
the world–with a strong focus on large corporates.
                                                                                                                                formal financial institution.
Regional differences with various distinct banking systems
across the region:
•	 Non-GCC Private-led Banking Systems (including Egypt, Lebanon, Jordan, Morocco,
   the Palestinian territories, Tunisia, Yemen and Djibouti): Moderate to large banking
   systems, small to moderate share of state banks, and a moderate to large market cap-
   italization with a high bank share


                                                 Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice                                          51
     •	 Non-GCC Public-led Banking Systems (including Algeria, Iraq, Libya, Syria, and
        Iran): Small to moderate sized banking systems, a large share of state banks, small
        market capitalization, and weak financial infrastructure
     •	 GCC countries: Large banking systems, small to moderate share of state banks (but
        large presence of quasi-public ownership), and large market capitalization with a high
        bank share

     Key Strategic Engagements
     The World Bank Group’s engagement in the MENA region aims to support countries by
     promoting financial systems that provide more and better financial services to larger seg-
     ments of the population. This is an important area of engagement in order to support the
     ambitious growth and employment agenda, while strengthening the resilience of these
     financial systems to weather financial, economic and political shocks. MENA’s financial
     systems are characterized by significant diversity in terms of structural characteristics
     (state vs public led systems), levels of income, and development, all of which require tai-
     lored solutions adapted to their needs. To this end, it is critical to support the region by:
     Supporting financial sector stability. Providing a strong and stable financial sector is
     important for the growth of the economy, yet it must ensure both its own stability, as
     well as its further development. The basis for many systemic country interventions is
     given by the Financial Sector Assessment Program (conducted jointly with the IMF),
     which provides a diagnosis of the current state of health of the financial sector, as well as
     a set of recommendations for legal and regulatory reform. In those economies affected
     by a financial crisis, the follow-on strategy is to support central banks and ministries
     deal with NPLs, and introduce specific reforms on risk based supervision, insolvency,
     creditor rights, and bank resolution. Depending on the country, this may require work-
     ing directly with state-owned banks on restructuring and/or reforming the governance
     structures of the institutions, as well as promoting capacity building efforts for both the
     central bank and the industry.
     Enhancing access to finance for households and MSMEs. Resolving the low rates of
     financial inclusion is one of, if not the key strategic priorities, both for the population, as
     well as for SMEs.The President of the World Bank Group announced in 2014 the Univer-
     sal Financial Access agenda, under which 100 percent of the population of the 25 largest
     countries should have access to financial accounts by 2020. This includes three countries
     in the MENA region: Egpyt, Morocco, and Yemen. Achieving this goal requires working
     in parallel in a number of areas: (a) reforming payment systems and regulating payment
     services providers; (b) providing a diagnostic of financial capability and supporting gov-
     ernments in the development of national strategies for financial literacy and capacity; (c)
     introducing and modernizing regulations for branchless banking transaction accounts;
     and (d) providing lending and advisory support for low-income housing.



52   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Expanding the access to finance for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) also
requires working in a number of areas. This often includes the introduction of new finan-
cial services. Microfinance, for instance, is hampered by inappropriate regulation, which,
in turn, often results in reforms that focus on modernizing the legal and regulatory
framework for microfinance. Access to credit can be broadly enhanced by creating the
correct financial infrastructure, which entails introducing the legal framework for credit
bureaus, and supporting the establishment of private credit bureaus. SMEs often lack the
collateral required by financial institutions. To this end, supporting the introduction of
secured transaction registries both at regulatory and sectoral level has proven to be an
effective mechanism for expanding access to credit globally, as banks become legally able
to accept the moveable assets that SMEs can offer. Leasing is yet another alternative to
provide finance with an alternative form of collateral that in addition is compatible with
Islamic finance principles. This offering is completed either by lines of credit (where
liquidity is an issue) or by partial credit guarantees for MSMEs (where risk aversion is
an issue).
Increasing the depth of the financial sector. Where the financial sectors are generally
stable, efforts can be focused at increasing the diversification of financial institutions, and
building a platform for long-term finance. This implies working on pension reforms and
supervision of pension funds, developing the regulatory framework for capital market
development, and strengthening the insurance sector.
Additionally, new financial instruments have been introduced that combine financial sec-
tor depth with improved access to finance. Islamic finance is increasingly in demand
by SMEs throughout the region. Together with the Islamic Finance Centre in Istanbul,
and jointly with IFC, the World Bank is introducing reforms at the regulatory level (to
account for the differences in accounting and reporting), and training banks to expand
their outreach to SMEs. The MENA region is also known for the lack of patient capital
for start-up firms. Nonetheless, MENA is leading globally in developing specific patient
capital solutions in order to bridge the gap between start-ups and venture capital firms,
and provide start-up SMEs with the necessary patient capital to grow their businesses and
provide greater employment.




                               Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   53
                           Governance Global Practice
                                                            Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 10 projects in 5 countries (Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco,
   Tunisia and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$54 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$11 million

 Figure 2.9. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                                  Tunisia: 1; 1%
                                                    Jordan: 4; 8%
                                                           Lebanon: 5; 10%




          Yemen: 23; 43%

                                                             Morocco: 21; 38%




Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 32 products, including
   8 Reimbursable Advisory Services.
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 3 projects, 2 approved by the Board of Executive
   Directors for a total amount of US$4.0 million.




                           Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   55
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the Governance
     Global Practice in the Middle East and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     The existence of weak institutions and poor governance, as many aggregate gover-
     nance indicators document.1 As a consequence, in many countries in the region, gov-
     ernance accountability is weak, trust in government institutions is low, and public-sector
     service delivery is poor. There has been limited improvement on governance and the
     quality of institutions since the Arab Spring, which points to deep, historically-rooted
     institutional issues that are difficult to overcome, particularly the high concentration of
     political and economic power by the governing elites, and the general lack of transpar-
     ency and accountability of state actors. These challenges are exacerbated by the limited
     availability of data on governance for many countries in the region. Such limitations
     make policy makers and donors unable to, in a number of ways, clearly identify gover-
     nance weaknesses, prioritize among reforms, and monitor progress.
     With regard to public financial management, the Middle East and North Africa aggre-
     gated average public expenditure and financial accountability (PEFA) ratings based on
     the latest assessments (some of which are now becoming dated), scoring C-, comparable
     to the range of C to C+ scores of the East Asia and Pacific, Europe and Central Asia,
     and Latin America and the Caribbean regions. However, according to the Open Budget
     index, the Middle East and North Africa has the lowest scores among the four regions.
     This situation points to the need for concerted efforts to improve the performance of


     Figure32.10. PEFA Aggregated Scores: C to C+ Average

              2                                                                          1.9
                                    1.4                                                                 1.4
                                                             1.2
              1

              0
                         MENA                       EAP                      ECA                 LCR
                            Budget credibility                               Accounting and reporting
                            Comprehensiveness and transparency               External scrutiny
                            Policy-based budgeting                           Average
                            Predictability and control in execution



     Source: PEFA Secretariat Database 2014.
     Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LCR = Latin America and the Caribbean;
     MENA = Middle East and North Africa.



     1. For a more comprehensive analysis of governance please visit: www.agidata.org.




56   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
different elements of public financial management systems and to increase fiscal trans-
parency, working with both supply and demand actors to enable true accountability.
There is a volatile environment and an uneven commitment to reforms in areas
such as transparency, government effectiveness, civil liberties, media freedom, par-
ticipation, and social accountability, making the design and
implementation of programs much more challenging. This                      There has been limited
calls for a pragmatic approach focused on building basic systems       improvement on governance
and capacity to manage public resources, strengthening govern-      and quality of institutions since
ment accountability, and promoting knowledge sharing. Some of         the Arab Spring, which points
the specific needs include:                                             to deep, historically-rooted
•	 A greater focus on social sector service quality and delivery                      institutional issues that are
   and the associated institutional weaknesses and poorly man-                             difficult to overcome.
   aged civil service that prevent better service quality, accessi-
   bility, and delivery
•	 A strengthening of public investment management systems to improve the low exe-
   cution/quality rate of observed investment budgets
•	 Capacity development for public financial management and procurement systems to
   close the significant gap between laws and procedures (de jure) and actual practice
   and budget implementation (de facto)
•	 More integrated support for subnational government reforms that includes ade-
   quate sequencing and coordination between central/regional and fiscal/institutional
   reforms and local government reforms
•	 Enhancements to the corpo-
                                         Figure 2.11. Open Budget Index
   rate governance and financial
   reporting framework to address        60
   serious deficiencies in its struc-                                 50 52
                                         50                                           47
   ture and function, as well as                           39 39                 39
                                         40
   the lack of awareness among                                                                  2008
                                         30
   national policy makers of its               24                                               2012
                                         20         18
   importance
                                         10
•	 Engagement on both the supply
                                          0
   and demand sides to strengthen              MENA        EAP        ECA         LCR
   social accountability, ensuring
                                         Source: International Budget Partnership 2008/2012.
   that enhanced public engage-
                                         Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and
   ment leads to sustainable results     Central Asia; LCR = Latin America and Caribbean Region;
                                         MENA = Middle East and North Africa.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice                   57
Figure 2.12. Statistical Capacity Index for Middle Eastern and North African Countries

100
               2012
 90
               2013
 80

 70

 60

 50

 40

 30

 20

  10

     0
         Algeria Dijibouti Egypt,     Iran,   Iraq   Jordan Lebanon   Libya   Morocco Syrian     Tunisia     West Yemen,
                            Arab    Islamic                                            Arab                  Bank   Rep.
                            Rep.      Rep.                                             Rep.                and Gaza

Source: World Bank, 2012–13.




                  Key Strategic Engagements
                  Building credible state institutions and creating trust between citizens and gov-
                  ernment. Large, inefficient public sectors are characteristic of most Middle Eastern
                  and North African countries. World Bank engagement aims to clarify core government
                  functions and introduce principles of transparency and accountability in public resource
                  management, including service provision in health, energy, and financial regulations, and
                  optimizing the performance of state-owned enterprises through improved corporate
                  governance and financial reporting. Libya and Yemen have broader state-building initia-
                  tives through institutional and capacity development programs. Also, the Bank’s sup-
                  port of public procurement policy and oversight bodies emphasizes the need for more
                  independent and empowered procurement policy units in places where there is a very
                  high concentration of political and economic power. The lack of truly independent pol-
                  icy bodies exacerbates the capturing of economic rents by the elites at the expense of
                  society. Regarding the agenda of corporate financial reporting, the Bank provides tech-
                  nical support to the legal and regulatory framework for financial reporting, professional
                  accountancy organizations, micro-, small-, and medium-sized enterprises, and financial
                  regulators to support better business environments.




58                Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Promoting government accountability and open government reforms. It is import-
ant to support this agenda through administrative reforms to improve public perfor-
mance, independent monitoring of government activities, and more effective checks and
balances institutions (e.g., judiciary, supreme audit institutions, anticorruption agencies,
and effective independent grievance mechanisms). In particular, this includes justice
reforms; improving citizen participation and access to information, including economic
and social data; and transparency of administrative processes and procedures.
Strengthening public financial management and procurement reforms. This allows
countries to plan, direct, and control their financial resources for efficient and effective
service delivery and to more transparently manage public resources, which impacts all
public spending in Middle Eastern and North African countries. These reforms can also
serve higher development goals for economic growth and job creation (e.g., small- and
medium-sized enterprise development).



  Dialogue Between Public and Private Sectors on Good Governance
  The Public Integrity and Openness Department has been working to strengthen the linkages
  and dialogue between the public and private sectors to improve results on the ground. There is a
  regional initiative to improve opportunities for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to
  participate in public procurement markets. In particular, efforts are underway in eight Middle
  Eastern and North African countries to partner with local training institutions and provide capac-
  ity building to small businesses in their respective national private sectors. The aim is to enhance
  the ability of SMEs to both prepare and win bids. When SMEs win government contracts, and
  thus have more business and an increased need for labor, they create jobs.
  A second initiative is to use South-South knowledge to expose clients in the region to good prac-
  tices for private-public-partnerships (PPPs). A recent learning workshop in Beirut exposed cli-
  ents from Middle Eastern and North African countries to examples and knowledge from around
  the world—including speakers and participants from eight countries—on how to successfully
  work with the private sector to execute the procurement of PPP projects. The Governance team
  partnered with the Public-Private Partnership Cross-Cutting Solutions Area, the IFC, and the
  Energy and Extractives and Water Global Practices to provide integrated content on the legal
  and regulatory framework for PPPs as well as advice for delivering on-time and on-budget PPP
  projects. Given the growing infrastructure funding deficit in the region, clients are expressing
  increasing interest in strengthening their governance systems to facilitate private participation in
  infrastructure and public service provision.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice      59
     Operations support through increased emphasis on country financial manage-
     ment and procurement systems. The Governance Global Practice helps prepare and
     provide implementation support to other Global Practice projects with due attention
     given to responsiveness and quality.
     Promoting knowledge management. This is provided through initiatives such as Con-
     necting Voices of MENA (CV MENA) with its four pillars: (a) The Exchange, (b) Solution
     Labs, (c) Boot Camps and (d) Maarefah (community of practice); in addition to the quar-
     terly magazine. This is also supported through the MENA Network of Public Procure-
     ment Experts, the partnership with the Arab Administrative Development Organization
     (the training arm of the Arab League), as well as the expansion of procurement trainings
     with a regional scope and aimed at producing regional knowledge products, including
     surveys and papers on topics related to effective government contracting.




60   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
         Health, Nutrition and Population
                           Global Practice
                                                                    Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 8 projects in 5 countries (Djibouti, Egypt, Lebanon,
   Tunisia, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$171 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$34 million

 Figure 2.13. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)

                                 Tunisia: 1; 0%   Djibouti: 7; 4%




                                                                     Egypt: 75; 44%
             Yemen: 73; 43%




                                       Lebanon: 15, 9%

Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 9 products, including 3
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 4 projects in the pipeline (1 approved by the Board
   of Directors) for a total amount of US$131 million




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   61
                Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the
                Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice
                in the Middle East and North Africa

                Key Challenges
                Weak governance and service delivery. Poor and fragmented system governance, fiscal
                sustainability in health expenditures, high level of out-of-pocket expenses, shortages in
                human resources for health, and low quality of care are all significant challenges that
                primarily affect the poor, and particularly those residing in rural areas.
                Modernizing and transforming the health sector. There is a need for countries in
                the Middle East and North Africa to move beyond the Millennium Development Goals
                and transform their health systems to cope with the ever increasing burden of non-com-
                municable diseases in a context of moving towards effective universal health coverage
                (UHC). This is a key goal of the Heath, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, as it is
                necessary in order to ensure access to essential healthcare services and prevent impov-
                erishment as a result of illness. Similarly, ministries of health need to look beyond mere
                service delivery toward an increased and more assertive stewardship of health in all pol-
                icies mainly with respect to issues such as climate change, the environment, transporta-
                tion, and food security.

                Key Strategic Engagements
               Improving access to healthcare. Many countries, namely Morocco, Tunisia, and Egypt,
               have adopted new constitutions in which access to healthcare has been explicitly stated as
               a human right, followed by high-level commitments to improve equity in health, access
                                      to healthcare, and increased public financing. In Morocco and
                                      Egypt in particular, there is a palpable move towards achieving
     Many countries have adopted      UHC with financial and technical support from the World Bank.
     new constitutions in which
     access to healthcare has been         Implementing the World Bank’s Health, Nutrition and
     explicitly stated as a human          Population Strategy.1 The new Middle East and North Africa
     right.                                Health, Nutrition, and Population Strategy has been very well
                                           received in most countries, many having agreed with the World
                                           Bank on how to implement the fairness and accountability
                  agenda that the strategy focuses upon. To this end, fairness in health and health systems
                  refers to the absence of systematic disparities in health that could be avoided through
                  prevention and care; the just distribution of the burden of costs of health care according
                  to people’s ability to pay; and an equitable response to the nonmedical needs, rights, and

                1. Please see Middle East and North Africa Health, Nutrition and Population Strategy for details on key challenges and oppor-
                tunities for World Bank Group intervention at http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/01/18369069/
                fairness-accountability-engaging-health-systems-middle-east-north-africa.




62              Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
expectations of those seeking and obtaining health care-that is for a dignified interaction
with the provider. Accountability refers to the obligation to ensure that healthcare ser-
vices are timely, effective, safe, appropriate, cost-conscious, and patient-centered. As a
consequence of this new strategy, the Bank has been able to engage in deeper policy dia-
logue and lending commitments in Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon, the Palestinian territories,
and Yemen, with greater emphasis on health system governance and equitable access to
quality care. Hence, there are thus strong prospects for both broadening and deepening
the Bank’s engagement in the health sector with both IDA and middle-income countries.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   63
                            Macroeconomics and Fiscal
                           Management Global Practice
                                                            Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 2 projects in 2 Countries (Jordan and Tunisia)
•	 Total Commitments: US$500 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$493 million

 Figure 2.14. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)




       Tunisia: 250; 50%                                    Jordan: 250; 50%%




Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: A total of 17 products, including 4
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 3 projects in the pipeline (1 approved by the Board
   of Directors) for a total amount of US$541 million




                           Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   65
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the
     Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management Global Practice
     in the Middle East and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     Conflict has engulfed some countries including several in transition, while generating
     complex spillovers for others, especially in the Mashreq.The current global environment
     presents familiar challenges for the MENA region, but it also presents new opportu-
     nities to implement reforms for broader based and more sustained growth. Overall,
     the oil price decline is already having significant effects on fiscal space in oil-producing
     countries. It is hoped that the decline in oil prices will give urgency to long-overdue
     structural reforms in oil-dependent countries while giving impetus for energy subsidies
     reforms in countries where there were concerns about the inflationary and equity impact
     of subsidy removal or reduction. Conversely, the positive growth effect of the decline of
     oil prices in oil-importing countries is yet to be fully seen. To this end, one of the main
     challenges in the region is:
     The impact of the sharp decline in oil prices. Oil prices plunged to a level below
     US$50 per barrel (Brent crude) in early January 2015, a 50 percent decline since their
     peak in mid-June 2014. Most Gulf Cooperation (GCC) countries were able to sustain
     growth in their non-oil sectors, primarily in services. However, since public spending
     levels were maintained despite lower oil revenues, fiscal balances have deteriorated.
     With oil prices projected to remain low, high-income oil exporting countries can seize
     this opportunity to implement reforms relating to expenditure allocation and efficiency
     as well as economic diversification. Such reforms will make their economic model more
     sustainable.
     •	 Consequences for developing oil exporting countries. For developing oil exporting
        countries, the fiscal consequences of the oil price shock are more significant, and are
        exacerbated by political tensions and conflict. Following a short-lived post-revolution
        economic boom, the civil strife in Libya has contracted the economy by almost 30
        percent in 2014. Yemen also suffered from similar disruptions to the oil sector result-
        ing in slower growth (0.2 percent).The economies of these countries also suffer from
        the persistence of distortive policies that have been detrimental to private savings and
        investment or to economic activity and job creation in the non-oil sector. A sustained
        decline in oil prices thus presents a major risk to the medium-term outlook for oil
        exporting countries.




66   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
•	 Consequences for oil importing countries. Among the oil importing countries,
   Egypt, Lebanon and Djibouti achieved accelerated growth rates in 2014.This has been
   attributed to the progressing political transition in Egypt, increased public spending
   and investment in Lebanon, and an investment boom in Djibouti. For Tunisia, the suc-
   cessful democratic transition has not yet yielded economic dividends. Moderate gains
   will be made in GDP growth on the back of a moderate rebound in the tourism and
   manufacturing sectors. Although Morocco continues on an ambitious reform agenda,
   trend growth remains sluggish and subject to seasonal factors in agriculture. Jordan’s
   economy suffered large shocks due to spillovers from neighboring Syria and Iraq.
   Going forward, lower oil prices will, in the short-term, help narrow Jordan’s twin
   deficits and boost private consumption. Structural fiscal consolidation efforts within
   the framework of the current development policy loan (DPL) and International Mon-
   etary Fund (IMF) program, are expected to narrow the fiscal deficit further. Most oil
   importing countries are likely to benefit from lower oil prices via: (a) higher private
   consumption; (b) stronger fiscal balance; and (c) improved balance of payments. Low
   oil prices will also maintain downward pressure on the inflation rate and in turn
   (indirectly) interest rates. However, proactive and developmentally-oriented policies
   will be needed if these gains are to translate into sustained growth.

Key Strategic Engagements
Collaborating with the country management units, other Global Practices and
units across the World Bank Group to prepare rigorous systematic country diag-
nostics (SCDs). Where SCDs are not in the pipeline, other economic and sectoral work,
such as Country Economic Memorandums (CEMs), will provide an increasingly signifi-
cant vehicle for integrative diagnostics.
Identifying opportunities for delivering high quality development policy opera-
tions. This entails integrating policy measures and reforms aimed at coping with shocks,
boosting economic growth and securing social stability through shared prosperity,
efficiency-led growth, job creation, macroeconomic stability and/or sound economic
governance.
Strengthening analytics. It is critical to enhance the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Man-
agement (MFM) Global Practice’s integrative role by developing an analytical base for
linking structural policies to the twin goals and proactively offering to incorporate mac-
ro-perspectives into the key engagements of other Global Practices. Moreover, stepping
up country-specific policy dialogue by using insights from analytical work such as the
regional flagship report on “Jobs or Privileges” and in-depth country reports to which
MFM contributed such as “All in the Family” is important in this agenda.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   67
     Disseminating macroeconomic monitoring reports. In order to facilitate greater
     knowledge sharing on key MFM related issues, there will be a push for greater in-country
     dissemination of macroeconomic monitoring reports such as the Economic Monitoring
     Notes, with a focus on emerging macroeconomic and fiscal pressures, structural policy
     imperatives in areas such energy subsidies reforms, economic diversification, economic
     implications of gender-based norms, opportunity cost of weak regional integration, and
     economic and social costs of conflicts.
     Supporting Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS). It is a key strategic focus to
     deepen the Bank’s involvement in policy design and implementation support in the GCC
     around strategic programmatic RAS, sharing global knowledge, and deploying our GCC
     RAS experience to other RAS clients like Algeria and the Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI).
     Developing conflict spillover analyses. Given the security situation across the region,
     it is important to pioneer conflict spillover analyses through Economic and Social Impact
     Assessments (completed for Lebanon and KRI) while deploying new tools in collabo-
     ration with the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery, which allow for
     during-conflict needs assessments to enable rapid responses when conflict declines.




68   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                                    Poverty Global Practice
                                                          Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 2 projects in 2 countries (Jordan and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$2 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$2 million

 Figure 2.15. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                                              Jordan: 0; 10%




             Yemen: 2, 90%




Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 14 products
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: No projects in the pipeline.




                        Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   69
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the Poverty
     Global Practice in the Middle East and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     Neither of the indicators of the World Bank Group’s Twin Goals gives a comprehensive
     picture of the MENA region’s development path. On the one hand, the extreme poverty
     goal for 2030 has been met in the region, but adding a mere 75 cents a day to the pov-
     erty line increases poverty five-fold. This suggests that significant vulnerability to small
     changes in income, especially in light of the current economic and political uncertainty.
     On the other hand, the shared prosperity indicator does not give an accurate picture.
     According to this indicator, consumption growth was pro-poor in two of the four coun-
     tries where data is available, and moreover was slow.1 But in 2011–12, the region under-
     went five revolutions expressing widely shared citizen dissatisfaction and calls for greater
     inclusion, broader opportunities and better governance. To this end, some of the main
     challenges throughout the region include:
     •	 The impact of refugees and internally displaced persons. The crisis in Syria and
        ISIS in Iraq has had widespread repercussions across the region. It has resulted in
        the largest displacement crisis in modern history with 3.9 million refugees and 7.6
        million internally displaced people (IDPs). In Iraq, about 2 million people were inter-
        nally displaced and about half a million people fled the country. The costs of accom-
        modating the ever growing number of refugees present a major challenge for the
        neighboring countries. Furthermore, in the absence of data on the welfare of refugees
        and host communities, it is difficult to design appropriate policies on the part of gov-
        ernments and humanitarian and development agencies.
     •	 Lack of dynamism in the private sector. Even before the recent transitions and cri-
        ses, many MENA countries faced systemic challenges that limited the translation of
        economic growth into broad-based improvements in welfare. The lack of dynamism
        in the private sector has severely limited job created and contributed to the exclusion
        of many segments of society from the benefits of growth. The economic structure—
        dominated by oil in some countries and with fuel subsidies and large public sectors in
        most others—is one where rents and power accrue to the privileged few (Schiffbauer
        et al. 2014). Distortive food and energy subsidies account for over 10 percent of
        GDP in some countries of the region and create major fiscal pressures and their ben-
        efits accrue disproportionately to the better off. Yet, it is often difficult to transition
        from these policies, in part due to the potential poverty impacts in countries with
        weak social protection systems, particularly if commodity prices are rising.




     1. Shared Prosperity for the Global Database of Shared Prosperity (GDSP) circa 2006–11.



70   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
•	 Spatial disparities. Finally, in many countries, there are also stark disparities in out-
   comes across space. For example, in Tunisia, Iraq and Egypt, poverty rates are sharply
   higher in the interior, in the south and in Upper Egypt respectively.
•	 Lack of accessible poverty data. In this challenging and fast-changing context, evi-
   dence-based policy making is critical but severely hampered by the lack of regular,
   timely and accessible data on welfare and socio-economic conditions. Access to data
   in MENA has been improving in recent years but much more needs to be done. Five
   years ago, in 2008, only one MENA country publicly shared all its micro-data. A year
   later, surveys conducted in the period 2005–07, supported by substantial technical
   assistance from the World Bank, were made publicly available for two more coun-
   tries.Today, in 2015, in all, at most four countries in the MENA region provide public
   access to micro-data.

Key Strategic Engagements
Developing cutting edge analyses of poverty, inequality, and labor markets. Ana-
lytical work on inequality and poverty-related issues at the country and regional level
remain critical for guiding policy advice to governments and informing World Bank’s
operations and country assistance strategies. In the absence of timely and accessible data,
the Poverty Global Practice uses innovative methodologies, such
as survey to survey imputation, to provide estimates of key wel-
                                                                       Stagnant growth and lack of
fare indicators. Thematically, our analytical work focuses on: (a)
                                                                       “trickle down” growth is com-
shared prosperity; (b) the poverty impacts of shocks; and (c) jobs
                                                                       mon across most Middle Eastern
and subsidies. For example, the recent Poverty and Inclusion
                                                                       and North African economies.
Report in Iraq provides an in-depth analysis of the determinants
of poverty and vulnerability, accessibility of basic services, spatial
disparities in wealth, labor market characteristics, and the role of the social transfers in
supporting the poor. It also offers policy recommendations for enhancing the welfare
of Iraqi citizens. Comprehensive poverty assessments are ongoing in Egypt, Tunisia and
Yemen; and poverty maps have been completed for Iraq and the Palestinian territories.
A regional flagship on Inequality of Opportunity in MENA will be completed in 2015,
offering insights on inequality in access to services and labor markets. At the country
level, the recently released studies on inequality in Egypt have shed light on the nature
of inequality in the country, the sharp difference between facts and perceptions, the state
of poverty and inequality in the poorest villages of the country and the relation of top
incomes and inequality.
The Poverty Global Practice also supports labor market analyses in several MENA coun-
tries. In Morocco, our studies on female employment are informing discussions on labor
market reforms. The recently released report on jobs in Egypt offers an in-depth anal-
ysis of employment trends over the past decade, spatial disparities in labor markets and
impediments to private sector job creation.


                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice     71
     Promoting subsidy reforms. Costly and inefficient subsidies for food and energy have
     been common throughout the region and have resulted in fiscal pressures, particularly
     with the rise of food and commodity prices. The World Bank has been repeatedly called
     to assist governments in the analysis of subsidies, simulation of subsidy reforms, and, at
     times, implementation of reforms. Poverty economists have provided technical assis-
     tance in seven countries Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Jordan, Djibouti and Yemen.
     For example, the Poverty Global Practice developed a model for distributional analysis
     of subsidies and a simulation of subsidy reforms.2
     Building knowledge on the welfare needs of refugees and IDPs as well as host com-
     munities. Availability of detailed data on the poverty profile and needs of refugees and
     IDPs is critical for designing effective support programs for them. In Iraq, poverty teams
     are working with the government to estimate the poverty impact of the new conflict and
     to provide analytical underpinnings for the crisis response strategy.
     The Bank has partnered with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to
     produce a comprehensive welfare needs assessment, which will be used to design social
     assistance programs. Refugees, IDPs and migrant populations are not captured by World
     Bank poverty statistics because these are based on national household surveys covering
     the resident population. As a result, little is known about welfare of over 50 million
     refugees and IDPs worldwide. Cooperation with UNHCR is expected to fill this gap
     and facilitate development of methodologies that can be applied to other refugee and
     displacement situations.
     In addition, the World Bank, the Regional Development and Protection Programme
     (RDPP) and UNHCR are collaborating to implement an innovative multi-country sur-
     vey to assess the socio-economic conditions and coping strategies of hosting communi-
     ties and refugee populations.
     Improving availability, quality and access to data. The World Bank has provided
     intensive technical assistance in survey design, sampling, implementation, data quality
     and new methods and tools to IBRD and IDA countries of the region. The Bank has had
     a major impact on availability of data in fragile states, and supported large household
     survey implementation in Yemen and Iraq. For example, Yemen’s on-going household
     survey is the first since 2005. In both countries, the World Bank’s assistance has resulted
     in open data access.
     Statistical capacity building activities are also ongoing in Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and
     Tunisia. A regional facility dedicated to expanding the access and quality of micro-data
     for poverty and shared prosperity has been set up. In other countries in the region the
     strategy has been focused on strengthening existing relationships, providing training on
     innovative methodologies and generating demand for open data access.

     2. Please refer to the Subsidy Simulation Stata Package, or SUBSIM, for more details: www.subsim.org.




72   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                           Social Protection and Labor
                                        Global Practice
                                                              Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 17 projects in 8 countries (Djibouti, Egypt, Jordan,
   Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$732 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$327 million

 Figure 2.16. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)

                Tunisia: 13; 2%                         Djibouti: 10; 1%



         Yemen: 235; 32%                                      Egypt: 294; 40%




         Morocco: 100; 14%                                   West Bank and Gaza: 20; 3%
           Lebanon: 46; 6%                                   Jordan: 14; 2%




Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 24 products, including 8
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 7 projects in the pipeline (4 approved by the Board
   of Directors ) for a total amount of US$649 million




                            Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   73
              Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the
              Social Protection and Labor Global Practice in the
              Middle East and North Africa

              Key Challenges
              High levels of fuel and food subsidies. With the region holding approximately 48
              percent of the global fuel subsidies, resources are locked into this inefficient mechanism
              that is regressive in nature. Moreover, these subsidies, particularly fuel subsidies, are
              ineffective in reaching the poor.
              Program fragmentation and lack of coordination. Most countries in the region have
              a large number of programs with overlapping mandates, institutional arrangements,
              and delivery mechanisms. Existing coordination mechanism at the policy and program
              implementation levels are weak and result in inefficiencies as well as exclusion of target
              groups.

              Key Strategic Engagements
              Supporting social protection programs. Supporting Middle Eastern and North African
              countries consolidate their social protection and labor programs into coherent systems is
              a key agenda item. Such support entails: (a) building unified registries of beneficiaries of
                                   social programs, whereby different program databases can identify
                                   beneficiaries and exchange information; (b) supporting the con-
A key opportunity for Social       solidation of policy and program level coordination amongst social
Protection in Middle Eastern       ministries; and (c) addressing emergency needs, which often fol-
and North African countries is     low political events, by creating quick job opportunities and using
to support efforts to consoli-     the existing systems to deliver immediate support.
date social safety nets, with an
emphasis on pursuing a systemic    Supporting the design of policies to reallocate public social
approach rather than frag-         expenditures in a more targeted and progressive manner. This
mented programs.                   includes supporting the region’s governments by ensuring the nec-
                                   essary fiscal space to undertake reforms of regressive subsidies.
                                   Not only does this relate to energy subsidies, but also to eliminat-
             ing regressive features present in other social programs, such as the structural deficits or
             pension programs, as well as poorly targeted social safety net programs.
              Informing labor discussions. The World Bank provides technical assistance to a variety
              of stakeholders to better inform overall labor discussions in the region. This, in some
              countries, involves discussions with employers, labor unions and focuses on areas such as
              reform of social security systems and labor regulations.




74            Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Better equipping the unemployed in the region. Although the main issues regarding
unemployment relate to growth levels and their sustainability as well as the demographics
of the region, certain groups such as youth and women have particular vulnerabilities in
the labor market. There is thus a specific focus on these groups in order to enhance their
employability in the labor market. This includes short-term approaches such as support-
ing active labor market projects, as well as long-term projects such as supporting struc-
tural reforms in labor markets and improving interventions to connect skills and jobs.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   75
       Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience
                          Global Practice
                                                              Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 21 projects in 8 countries (Djibouti, Iraq, Jordan,
   Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$975 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$312 million

 Figure 2.17. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                                       Djibouti: 6; 1%
                 Regional activities: 8; 1% Iraq: 3; 0%

          West Bank and Gaza: 71; 7%            Jordan: 50; 5%
                                                        Lebanon: 69; 7%

           Yemen: 156; 16%



                                                               Morocco: 310; 32%



             Tunisia: 303; 31%



Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 15 products, including 6
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 4 projects were approved by the Board of
   Directors for a total amount of US$483 million.




                             Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   77
               Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the
               Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice
               in the Middle East and North Africa

               Key Challenges
               The Middle East and North Africa Region (MENA) is one of the world’s most vol-
               atile and conflict-affected regions. After Africa, MENA has the highest numbers of
               displaced people due to conflict, with 9.1 million internally displaced persons in 2013.
               Several countries in the region are experiencing recurrent cycles of conflict and fragility
               with long term impacts on poverty, human development and social cohesion.
               The region is increasingly vulnerable to natural disasters and climate change. The
               MENA region has been affected by 388 disasters in the past 35 years, with the number
               of disaster events almost tripling since 1980. Furthermore, the effects of climate change
               (for instance, the increasing water supply gap) will also have a significant impact on the
               region moving forward.
             Cities are key engines of growth, but also hotspots of poverty and unemployment.
             About 64 percent of GDP is generated in cities, dominated by primary cities. Moreover,
             MENA is 60 percent urbanized compared to the global average of 52 percent. Poverty is
                                     urbanizing, as the poor increasingly live in informal settlements
                                     and slums. If unmanaged, urban poverty can contribute to social
       Poverty is urbanizing, as the
                                     instability and unequal growth.
      poor increasingly live in infor-
      mal settlements and slums. If       High youth unemployment is a major source of tension.
     unmanaged, urban poverty can         MENA is home to the largest youth population of any region (30
     contribute to social instability     percent of the population is between the ages of 15–29). Forty
               and unequal growth.        percent of youth are not part of the labor force, in training or
                                          school, and youth represent 67 percent of the total unemployed.

               Key Strategic Engagements
               Due to the aforementioned challenges, the SURR Global Practice is focusing on
               developing more inclusive development approaches and opportunities. This will
               entail reducing inequality by addressing regional disparities, including rural and urban
               disparities. Improving accountability through better governance, local empowerment
               and decentralization will also be crucial. Finally, the provision of local basic services,
               particularly for disenfranchised groups, including refugees and internally displaced per-
               sons, is a key area of focus.
               Improving government accountability, expanding decentralization, empowering
               local governments, and enabling citizen voice. Mainstreaming citizen engagement
               through operations and country systems (e.g., grievance redress mechanisms, citizen



78             Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
feedback, budget transparency, participatory planning, etc.) is a main focus area. It will
also be crucial to continue sharing relevant experiences on adopting more inclusive and
participatory approaches to reflect changing state-society relations. In addition, com-
prehensive approaches to improving local service delivery institutional frameworks and
governance structures is a significant part of this agenda.
Enabling cities to become growth engines and incubators of innovation and
enterprise. This includes expanding the provision of services, especially for marginal-
ized groups, reducing socioeconomic inequality and demographic and regional dispar-
ities, and fostering transparent financing for better, more responsive and efficient local
services.
•	 Palestinian territories. The World Bank’s urban and social development program
   in the West Bank and Gaza applies an integrated approach to strengthen government
   and civil society institutions for improved local service delivery. The Palestinian Solid
   Waste Management Program equips local government to provide more efficient and
   reliable solid waste services, and also mandates them to conduct citizen satisfaction
   surveys and develop municipal service delivery performance scoring systems. Fur-
   thermore, the Bank’s financial and capacity building support in the Palestinian urban
   and social sectors is complemented by a number of AAA including on municipal
   finance, inter-governmental fiscal relations, municipal public-private partnerships,
   village development and governance, housing finance, and state-NGO relations.
•	 Tunisia. The Bank’s urban development and local governance engagement in Tunisia
   presents a comprehensive package of support and services for the government in
   transition. For instance, an Economic and Sector Work (ESW) series (including pol-
   icy notes) on: (a) decentralization; (b) municipal finance; (c) regional disparities; and
   (d) spatial disparities and labor market provided key data and analysis to inform the
   decentralization process. In addition, a Program for Results (PforR) provides fiscal
   incentives for improved institutional performance of 264 municipalities in support
   of the government’s transition to a decentralized service delivery model as enshrined
   in the new constitution. The Bank has also provided just-in-time technical assistance
   to assist municipalities and the central government transition to the new roles desig-
   nated to them by the new constitution.
•	 Gulf Cooperation Council countries. The World Bank’s City Institutional Strength-
   ening Program (CISP) provides continuous support to metropolitan municipalities in
   the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in: (a) Urban Management; (b) Urban Regeneration; (c)
   Climate and Disaster Resilience; and (d) Economic Empowerment of Women. The
   Bank’s Solid Waste Sector Program in Kuwait assists the Municipality of Kuwait in
   strengthening the legal, planning and institutional frameworks necessary to improve
   operational, environmental and economic performance.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   79
     Tunisia. Tunisia Urban Development and Local Governance Program for Results (PforR) is
     helping the government of Tunisia: (a) introduce citizen participation in the annual planning pro-
     cess at the municipal level nationwide; and (b) establish a portal (e-Platform) to serve as a trans-
     parency platform providing real-time information about financial transfers to local governments,
     thus enabling monitoring by local government, civil society organizations (CSOs) and citizens.
     MENA. There are new local governance and service delivery operations taking place across the
     region in Tunisia,Yemen, Morocco, Jordan, and the West Bank and Gaza.


                Addressing the social, economic and political exclusion of women and youth. The
                Bank has contributed to this agenda by targeting gender interventions in country pro-
                grams, removing constraints to youth and women’s economic participation, while
                increasing their voice and participation in project design and implementation. This has
                been facilitated through knowledge exchanges, raising awareness and capacity building
                on social accountability methods (via the Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in
                the Arab World), as well as by mainstreaming citizen engagement in more than 40 oper-
                ations. Moreover, the Bank has focused on enhancing social cohesion and access to social
                opportunities, mostly targeting women and youth, through numerous literacy programs,
                vocational training, capacity building for community associations, and other community
                development activities.
                •	 Palestinian territories. The Gender Action Plan for the program focused on the
                   key constraints women face in participating in the labor market, making service
                   delivery responsive to women’s needs, and enhancing women’s decision-making and
                   access to credit. Moreover, building stronger government-civil society relations for
                   better service delivery and enhanced accountability through programs such as the
                   West Bank and Gaza Village and Neighborhood Development Program (VNDP) and
                   the ongoing Palestinian NGO Program, for example, address capacity development
                   needs of citizens and CSOs. The VNDP applied a community-driven development
                   (CDD) approach to build social capital and enable communities to formulate the first
                   community development plans.
                •	 Yemen. The Faith Based Leadership Training for Women provided a comprehensive
                   10-module leadership training over a six-month period to 36 women change-makers,
                   political advocates and civic champions.
                •	 MENA. Women and youth employment and entrepreneurship projects in Jordan,
                   Egypt, Tunisia and Morocco target women and youth to increase employment pros-
                   pects. Targeted gender analysis and programs in Yemen and Morocco to address chal-
                   lenges faced by women in terms of voice and participation.




80              Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Strengthening resilience to climate change and natural disasters. Governments
have progressively shifted their risk management approach from emergency response
and disaster risk management to long-term resilience. To this end, promoting the estab-
lishment of resilience strategies and funds is critical. The Bank is thus focusing on helping
national governments and cities build sustainable, resilient infrastructure in the context
of rapid urbanization and fast growing cities.
•	 Jordan and Lebanon. In both countries, the Bank is helping to respond to the crisis
   in Syria by supporting the resilience of municipalities dealing with refugees and infra-
   structure challenges. The Bank has carried out the Jordan Emergency Services and
   Social Resilience Program, and the Lebanon Municipal Services Emergency Project.
•	 Palestinian territories. The Bank has supported this agenda through the Gaza Emer-
   gency Additional Financing to the Second Municipal Development Project.




                               Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   81
                                Trade and Competitiveness
                                          Global Practice
                                                             Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 5 projects in 4 countries (Djibouti, Tunisia, West Bank
   and Gaza, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$61 million
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$3 million

 Figure 2.18. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)

                                   Djibouti: 2; 3%
                                                      West Bank and Gaza: 5; 9%

                                                          Yemen: 4; 6%



         Tunisia: 50; 82%




Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 16 products, including 6
   Reimbursable Advisory Services. IFC Advisory Services accounts for
   an additional 14 knowledge products.
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 2 projects to be delivered for a total amount
   of US$206 million.




                            Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   83
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the
     Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice in the
     Middle East and North Africa

     Key Challenges
     Complex political economy issues. Dealing with complex political economy issues that
     are constraining private sector development and job creation in the Middle East and
     North Africa is the main challenge in the region.
     The Jobs or Privileges regional report has recently pointed to issues of policy uncertainty,
     capture, and discretionary implementation of regulations and policies as key constraints
     to private sector development and job creation in the Middle East and North Africa.
     Addressing these issues of capture, discretion, and policy uncertainty is particularly sen-
     sitive and challenging as they relate to deeply entrenched political economy equilibria.

     Key Strategic Engagements
     Encouraging regulatory simplification, transparency and accountability. Support-
     ing major efforts in the areas of regulatory simplification, transparency, and accountabil-
     ity in the delivery of regulatory services; improving the competition framework and its
     enforcement; and putting in place mechanisms that shield government policies, inter-
     ventions, and agencies from capture, discretion, and arbitrary enforcement to protect
     privileged incumbents from competition.
     Priority areas for intervention. Ultimately, the priority areas for intervention in Trade
     and Competitiveness in the Middle East and North Africa are in the realm of policy
     changes and better governance rather than in actual investments, which limits the scope
     for investment lending, except in financing the infrastructure for cluster development
     and growth poles.
     Ensuring cross cutting Global Practice interventions. Developing interventions with
     other practices to provide cross-Global Practice solutions, particularly for jobs with the
     Education Global Practice, governance and transparency with the Governance Global
     Practice, e-government initiatives for Government-to-Business (G2B) services and trade
     facilitation infrastructure with the Transport and ICT Global Practice, agribusiness value
     chains with the Agriculture Global Practice, tourism offerings with the Social, Urban,
     Rural and Resilience Global Practice, and overall growth policies and business taxation
     policies with the Macro and Fiscal Management Global Practice.




84   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
        Transport and ICT Global Practice
                                                            Middle East and North Africa


Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 10 projects in 5 countries (Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon,
   Morocco and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$1.9 billion
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$513 million

 Figure 2.19. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                              Yemen: 254; 14%




          Morocco: 241; 13%                                    Egypt: 880; 47%




           Lebanon: 141; 7%

                  Iraq: 355; 19%



Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 21 products, including 7
   Reimbursable Advisory Services
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 7 projects in the pipeline for a total amount of
   US$407 million




                           Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   85
                Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the Transport
                and ICT Global Practice in the Middle East and North Africa

                Key Challenges: Transport
                Upgrading urban transport services. Sixty percent of the population is now urban-
                ized. Most cities see rapid growth in urban transport demand and motorization.Yet, the
                development of urban transport systems, and particularly public transport, has lagged,
                and this has fostered excessive reliance on private automobiles. As a result, many of the
                region’s large urban areas where the bulk of GDP is produced face increasingly difficult
                transport problems with high traffic congestion, reduced mobility, and deteriorating air
                quality. This reduces social and economic opportunities and quality of life, especially for
                the poorest, while affecting cities’ competitiveness and economic growth.
                Expanding access to all-weather roads in rural areas. Transport is critical in rural
                areas for accessing markets, health centers, schools and other social and administra-
                tive services. Populations without affordable and dependable transport are generally
                poorer. For most MENA countries, especially those with a large rural population, such
                as Morocco, Egypt, and Yemen, all-weather access in rural areas is limited by the poor
                condition of road networks and the inadequacy of basic transport services. In Yemen for
                instance, only about 25 percent of the rural population lives within two kilometers of an
                all-weather road.
                                           Improving the governance of large state owned enterprises
     Sixty percent of the population       (SOEs). Whether operating in the field of railways or urban
        is now urbanized. Most cities      transport, many SOEs are heavily subsidized, inefficient and loss
     see rapid growth in urban trans-      making.
     port demand and motorization,
     leading to more congestion, less    Facilitating trade and promoting regional integration
     mobility, and poorer air quality.   through greater efficiency of transport infrastructure and
                                         services. Intra-regional trade is marginal—for example, trade
                                         between Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia accounts for only 3 per-
                cent of their total trade. Over the past years, the region has lost global market share in
                many export sectors, and non-oil exports represent just one percent of world trade,
                which is the lowest share of any developing region. While a number of factors have con-
                tributed to this reduction, low performing transport infrastructure and services in many
                countries of the region have adversely affected trade flows through higher costs, delays,
                and uncertainty. To address this situation, more efficient logistical services are required
                as well as transport infrastructure with broader geographic coverage, better inter-modal
                connectivity, and higher quality and capacity.




86              Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Increasing the role of the private sector to meet growing transport demands.
Throughout the 1990s, most countries encouraged private participation in the develop-
ment of infrastructure facilities and services. However, private investment flows to trans-
port public-private partnership (PPP) projects throughout the MENA region have been
low. Yet, the need to build additional capacity at airports and ports, and to extend and
maintain road and motorway networks has continued to grow. To meet this additional
demand in a fiscally constrained environment, the private sector
has an important role to play. This requires a change in paradigm,
                                                                       The region has the highest
as for too long the focus in MENA’s transport sector has been on
                                                                       greenhouse gases transport
public provision of infrastructure and services.
                                                                            emissions per unit of GDP,
Mitigating and adapting to climate change. Climate change             roughly the same as North
mitigation is a special challenge in the region. Indeed, although     America.
MENA greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are less than 6 percent
of the world total for the transport sector, some countries are
among the highest per capita emitters in the world. In addition, of all the regions of the
world, MENA has the highest GHG transport emissions per unit of GDP – roughly the
same as North America.
Contributing to social development by improving road safety, responding to wom-
en’s needs, and increasing physical accessibility for people with reduced mobility.
Four countries of the region rank among the ten worst countries in the world for road
traffic mortality and injury rates.

Key Strategic Engagements: Transport
Improving expenditure patterns in five key areas: (a) maintenance, especially for
roads; (b) urban public transport, including the expansion of mass transit systems;
(c) capacity and efficiency of infrastructure for international and particularly regional
cross-border trade; (d) social development—i.e., rural access, road safety, needs of
women, and physical accessibility for people with reduced mobility; and (e) assessment
and selection of transport investments.
Increasing the performance and capacity of the public sector. Whether it is at the
government level or within state owned enterprises, capacity development should be
pursued vigorously. Indeed, transport sectors often do not have the adequate systems,
institutions, or even staff to formulate and implement adequate strategies and invest-
ment plans, and to ensure that operations are organized and managed efficiently. Plan-
ning systems and data bases need to be improved, for example for urban transport.
Proper asset management systems are required, especially in the road sector. Regulatory
capability should be developed, notably for urban public transport services. Performance
of border agencies needs to accompany improved cross-border facilities. Furthermore,




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice      87
               better monitoring and multi-sectoral coordination is necessary for addressing the social
               agenda. Finally, better governance and accountability systems are necessary throughout
               the region.
               Developing a suitable environment for efficient provision of transport infrastruc-
               ture and services by the private sector. A key challenge within the region’s transport
               sector remains one of removing major policy and practical constraints to private sector
               participation and competition. Policy makers should greatly improve the institutional,
               regulatory, and financial framework in transport to provide suitable incentives for pri-
               vate participation. This still requires in many cases separating the policy, regulatory, and
               operational functions in the sector. In parallel, it will be key to develop well-structured
               transactions that best fit the specific economic and political context of MENA coun-
               tries. Cost-effective transport services also need to be promoted through deregulation
               of transport markets and greater competition among service providers, including for
               international transport.
               Improving pricing policies, notably for fuel and public transport services. Although
               the situation varies greatly by country, there are numerous examples of gross price dis-
               tortions in the MENA transport sector, for example for fuel pricing and public transport
               tariffs. These should be gradually removed while paying attention to the social impact of
               cost reflective price levels. Raising fuel prices is essential for increasing transport sector
               energy efficiency and reducing GHG emissions but it should be carried out in a gradual
               manner as part of a fair process that includes compensation for the poor.Whenever feasi-
               ble, proper systems should also be established to compensate operators for public service
               obligations imposed on them.
               Improving road and railways management and safety. The road sector is a key
               enabler of economic development but there is a need to develop a road strategy to first
               enhance the preservation and the safety of road network assets. In some countries, rail-
               ways are an essential mode of transport, especially for low-income commuters, and have
               been affected by acute safety issues, aging infrastructure and rolling stock. There is a


     Morocco. The Morocco Second National Rural Roads Program (NRRP2) consists of the reha-
     bilitation of 15,560 kilometers of rural roads throughout the country, which will improve access
     to all-weather roads for about three million rural dwellers. A 2010 study of the Ministry of
     Equipment, Transport and Logistics on a sample of six roads financed by the program showed
     encouraging results, compared to the situation prior to the project: transport cost of passengers
     and goods decreased by about 40 percent, school enrollment rates increased by 17 percent,
     girls school enrollment rates went up from 40 percent to 44 percent, visits to health facilities
     increased by 40 percent, women visits to health facilities increased from three to five times per
     year, household revenue and consumption increased by 35–40 percent, and the price of a basket
     of basic commodities (sugar, oil, gas bottle, tea, flour) decreased by 14 percent.



88             Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
need to reform the railways to introduce better accountability, and improve financial and
safety management.
Reducing emissions of greenhouse gases and adapting the transport sector to cli-
mate change. Much can be done in the MENA region to reduce GHG emissions through
general efficiency improvement measures such as vehicle emissions regulations, fiscal
incentives, raising fuel prices, and better traffic management, as
well as through specific actions such as vehicle fleet renewal pro-
                                                                          The introduction of competi-
grams, public information campaigns, and training of operators.
                                                                       tion and open access regulations
Investment in public transport in the large cities would also be a
                                                                          could significantly change the
key contributor to emissions reductions. These measures would
                                                                            landscape of the region and
have major co-benefits in terms of better air quality and lower
                                                                            spawn substantial economic
fuel import bills for the oil importing countries. In addition,
                                                                                                 growth.
adaptation of the transport sector to the changing climate, par-
ticularly the heavy rains and flooding that climate models pre-
dict for the region, requires better design norms and methods, retrofitting vulnerable
infrastructure, and building capability within transport and other relevant institutions to
address catastrophic events.

Key Challenges: ICT
Sector liberalization, regulation and infrastructure open access. Several countries
have yet to liberalize, or further liberalize their ICT sector in order to increase broad-
band access and make it more affordable to the average citizen. Strengthening the regu-
latory framework is also needed in order to ensure level playing field and infrastructure
open access.
Private sector participation. Investments in infrastructure and services could be sub-
stantially enhanced in many countries where the incumbent is state-owned or inter-
net service providers are restricted. Growth in the sector would have several virtuous
effects. Notably, a vibrant IT private sector is needed to sustain eGoverment programs
and the related IT outsourcing services (systems, services, maintenance and develop-
ment). In addition, the expansion of the private sector in the ICT field could also boost
the adoption of innovative IT management tools among small- and medium-sized enter-
prises, and in turn could increase productivity and transparency.
Innovation ecosystem. Mobile broadband is increasingly accessible and is opening new
horizons of services and products. To seize these opportunities, digital literacy programs
(which stress inclusion of girls, women, the disabled, and the elderly) and computer
science programs in higher education are needed. This in turn can feed start-ups which,
if have access to facilities and financing, can be an engine of job creation.




                              Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice        89
               Key Strategic Engagements: ICT
               Strengthening competition and open access. The introduction of competition and
               open access regulations could significantly change the landscape of the region and spawn
               substantial economic growth.
               Accelerating the transition towards the digital economy. This covers multiple dimen-
               sions on the “demand” side of the sector: eGovernment programs, ICT in various sec-
               tors (agriculture, energy, transport, health, education, etc.), IT sector development, and
               innovation ecosystems,
               Promoting open and big data. A continuation of the eGovernment programs, open
               data (public and private data) and big data are shaping citizen engagement and the innova-
               tion ecosystems. They are key elements of the new frontier for ICT sector development.


     Djibouti. The Djibouti Telecom Sector Opening Project will introduce competition and improve
     the institutional and regulatory environment by updating the legal and regulatory framework,
     strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Communication, and preparing the establishment of
     an independent regulatory authority. It will also examine options for Djibouti Telecom’s strategic
     repositioning.
     Tunisia. The Tunisia Accelerating High-Speed Internet Access Project will contribute to expand-
     ing and developing Tunisia’s broadband services by accelerating ultra-fast broadband (UFB)
     deployment in appropriate geographical locations with the involvement of the private sector and
     by furthering competition in the sector.
     Morocco. The Morocco Creating Income-Generating Opportunities through ICT-enabled
     Microwork will explore income-generating opportunities for the most disadvantaged communi-
     ties through ICT-enabled work.
     Lebanon. The Mobile Innovation Ecosystem Project aims at boosting the innovation ecosystem
     through stimulating the private and public sectors, as well as civil society, to engage in new col-
     laboration and co-creation models.




90             Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                                              Water Global Practice
                                                              Middle East and North Africa

Highlights
•	 Active Portfolio: 24 projects in 7 countries (Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon,
   Morocco, Tunisia, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen)
•	 Total Commitments: US$2.2 billion
•	 Total Disbursements to Date: US$520 million

 Figure 2.20. Total Commitments by Country ($ million, % of total)
                           Tunisia: 209; 9%
             Yemen: 90; 4%                          Egypt: 638; 29%


       Morocco: 447; 20%


                                                       West Bank and Gaza: 49; 2%
                                                      Iraq: 105; 5%
             Lebanon: 674; 31%



Fiscal 2015 Deliverables
•	 Fiscal 2015 Knowledge Products: 5 products
•	 Fiscal 2015 Lending: 5 projects in the pipeline (2 approved by the Board
   of Executive Directors) for a total amount of US$687 million




                            Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice   91
     Key Challenges and Strategic Approach of the
     Water Global Practice in the Middle East and North Africa
     The Middle East and North Africa region is the origin of the Water Global Practice’s
     emerging “Extreme Water Initiative”. This initiative seeks to link localities, utilities,
     policy and technology innovators, and civil society organizations across the world in a
     common agenda in order to share approaches and identify solutions to the challenges
     imposed by extreme scarcity in achieving water security.1

     Key Challenges
     Water scarcity. As the most water-scarce region in the world, the Middle East and
     North Africa faces tremendous challenges in meeting the growing demand for water
     to support expanding urban populations and economic growth, while moving towards
     more effective inter-sectoral water allocation, including the use of water pricing.
     Water as a source of social and political tension. Given the fragile political con-
     text, water is often a source of further social and political vulnerability, fueling con-
     flicts between nations, regions, urban and rural communities over scarce resources, and
     undermining the social compact between the state and its citizenry where basic water
     services are under-provided (poor, rural and peri-urban communities) or are of very
     poor quality (many major municipalities).
     Institutions and policies in need of strengthening. Water institutions and policies
     across the region – including key issues such as client responsive and sustainable utilities,



                                                     Integrated
                                                    urban water
                                                    management




                          Agricultural            Sustainable                   Closing
                                                                              water service
                             water               water resources              gaps for the
                          productivity
                                                  and services                   poor




                                                    Cooperative
                                                   management of
                                                    international
                                                       waters



     1. Defined as meeting the social, environmental and economic needs for water resources on a sustainable basis.




92   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
water pricing, regulation of groundwater utilization and water quality – require substan-
tial institutional and policy strengthening.
Climate change. These challenges are further accentuated by the risks of climate
change. Forecasts suggest that climate change will result in generally lower and more
concentrated precipitation levels over much of the region, higher temperatures and eva-
po-transpiration rates, and will place further pressure on the natural basis of water secu-
rity – groundwater aquifers.

Key Strategic Engagements to Meet the Extreme Water Challenge in MENA
Developing integrated urban water management (IUWM) for localized water
security. MENA’s rapidly growing cities and towns are quite vulnerable to water service
shortages due to the insufficient capacity to mobilize and treat water and wastewater,
as well as potential supply shocks due to natural (droughts or
earthquakes) or man-made (conflict) disruptions. Localities such       As the most water-scarce region
as Sana’a in Yemen and Gaza in the Palestinian territories are            in the world, the Middle East
already facing critical water supply constraints as they deplete        and North Africa faces tremen-
their local aquifers. Global experience has shown that local water      dous challenges in meeting the
security, under extreme circumstances, necessitates a different           growing demand for water to
water services management approach which goes beyond the               support expanding urban popu-
standard, efficient utility approach (though still much needed           lations and economic growth.
in most MENA countries) to include highly specific technology
options and institutional capacities. IUWM is particularly rel-
evant to the MENA extreme water context as it explicitly integrates improvements in
service delivery in cities and towns with more effective management of water resources
both local (aquifers and rivers) and incremental (conveyed water, desalination, and
reuse), as well as energy efficiency. As the risks of localized water insecurity are most
intensively perceived by mayors and other local governance authorities, the Water Global
Practice is working with the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice to bring
together the municipal services agenda with the sustainable water resources manage-
ment agenda across the region, including in Morocco, Tunisia, the Palestinian territories,
Yemen, Lebanon, Iraq, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia.
Increasing the productivity of water, particularly in agriculture to improve allocative
efficiency. Despite its extreme scarcity, MENA has amongst the lowest levels of water pro-
ductivity in the world. This is particularly true for agriculture which continues to account
for approximately 80 percent of freshwater withdrawals in the region. While non-con-
ventional sources of freshwater such as desalination and reuse of wastewater can provide
some incremental resources (albeit at high cost), there is a compelling need to stabilize and
eventually reduce water resource consumption in agriculture and facilitate reallocation to
urban, industrial and other higher value uses in terms of economic growth and employ-
ment. In order to ensure that the inter-sectoral competition for scarce water resources


                               Overview of Middle East and North Africa Portfolio by Global Practice      93
     does not accentuate tensions between rural and urban communities, we are working with
     countries to maintain or increase agricultural value added and food security in a context of
     likely declining water use. Specifically, the Water Global Practices is working in conjunction
     with the Agriculture Global Practice to increase both the efficiency and quality of irrigation
     services, while increasing the value of production, setting the basis for improved water
     pricing and other incentives for efficiency. In conjunction with the Food and Agriculture
     Organization (FAO) and other partners, the World Bank is currently focusing its agricul-
     tural water productivity work in Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt,Yemen and Iraq.
     Closing remaining basic water service gaps for the poor in rural and peri-urban
     areas, and supporting communities impacted by refugees and internally displaced
     persons. Despite tremendous improvements in water supply and sanitation coverage in
     the MENA region over the past three decades, there are significant areas which remain
     unconnected to improved services—particularly in rural and peri-urban areas where the
     costs or service provision are higher and the scope for cost recovery lower, than in core
     urban areas. This has been accentuated in recent years by the inflow of refugees from
     the conflicts in Syria and Iraq. In addition to the health and welfare risks posed by access
     to substandard water and sanitation services, these service gaps are often perceived by
     citizens as contributing to their sense of social and political exclusion. However, global
     as well as regional experiences provide a range of technical and institutional options to
     address these challenges while limiting fiscal costs. These options require governments
     and utilities to incorporate an open approach of the mechanisms and roles of local com-
     munities and the private sector in delivering services. In addition, the Bank is supporting
     programs responding to the impacts of the refugee influx in Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq/
     Kurdistan Region of Iraq.
     Supporting cooperative management of international waters. With an estimated 60
     percent of freshwater resources in trans-boundary rivers and aquifers, the MENA region
     is amongst the most water inter-dependent in the world. While often viewed as a source
     of actual and potential conflict, recent global experience suggests that this can also be the
     basis for strengthening international cooperation, as in the case of India and Pakistan’s
     respect of the Indus River Agreements, and more recently, the Jordanian, Israeli and Pal-
     estinian tripartite agreements in the context of efforts to address threats to the Dead Sea.
     There are also civil society and local government based initiatives in several countries
     which provide an opportunity for developing “bottom-up” cooperation. A water secure
     MENA requires increased technical support to political agreements at the national and
     local levels on shared management of rivers and major aquifers. Such agreements should
     focus on common information and modelling of resources, water quality, current and
     future utilization, and options for water sharing. Given the importance of water quality
     issues to this agenda, the Water Global Practice is currently working with the Environ-
     ment Global Practice on this initiative, including in the Jordan River Valley—Red Sea to
     Dead Sea—and the Nile Basin Initiative.



94   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                          III.
      Selected Key Cross-Cutting
 Challenges and Opportunities in
the Middle East and North Africa




                                   95
                                                                              Climate Change

Key Challenges

C     limate change is a critical issue in the Middle East and North Africa as the region
      continues to experience extreme heat, drought, and aridity. While societal
responses to changes are hard to predict, extreme impacts would present unprecedented
challenges to the social systems affected. Climate change might act as a threat multi-
plier to the security situation in the region by imposing additional pressures on already
scarce resources and by reinforcing pre-existing threats connected to migration follow-
ing forced displacement.
Changing precipitation patterns and an increase in extreme heat pose high risks
to agricultural production and regional food security. Productivity is expected to
drop and crop yields may decrease by up to 30 percent and more if the global tempera-
ture rises more than 4ºC compared to the historical average. With 70 percent of agri-
cultural production being rain-fed, the sector is highly vulnerable to temperature and
precipitation changes and the associated potential consequences for food, social secu-
rity, and rural livelihoods. The increase in demand for irrigation water will be difficult
to meet due to the decrease in water availability. Rising food prices that often follow
production shocks and long-term declines make the growing number of urban poor
increasingly vulnerable to malnutrition. With its high and growing import dependency
the region is particularly vulnerable to worldwide and domestic agricultural impacts and
related spikes in food prices.
Heat extremes will pose a significant challenge for human health. The period of
consecutive hot days is expected to increase. Heat stress levels can approach the physi-
ological limits of people working outdoors and severely undermine regional labor pro-
ductivity. High temperatures can cause heat-related illnesses especially for vulnerable
groups. The relative risk of diarrheal disease as a consequence of climatic changes and
deteriorating water quality is expected to increase.
Sea-level rise will pose serious challenges to the region’s coastal population,
infrastructure, and economic assets. All coastlines are at risk from sea-level rise. The
Maghreb countries of Tunisia, Morocco, and Libya along with Egypt, are among the
most exposed North African countries in terms of total population affected by sea-level
rise. Key impacts include inundation, flooding, and damages caused by extreme events
(including storms, storm surges, and increased coastal erosion). Impacts on groundwater
levels are significant, with potential negative repercussions on human health for local and
migrant populations.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   97
                 Relative Increase of CO2 Emissions and the CO2 Intensity for
     Figure 3.1. 
                 MENA Compared to the Global Average
        2.2
        2.0             MNA     World                                                    1.28Gt
        1.8                              CO2 emissions
        1.6
        1.4
                     0.56Gta
        1.2                                                                         0a.61kg/$
        1.0
                0.57kg/$           CO2 intensity of GDP, PPP
        0.8
        0.6
              1992                               2000                                             2010


     Source: WDI data from CDIAC



     Increasing energy intensity and gas flaring risks GHG emissions rising even
     higher. Energy intensity—the ratio of energy use to GDP—has dropped dramatically
     nearly everywhere in the world. With a few exceptions, the energy intensities of coun-
     tries in the MENA region remain below the averages for their income brackets—but for
     most of them energy intensity is rising, the opposite of trends elsewhere. From 2000
     to 2012, the energy intensity of lower-middle-income countries worldwide fell by 2.5
     percent a year, while MENA countries in the same income bracket rose by 0.4 percent.
     Upper-middle-income countries worldwide saw energy intensity fall by 0.5 percent a
     year over the same period, but those in MENA by only 0.1 percent. Among high-income
     countries, energy intensity fell across the globe at 1.6 percent a year, in contrast to a
     rise in the MENA region of 0.9 percent. In addition, gas flaring in oil production causes
     significant losses every year, representing 28 percent of global flaring volumes (2012),
     with eight of the top 20 gas flaring countries located in the MENA region. To this end,
     GHG emissions in the region have doubled over the past two decades (to 1.28 gigatonnes
     in 2010).
     There has been a limited use of renewable energy sources in the region. Meeting the
     forecast level of demand growth over the next decade will require major investments.
     According to a recent World Bank estimate, additional demand for electricity could grow
     by 84 percent in the MENA region by 2020 (compared to 2010), requiring 135 gigawatt
     of additional capacity.Whether those investments will embrace energy-efficient technol-
     ogies is a critical question. The broad availability of hydrocarbons associated with univer-
     sal subsidy schemes for energy consumption has hindered the use of new technologies
     to harvest renewable energy and energy efficiency potential. The production of energy




98   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
from renewable sources is still limited, even as solar and wind energy can be easily har-
vested due to the climate of the region.

Key Strategic Engagements
Improving water resource management and water quality: To face the challenge of
water scarcity, the Bank Group is engaged in improving water resource management
and increasing water mobilization and provision. This is important in order to alleviate
pressure during the dry season, through a “landscape” approach that supports rural live-
lihoods and the sustainable management of forests and grazing areas and watersheds.
Global benefits in terms of increased sequestration can be substantial, and provide addi-
tional revenues for financing the environmental services provided by these natural assets.
As water becomes less available, preserving its quality becomes more important. The
Bank Group is engaged in reducing water pollution in major water rivers and Lake in an
integrated fashion (i.e., Lake Qaraoun; Lebanon), from industrial pollution (i.e., Leba-
non, Pollution Abatement project) or from agriculture (Egypt analytical work).
Improving natural resources and desert ecosystem management. To increase resil-
ience to drought, the Bank is engaged in the sustainable management of desert and oases
ecosystems to optimize the provision of desert goods and services in the agro-food chain
specific to arid environment and to promote eco-tourism (i.e., Algeria, Jordan, Morocco
and Tunisia). The Bank is also promoting climate resilient agriculture especially in rain
fed areas (i.e.,Yemen).
Protection of coastal zone. Coastal cities play a major role in economies across the
MENA region. The Bank Group’s strategic vision is to promote the development and
management of a coastal zone that is both sustainable and resilient (i.e., Morocco Inte-
grated Coastal Zone Project).
Local Co-benefits of Climate Change Mitigation. Air pollution has become the most
significant cause of premature deaths in the world. Mitigation actions to reduce green-
house gases from energy and transport sectors in particular, will also have a significant
and positive impact in reducing air pollution, and the large human and economic costs
associated with air pollution. To be effective, these efforts need to be complemented by
efforts to build Air Quality Management Systems, most notably in large urban centers
and industrial areas (i.e., RAS in Gulf countries; Egypt Analytical work). The Bank is also
working to implement the Montreal Protocol to phase out HCFCs in the region.
Reforming the energy sector. The current structure of the energy sector in most of the
countries, characterized by dependence on fossil fuels and sub-optimal efficiency in key
end-use sectors (industry, transport, and residential sectors), poses competitiveness risks
and has a direct implication on fiscal spending. While climate change mitigation is not a
primary driver of change of the energy sector in the MENA region, the fundamentals
of the energy sector in the MENA region are rapidly changing, with important climate


          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   99
      change co-benefits. Many countries are taking a hard look at reforming energy subsidies,
      driven by the need to improve fiscal balances, shift government spending to social ser-
      vices, and to attenuate the impact of the volatility of oil prices in the economy.
      Supporting the diversification of energy sources. In response to the need for energy
      security and to hedge against exposure to oil price shocks, many countries in the region
      are adopting aggressive renewable energy strategies, and embracing hydropower, wind
      and solar power. This is true for net energy importers such as Morocco, as well as ener-
      gy-rich countries alike, which consider developing renewable sources of electricity
      generation as an economic alternative to ever-increasing pressures on the countries’
      hydrocarbon resources.
      Improving energy efficiency. While still a nascent interest, MENA countries are also
      seeking opportunities to improve energy efficiency through advancing strategies already
      adopted and by applying international experience to accelerate implementation of pol-
      icies and programs. This includes implementing energy efficiency along the entire value
      chain, from production, transmission and distribution, to reducing energy demand.
      Finally, citizens are increasingly demanding improved service delivery and sound gover-
      nance, including from the energy sector.




100   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                                                                         Decentralization

Key Challenges

A     ll of the countries where the World Bank Group is engaged in the Middle East and
      North Africa region were affected in one way or another by the 2011 political
upheaval, popularly known as the Arab Spring. The demands for more economic and
political inclusion forced the region as a whole to consider vital questions regarding
good governance, public accountability, shared growth, and the rights of ordinary people
to have a say in their country’s future. The dialogue around these issues has put much of
the region on a path toward profound political and social change. Much of that change
involves redrawing the social contract between the citizens and the state with the objec-
tives of bringing the state closer to citizens, acknowledging voice and diversity, ensuring
equitable and responsive service provision, and enabling local endowments for inclusive
local development. This is the broad context for decentralization in the Middle East and
North Africa region today. Yet, many challenges remain for effective decentralization to
take roots, even in countries where political momentum exists for decentralization. For
instance:
•	 Political decentralization continues to lag in the region as a whole with notable
   exceptions. While the Palestinian territories have a tradition of elections at the local
   level,Yemen, Tunisia, Libya, and Morocco are fast forwarding their efforts to devolve
   through constitutional and legal changes. Countries like Lebanon, driven by political
   and other exigencies, are expanding the functional domains of local governments
   through de facto arrangements.
•	 Broadly, administrative decentralization in the Middle East and North Africa can be
   characterized as deconcentrated rather than devolved. The public administration sys-
   tem comprises an elaborate system of deconcentrated field offices of line agencies.
   The financing and construction of major infrastructure as well as decisions on service
   delivery are usually made by the central government. Deconcentrated central units
   provide major public services, including water, sanitation, health, and education,
   while devolved municipal units perform a limited menu of functions, such as street
   maintenance, construction of local roads, street lighting, garbage collection, librar-
   ies, park services, and issuing construction permits.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   101
      •	 Although the degree of fiscal decentralization differs among the Middle East and
         North Africa countries, many have highly centralized expenditure and revenue sys-
         tems. Expenditure responsibilities have followed bureaucratic and administrative con-
         siderations rather than principles of political accountability and economic efficiency.
         Most of the local expenditure responsibilities are “delegated” as opposed to “owned.”
         Further, expenditure assignments are not matched by corresponding revenues.
      •	 Intergovernmental fiscal frameworks do not address issues of vertical and horizontal
         balance between tiers of government and among subnational units. Most countries
         have rather ad hoc local revenue systems. Municipal budgets primarily depend on
         transfers. However, transfer systems tend to rely on earmarked grants and suffer
         from a lack of transparency in the allocation mechanism. Own source revenues are
         limited in many countries and public financial management systems are generally
         weak.
      •	 Services coverage has improved in several countries but equity, quality, and sustain-
         ability are continuing challenges. Operation and maintenance of infrastructure and
         cost recovery for services are weak. Inadequate coordination between central and
         local authorities and weak local capacities have led to imbalances in the coverage and
         quality of services.


      Key Strategic Engagements
      Much of the post-Arab Spring political change falls outside World Bank’s operational
      domain. Yet, the Bank has played a meaningful role to help countries, cities, towns, and
      communities address a broad gamut of issues related to decentralization, local gover-
      nance and development, and citizen voice and participation through demand-based
      policy support and technical assistance, by facilitating knowledge exchange among coun-
      tries, and by financing local governance and service delivery programs.
      •	 In Tunisia, for example, the Bank is supporting state restructuring and constitutional
         reforms aimed at decentralizing the state, strengthening foundations of good gover-
         nance, making service delivery more accountable and effective, and opening avenues
         for greater voice, citizen engagement, and participation.
      •	 In Morocco, the Bank is supporting the government’s regionalization agenda, while
         in Saudi Arabia, the Bank is providing technical assistance to improve local finances.




102   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
•	 In the Palestinian territories and Jordan, the Bank has supported local infrastructure
   development and service delivery as well as the strengthening of local governments
   through policy support, investment projects, and technical assistance. The World
   Bank’s programmatic engagement with local governments in the West Bank and Gaza
   have allowed it to establish a transparent, performance-based transfer mechanism,
   providing investment grants as incentives for municipal management reforms.
•	 Bank support to Jordan and Lebanon in the wake of the Syrian crisis to ramp up
   critical services and to embed conflict resilience among host communities involves
   strengthening local response systems through intergovernmental channels and local
   participatory mechanisms.
•	 Bank focus has encompassed both demand and supply sides of accountability. The
   Bank is supporting the strengthening of frameworks and capacities for transparent
   and efficient subnational PFM systems across several countries in the Middle East
   and North Africa. In the Kurdistan Region of Iraq, the Bank has helped strengthen
   demand-side mechanisms to enable responsive service delivery, while in Morocco,
   working within a deconcentrated framework, the Bank has supported a national pro-
   gram of localized service delivery and citizen engagement.

Most decentralization initiatives in Middle East and North Africa region have involved
multisectoral teams. Moving forward, it is crucial to engage on the following areas
through a comprehensive approach.
•	 Strengthening analytical foundations to better understand the largely idiosyncratic
   path of decentralization and localization in the Middle East and North Africa, includ-
   ing its political, social, institutional, and developmental underpinnings;
•	 Further developing country-specific knowledge of decentralization, regionalization,
   and localization imperatives to gauge appropriate entry points and tailor contextually
   relevant responses;
•	 Capturing appropriate cross-Global Practice linkages to harness contextual global
   knowledge and solutions, drawing from relevant global knowledge repositories and
   teams existing across several Global Practices; and
•	 Enhancing knowledge exchanges, bringing greater quality control, sharing experi-
   ences across sectoral and country teams, and mentoring staff working on decentral-
   ization issues in the region.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   103
                                                               Disaster Risk Management

Key Challenges

I ncreasing small unreported hazards, rapid urbanization and informal settle-
  ments. The Middle East and North Africa region (MENA) has been affected by 388
disasters in the past 35 years.With 62 percent of the population liv-
ing in cities, the region’s rapid urbanization is increasing the expo-
                                                                       MENA has been affected by 388
sure of people and economic assets to disaster events.
                                                                                                         disasters in the past 35 years.
Floods are the most recurrent hazards in the region, represent-
ing 53 percent of the recorded disasters since 1981. The percent-
age of gross domestic product (GDP) exposed to floods has tripled from 1970–79 to
2000–09.1 Earthquakes are the second most prevalent disaster in the region, but the
most damaging, followed by droughts and storms. These numbers only speak for the
large scale events, which are documented, and their effects calculated. However, low
scale events are frequent and increasing across MENA, disrupting the national and3 local
economies. West Bank and Gaza, Morocco, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Algeria and Dji-
bouti have experienced severe storm and flash-floods events in 2013–14.
Rapid urbanization is an important aggravating factor to the impact of natural hazards
in a region where the urban population accounts for 62 percent of the total popula-
tion and is expected to double in the next three decades.2 Additionally, 3 percent of its
surface area is home to 92 percent of the population.3 The impact of urbanization
is especially significant in the region’s coastal areas, where the largest cities and econo-
mies are located. Today, approximately 60 million people (about 17 percent of MENA’s
total population) live in the region’s coastal areas. The concentration of people and eco-
nomic assets increases their exposure to disaster events. The high slum to urban ratio
throughout the region makes these urban areas particularly vulnerable to both floods
and earthquakes.
Climate change and variability will also impacts MENA economies. In 2050, the
region will likely face a 50 percent renewable water supply gap. Thus, water will need
to be imported or desalinated, costing the driest MENA economies at least a 1 per-
cent reduction in GDP.4 According to the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change


1. United Nations, 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, 32.
2. UN-HABITAT, The State of Arab Cities 2012: Challenges of Urban Transition, 2012, www.unhabitat.org.
3. World Bank, Poor Places,Thriving People.
4. World Bank, Adaptation to a Changing Climate in the Arab Countries.




             Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa                            105
      Figure 3.2. Occurrence of Disaster Events in MENA, 1980–2014

          30
          25
          20
           15
           10
           5
           0




                                                                                                                                       2014
                1980

                       1982

                              1984

                                     1986

                                            1988

                                                   1990

                                                          1992

                                                                 1994

                                                                        1996

                                                                               1998

                                                                                      2000

                                                                                             2002

                                                                                                    2004

                                                                                                           2006

                                                                                                                  2008

                                                                                                                         2010

                                                                                                                                2012
      (IPCC), sea-level rise would cause millions to be displaced in the region. In Egypt
      alone, a 1-meter rise in sea level is estimated to put 12 percent of the country’s agricul-
      tural land at risk. The same event would directly affect 3.2 percent of the population in
      the region, compared to a global figure of 1.3 percent.

      Key Strategic Engagements
      Digital Risk Information Management System. Deploy integrated risk information
      management systems to collect, unify and organize risk data, understand and quantify
      risk, prioritize resilience initiatives, map experts and relationships, and communicate
      and share data.
      Resilience Funds and Strategies. Create resilience funds to make pro-active invest-
      ments in risk reduction, financial protection, response, recovery and rebuilding efforts.
      Integrated Risk Management. Promote resilient and safer cities by developing resil-
      ience framework and strategies (in Djibouti, Yemen, Lebanon, Morocco, and Kuwait)
      and creating jobs and skills (funding resilient entrepreneurs across 100 cities in MENA,
      and educating and training women entrepreneurs).

      World Bank DRM Programs in MENA
      •	 Since 2008, the World Bank, with support from the Global Facility for Disaster
         Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) has expanded its risk management portfolio to 10
         countries leveraging US$750 million early recovery, reconstruction and resilience.
      •	 The report, Natural Disasters in the Middle East and North Africa Region: A Regional Over-
         view, was developed by the World Bank in collaboration with MENA governments,
         the United Nations, and regional institutions.




106   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
•	 MENA countries progressively shifted their risk management approach from emer-
   gency response, to disaster risk management, and finally to long-term resilience. This
   has led to a stronger involvement of the Ministries of Finance, Interior, Environment
   and Education and city mayors in risk preparedness and response.
•	 Prioritized risk management investments have been made in assessment and commu-
   nication of risk, institutional coordination, and early warning systems.
•	 Risk assessment baselines have been established, creating the necessary foundation
   to partner with countries to establish resilience funds and strategies in order to “risk
   proof ” these economies. This has been done in Morocco, Yemen, Lebanon, Djibouti,
   and Saudi Arabia, for instance.
•	 Hydromet network has been established in Djibouti,Yemen, and Morocco.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   107
                                    Fragility, Conflict, and Violence

Key Challenges

T     he MENA region is currently experiencing significant instability, with several
      violent conflicts, and political transitions, which are fundamentally alter-
ing the political, social and economic landscape. Underlying causes and dynamics
are complex and multi-faceted, spanning sub-national, country and regional forces. The
impacts and consequences of violence and conflict are not limited to individual coun-
tries, with significant spillovers on neighboring countries and, indeed, globally.
Drivers of fragility and conflict. Despite positive economic growth and low (and
declining) levels of poverty in the MENA region between 2000-2010, several structural
challenges contributed to deepening fragility, in particular due to the 2011 Arab Spring
and the subsequent trajectories of political transition, instability and conflict in countries
throughout the region. In summary, these include:
•	 Deep horizontal and vertical inequalities, which were exacerbated by worsening
   global and regional economic conditions (including the 2008 financial crisis), and led
   to strengthened perceptions of marginalization. In 2011, these grievances were one
   of the factors that led to the massive popular demonstrations in Tunisia, Yemen and
   Libya, for instance.
•	 Poor governance, characterized by inadequate service delivery, lack of trans-
   parency and accountability, and even corruption. Despite decades of apparent sta-
   bility, the weaknesses of many state systems were exposed in 2011, in light of states’
   inability to manage socioeconomic crises and mounting popular grievances.The 2011
   Arab uprisings ushered in complex political transitions in a number of MENA coun-
   tries, resulting in drastic and chaotic redistribution of power and attempts to rede-
   fine the social contract. In many countries, this led to a change in government, new
   constitutions, and some reforms. Whereas in some countries change took the form
   of revolutions followed by transition processes (Tunisia and Egypt), in others it took
   the form of violent contestations of state authority (Libya, Syria, and Yemen).
•	 Increased social fragmentation and polarization. While social cleavages (i.e.,
   ethnic, sectarian, regional, etc.) in MENA have a long and complex history, they have
   been exacerbated in recent years and become areas for mobilization, competition and
   conflict. This has led to the fragmentation of the national and social fabric in some
   countries, and the rise to prominence of identity-based agendas at the expense of a
   collective national vision. In some countries the deterioration of social cohesion has




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   109
         taken violent forms, including radical forms of social and political organization and
         the use of extreme violence to achieve political objectives.This is the case for instance
         in Libya, Syria and Yemen. This situation was also compounded by external destabiliz-
         ing factors and influences which exacerbated dissent and fed conflicts.
      Dynamics of fragility and violence. The way in which the various underlying drivers
      of fragility and conflict have shaped the dynamics of fragility, conflict and violence differs
      significantly between countries. In very general terms, country-specific dynamics can be
      regrouped as follows:
      •	 Countries undergoing complex transitions. In Tunisia and Egypt, large-scale
         demonstrations and mobilization have led to political transitions that to date, have
         addressed some grievances and initiated important reforms and institutional trans-
         formation, including through constitutional processes.
      •	 Countries experiencing large-scale conflict. Syria, Libya, Iraq and Yemen are
         experiencing large-scale violence and conflict, characterized by the breakdown of
         institutions, major loss of life, significant population displacement, destruction of
         infrastructure, and economic crises.
      •	 Countries in situations of acute vulnerability. Other countries have been signifi-
         cantly affected by conflicts occurring in neighboring countries, increasing their vul-
         nerability to destabilization and conflict. These include most notably Lebanon and
         Jordan, which have been directly impacted by the Syrian conflict through the influx
         of refugees, as well as the spill-over of conflict and violence across borders. In both
         Lebanon and Jordan, the costs of spillover are significant, undermining development
         achievements and prospects, creating important socioeconomic and fiscal pressures,
         and exacerbating already fragile political equilibriums.
      Regional dimension of conflict and fragility. Beyond the typology of country-specific
      fragility and conflict trajectories, attention must also be paid to regional-level conflict
      dynamics. Three distinct dynamics can be identified: (a) Destabilizing regional impacts of
      country-specific conflicts (the Syrian conflict is having a significant impact on neighbor-
      ing countries, in particular through the influx of refugees in Jordan and Lebanon); (b)
      transnational activity and organization of extremist armed groups; and (c) cross-border
      illegal networks and governance vacuums in peripheral areas (for instance in the Sahel).




110   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Key Strategic Engagements
TheWorld Bank has been responding to fragility and conflict in the region through
promoting stability, responding to urgent priorities and supporting comprehensive
and inclusive development solutions, complementing efforts in the political, secu-
rity and humanitarian spheres. While the following work is preliminary, and there is
a great deal more to be achieved in strengthening the World Bank’s response to fragility
and conflict–in close partnership with the United Nations (UN) and other partners– key
tenets of the Bank’s strategy include:
•	 A differentiated approach that recognizes the heterogeneity of fragility and conflict
   dynamics across countries;
•	 A two-pronged approach that focuses on responding to immediate needs and prior-
   ities while supporting long-term reform, institutional transformation and develop-
   ment goals;
•	 Identification of financing instruments adapted for delivering results in contexts of
   protracted crisis, high risks, and in the absence of clear linear transitions from conflict
   to peace, and most notably capturing the particular situation of fragile and conflict
   affected middle-income countries;
•	 A regional approach to both containing and mitigating regional dynamics and impacts
   of conflict and fragility, and strengthening regional capacities for crisis prevention,
   management and recovery.
Specifically, the Bank is:
Strengthening governance and state-building, by consolidating political set-
tlements, supporting fundamental reforms and building institutional capac-
ity. Addressing the governance challenge in the MENA region requires three types of
assistance, in order to address the inter-related challenges of consensus building on
governance priorities, enhancing accountability and transparency of institutions, and
improving quality and efficiency of functions and services:
•	 In the transition countries, the focus is on supporting ‘deep’ institutional reforms
   to improve transparency, participation and accountability, thereby ensuring continu-
   ity and implementation of the outcomes of recent political transition processes, as
   well as improved delivery of services;
•	 In the conflict countries, the Bank supports national dialogue around key transi-
   tion and reform priorities, with a view to informing political settlements, constitu-
   tional processes and reform processes. An example is the Bank’s recent support for
   the Yemeni national dialogue process. Other areas of engagement include support




           Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   111
         for strengthening (and/or rebuilding) state and institutional capacities, with a par-
         ticular focus on core functions and service delivery mechanisms, local governance,
         inter-government coordination and decision-making, and leadership training on the
         management of transition processes.
      •	 In the case of the vulnerable countries, the focus is on strengthening institutional
         resilience and capacity to deliver services in the context of the refugee influx, build-
         ing on support provided to date. A key priority is linking improvements in local ser-
         vice delivery with structural reforms to sustain these gains as part of a longer-term
         development strategy. Future priorities include supporting Lebanon in creating the
         necessary space for dialogue on policy and reform priorities to enable more effective
         governmental action on urgent priorities.
      Addressing social and economic stresses and grievances, notably through expand-
      ing opportunities, addressing the needs of marginalized and vulnerable popu-
      lations, and strengthening social cohesion and resilience. Traditional approaches
      to economic growth and poverty reduction in the countries impacted by fragility and
      conflict are not enough, and need to incorporate a focus on the social and economic
      challenges which contribute to drivers of conflict and fragility. These include economic
      inequalities and associated perceptions of exclusion and marginalization; the marginal-
      ization of at-risk groups who turn to violence and extremism in the absence of meaning-
      ful opportunities; and tensions and conflicts between groups arising from competition
      over livelihoods and services.
      •	 In the transition countries, the area of focus should be both in generating oppor-
         tunities (through job creation, support to entrepreneurs, and skill-building) and in
         economic and social reforms to address inequalities and improve access to services;
      •	 In the conflict countries, the focus is on immediate and short-term employment
         generation and social welfare support as part of broader economic recovery strate-
         gies, targeting groups that are most vulnerable. A good example is Bank assistance for
         cash transfers for the poor under the Social Welfare Fund in Yemen that has continued
         despite repeated crises. On the social side, priorities include mitigating and reversing
         current trends towards fragmentation and extremism by addressing the grievances
         of at-risk groups (e.g., youth) who are more susceptible to radicalization, and by
         strengthening local mechanisms for conflict resolution and collaboration in diverse
         communities (bridging ethnic, tribal, religious and economic divides);
      •	 In the case of the vulnerable countries, the focus of the Bank’s engagement is on
         the nexus between humanitarian and development assistance. To this end, it is key
         to complement the provision of humanitarian assistance to refugees by supporting
         host communities in order to mitigate the economic and social pressures placed on
         the latter. A key issue is strengthening the ability of communities and institutions




112   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
   to manage the stresses, burdens and shocks created by conflict spillover, including
   population displacement, regional economic shocks, and cross-border violence.
Developing innovative approaches to respond to crises and post-crisis recovery,
addressing both short-term priorities and longer-term structural drivers of fra-
gility and conflict. With protracted crises and non-linear transition processes marked
by high volatility and fluidity, traditional approaches and financing instruments are not
sufficient. Ensuring results in these contexts necessitates approaches that are grounded
in an accurate assessment of challenges and needs (and hence appropriately targeted and
framed), and which retain sufficient flexibility to combine responsiveness to short-term
priorities with long-term solutions to structural drivers of fragility and conflict.
•	 In the transition countries, the Bank’s focus has been largely programmatic in
   nature, with a focus on supporting transformations in key sectors (including the pri-
   vate sector), and increased participation of national stakeholders in policy reform
   processes.
•	 In the conflict countries, the Bank has employed a number of different instruments
   to permit continuous analysis of socioeconomic conditions and needs, and provide
   targeted assistance in the short-term. These include:
   –	 Undertaking targeted social and economic impact assessments (including Yemen,
      Libya and the Kurdistan Region of Iraq), and providing analytical/information
      management platforms to facilitate recovery planning;
   –	 Providing technical assistance to governments and other stakeholders to support
      development of recovery plans and priorities;
   –	 Development of operations to support implementation of critical reforms,
      improve services and economic opportunities, and restore critical infrastructure
      for long-term development.
•	 In the case of the vulnerable countries, the Bank has engaged in supporting both
   immediate ‘stabilizing’ measures to mitigate the social, economic and fiscal burdens
   of the refugee influx, as well as longer-term measures to improve and upgrade deliv-
   ery systems, infrastructure and governance mechanisms. A key challenge includes
   creating new ways to adapt to the dynamic situation on the ground whereby refugees
   and hosting communities are sharing the same living environment, and interacting in
   an extremely close economic and social fabric. Humanitarian aid is having a direct
   impact on refugees and hosting communities alike, helping improve living condi-
   tions but potentially distorting some economic dynamics, such as the job market.
   Therefore, the challenge is to identify additional financing to address the gap between
   humanitarian and development assistance, the latter of which is currently insufficient
   since these are middle-income countries with limited access to the Bank’s grant and
   concessional lending facilities.


          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   113
      Promoting regional stability through prevention, mitigating the ‘spill-over’ of con-
      flict across borders, and strengthening regional early-warning and crisis manage-
      ment capacities. Key priorities include:
      •	 Designing regional interventions to prevent, contain and mitigate destabilizing
         impacts of conflicts in neighboring countries, building on the experience of the
         Bank in supporting efforts to manage the impact of the refugee influx in Jordan and
         Lebanon;
      •	 Develop regional capacity to provide analytical, learning and technical assistance on
         common regional fragility, conflict and violence issues and themes (e.g., political
         transitions, national dialogues, job creation and labor market development, state and
         institution-building), drawing on global experiences, approaches and lessons, and
         supporting their adaptation to particular national contexts and requirements; and
      •	 Strengthening collaboration and coordination with regional organizations (e.g.,
         League of Arab States, Gulf Cooperation Council, and the Islamic Development
         Bank) on crisis prevention, early warning and response, post-conflict assessments,
         training, and capacity development for governments.

      Role of the Fragility, Conflict and Violence Cross-Cutting
      Solutions Area
      The Fragility, Conflict and Violence (FCV) Cross-Cutting Solutions Area, working
      in partnership with key Global Practices, will support the World Bank’s regional
      teams in scaling up their engagement on fragility and conflict in the MENA region.
      Key building blocks for scaling up and systematizing WBG engagement include:
      •	 Scaling up analytical work on FCV issues to inform strategy and operations,
         including through explicit analysis and treatment of FCV issues in SCDs and CPFs,
         and cross-regional research and analysis of FCV issues in middle-income country
         contexts;
      •	 Improving the design of World Bank Group operations to address FCV drivers,
         including through mechanisms to dedicate staffing and expertise for project prepara-
         tion, including a dedicated cadre of specialists;
      •	 Identifying instruments to finance innovative approaches and emergency
         responses, complementing IBRD/IDA sources, including through the FCV instru-
         ments (e.g., State and Peacebuilding Fund or the Korean Trust Fund) and innovative
         trust fund mechanisms for emergency response.




114   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
•	 Expanding partnerships with the United Nations, as well as others in order to
   improve coordination along the nexus of humanitarian assistance, development, and
   political transitions; and strengthen regional capacities for crisis prevention and mit-
   igation; and
•	 Developing approaches to address the regional and global impact of FCV
   dynamics, including through innovative regional or multi-country programs to build
   resilience and mitigate the impacts of large-scale displacement.
Highlights of ongoing and past FCV CCSA support in the MENA region
include:
•	 Support for the preparation of World Bank Group watching briefs, re-engagement
   strategies, country assistance strategies and interim strategy notes (notably forYemen
   and Libya).
•	 Support for the organization of multi-stakeholder needs assessments, including in
   Libya and Yemen.
•	 Support for World Bank Group engagement on governance and institution-build-
   ing, including in Libya (development of senior leadership skills for transition) and in
   Yemen (National Dialogue).
•	 Contributed to a regional development and protection program for refugees and
   host communities in the Middle East (in Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq). This included the
   development of analytical products, including political economy analyses of forced
   displacement in the region.
•	 Provision of funding of over US$50 million through the State and Peacebuilding,
   Korean and UN/World Bank Partnership Trust Funds to support World Bank Group
   emergency responses and innovative programming.
•	 Research and analysis on regional issues, notably the on-going study on the economy,
   security and governance of the Sahara (in partnership with the World Bank Africa
   region).




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   115
              Fuel Subsidy and Social Safety Net Reforms

Key Challenges

T     he cost of fuel subsidies in the Middle East and North Africa region in 2011 was
      about US$237 billion1 (see figure 3.3), which is about 48 percent of world subsi-
dies, equivalent to 8.6 percent of regional GDP or 22 percent of government revenues
(Sdralevich et al. 2014). A main rationale behind the fuel subsidies was that they were
a part of the “social compact” that sought
to support and conveniently reach the poor
and vulnerable and to encourage industrial         Figure 3.3.   Total Energy Subsidies in the
development. However, the largest share of                        Middle East and North Africa in
the subsidies has been accruing to middle-                        2011: US$237 billion (figures in
                                                                  US$ billion)
and high-income classes and to energy- and
capital-intensive industries at the expense of
                                                                                           Electricity: 62
labor-intensive sectors. Further, fuel subsi-                                                   26%
dies accrue enormous fiscal burdens, under-
mining government expenditures on more
productive economic and social programs            Petroleum:* 119
                                                        50%
necessary for economic growth, job creation,
and the improvement of service delivery to
citizens (see figure 3.4) (Devarajan et. Al.
                                                                                          Natural gas: 55
2014).                                                                                        23%

Most of the region’s spending on social               Source: Sdralevich et al. 2014.
transfers consists of poorly targeted food            *Mainly for diesel and gasoline used in transport, agricul-
and energy subsidies, crowding out more               ture, and water sectors and liquefied petroleum gas for
                                                      households.
effective interventions. In sharp contrast to
fuel subsidies, other social safety nets in the
region are under-resourced, receiving less
than 0.7 percent of GDP, and are fragmented among many small programs with signifi-
cant overlaps and in many cases, are not well targeted. Most of the poor and vulnerable
fall through the cracks: two out of three people in the poorest quintile are not reached
by nonsubsidy social safety nets. In fact, existing coverage of the bottom quintile in the
Middle East and North Africa is less than half of the world average. Moreover, inade-
quate targeting results in significant leakages of social safety net benefits to the non-poor,
siphoning off resources that could be used to decrease poverty and improve the welfare
distribution. Although subsidies are very inefficient and frequently ineffective relative


1. Of which, US$204 billion was in oil exporting countries and US$33 billion in oil importing countries.




             Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa            117
                  Fuel Subsidies in Comparison to Capital, Education,
      Figure 3.4. 
                  and Health Spending (figures represent percentage of
                  total government expenditure)
                12                                                                                       Fuel subsidy
                10                                                                                       Capital spending
                                                                                                         Education spending
                8
      percent




                                                                                                         Health spending
                6

                4

                2

                0
                     Egypt           Lebanon             Kuwait            Bahrain            Yemen

      Sources: IMF 2013, 2014b; World Development Indicators database.




      to other social safety net interventions, due to their sheer size, large numbers of people
      depend on them to stay out of poverty.2
      Excessive fuel subsidies also lead to unchecked demand for electricity,3 poor incentives for
      energy efficiency,4 inefficiencies in fuel consumption,5 energy supply shortages, and dete-
      riorating environmental pollution,6 resulting in a strain on public financing for required
      infrastructure to meet growing energy demands. Further, subsidized energy tariffs have
      been the main detriment to the financial viability of the gas and electricity sectors in the
      Middle East and North Africa region, undermining private sector investments in energy
      supplies, renewable energy, energy efficiency, progress toward energy market reforms,
      and development of regional energy markets. Energy subsidies have also encouraged cap-
      ital-intensive industries at the expense of employment-creating industries.
      International experiences show that sustainable subsidy reforms entail well-designed
      and politically supported comprehensive programs encompassing multi-year fuel price
      adjustment plans implemented in tandem with targeted social protection programs,
      mitigation measures to certain groups of the population, and effective public outreach

      2. This is particularly the case with fuel subsidies, while food subsidies generally tend to be better targeted.
      3. Earlier World Bank reports show that by 2020, peak electricity demand in the Arab countries is forecast to be 84 per-
      cent greater than 2010 levels, requiring an additional 135 GW of generating capacity at a total investment cost of US$450
      billion in the expansion of power generation, transmission, and distribution (World Bank 2013).
      4. The Middle East and North Africa is the only region in the world that had a negative rate of improvement for energy
      intensity gains during the period 1990–2010.
      5. Large fuel subsidies discourage incentives to improve the use of fuel. For example, average fuel consumption per vehicle
      in the Middle East North Africa is reported more than double the average in countries without fuel subsidies, and fuel
      efficiency in power generation in many Gulf Cooperation Council countries are considered among the lowest.
      6. Today, the Middle East and North Africa region is the second largest world producer of carbon dioxide emissions per
      capita.




118   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
strategies. The interaction between subsidy and social safety net reforms is bidirectional:
on the one hand, the social safety net reforms serve to selectively mitigate the social and
economic impact of price increases among the poorest and therefore contribute to man-
aging the political economy of subsidy reforms, while subsidy reforms provide the nec-
essary fiscal space to finance well-targeted social protection programs. While these key
elements of subsidy reforms are widely recognized by governments in the region, they
have been difficult to implement, in part due to the weak technical, administrative, and
coordination capacities of government agencies; the fragmented and inefficient social
protection and poverty targeting programs; and poor sequencing with energy sector
reforms. For subsidy reforms to be successful, timing and supportive political economy
environments are important because there is a risk of political opposition and public
discontent and a lack of trust that savings will be used wisely, which often leads to ad
hoc programs of fuel price increases. As an interim step, countries in the region are
increasingly investing in energy efficiency and renewable energy to reduce consumption
of highly subsidized fuels and electricity and to invest in the upgrading of energy infra-
structure to improve energy service delivery to their citizens.
However, the enormous fiscal burden and high public debt caused by energy subsidies,
especially encountered by energy importing countries in the Middle East and North
Africa and the fiscal pressure oil exporting countries are expected to experience with
emerging low oil prices, has made the reform of electricity and fuel price policies inev-
itable and an urgent priority that must be pursued by governments in the region. Gov-
ernments realize that effective and sustainable subsidy reforms will also serve as main
drivers for curbing inefficient energy demand, promoting economic and green growth,
and improving the deteriorating financial and operational viability of the energy utilities
in the region.
Nonetheless, the experiences of MENA countries with subsidy reforms show that, with
the exception of those in Jordan and the Palestinian territories, subsidy reform programs
are still largely implemented on an ad hoc basis without plans for achieving full cost
recovery in the longer term. Despite this limitation, a gradual extension of fiscal space to
expand social safety net programs provides a unique opportunity to accelerate reforms
in their targeting and coverage. Such reforms have been analyzed for years with only lim-
ited progress. Sustained progress will require additional efforts to consolidate their gains
by: (a) introducing or rigorously implementing automatic price setting mechanisms; (b)
extending the scope of reforms to tackle energy subsidies to enterprises; and (c) building
efficient, well-targeted, and adequately resourced social safety net systems to reach the
poorest and redistribute resources in a more equitable manner.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   119
 Country      Energy Prices Reforms                               Social Protection Reform
 Morocco      Fuel prices: Subsidized.                            A myriad of small targeted social safety
              Government implemented a subsidy reform             net programs exist, including cash transfers,
              program consisting of the indexation of             microcredit, fee waivers, housing assistance,
              tariffs to reflect fluctuations in fuel prices, a   and workfare, covering only a limited segment
              reduction of certain energy subsidies.              of the poorest. Their targeting is weak, driven
                                                                  by a mix of geographical and subjective criteria.
              Electricity prices: Subsidized.                     Design deficiencies, fragmentation, and targeting
              Government implementing an electricity              inconsistencies generate overlaps as well as
              tariff adjustment plan 2014–17.                     coverage gaps.
              World Bank program: Ongoing analytical
              work on energy efficiency (where pricing will
              be identified as an impediment) and energy
              efficiency operation under preparation.
 Tunisia      Fuel and electricity prices: Subsidized. In         Social safety net programs are underfunded
              July 2014, the government introduced a              and poorly targeted, with leakages as high as
              supplementary bill to reduce the high public        60 percent under the National Assistance to
              spending (and cut the budget deficit by             the Needy Families Program, whose targeting
              nearly US$1 billion in 2014).                       approach combines the use of categorical and
              World Bank program: Ongoing analytical              self-declared (unverified) criteria.
              work on systems planning and least-cost
              expansion. Tunisia Energy Efficiency Project
              under supervision.
 Egypt        Fuel prices: Subsidized.                            Cash transfer programs targeting the poor are
              The government implemented major fuel               fragmented and inefficient. The recent energy
              price increases in July 2014. However, no           (fuel and electricity) subsidy reform in Egypt
              comprehensive multi-year fuel subsidy               allowed more fiscal space (LE 51 billion savings)
              reform plan publicly exists. Significant gas        for the government to strengthen its social
              shortages exist for electricity and industrial      safety net system with the introduction of two
              users.                                              new better-targeted cash transfer programs,
                                                                  and by allowing improvements in benefits from
              Electricity: Subsidized.                            the food subsidy programs (ration card and
              Pervasive power cuts since 2009. The                Baladi Bread programs). Poverty maps will be
              government approved a five-year electricity         used to direct the first phase of benefits based
              tariff adjustment plan (2013–17).                   on geographical targeting, while a longer-term
              World Bank program: White Paper on Sector           program will be implemented at a later phase,
              Reforms under preparation for the Economic          using a proxy-means-test formula to target the
              Summit. Continued support to Ministry               poor and to gather relevant targeting data from
              of Petroleum on subsidy reforms through             the Unified National Registry under preparation.
              energy/social safety net technical assistance
              financed by Transition Fund.
 Lebanon      Fuel prices: Not subsidized.                        Social safety nets are fragmented, weak, and ill
              Automatic retail pricing mechanism applies.         prepared to be effective. Government spending
                                                                  on social safety nets has a limited impact on
              Electricity: Subsidized.                            poverty due to high rates of leakage to the non-
              Inadequate and deteriorating supply. No             poor, weak capacity and coordination among the
              reform plan. Extensive and pervasive power          main public institutions, and lack of reliable and
              cuts have led to significant use of captive         timely data. In 2011, the government launched
              power.                                              a new targeted program adopting proxy-
              PRG for floating storage regasification unit        means testing to identify poor and vulnerable
              (with substantive subsidy savings) under            households, providing them with a spectrum of
              preparation.                                        benefits.

                                                                                                        (continued)




120        Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Country          Energy Prices Reforms                             Social Protection Reform
Jordan           Fuel prices: Not subsidized except liquefied      The latest fuel subsidy reforms have allowed
                 petroleum gas (LPG).                              the country to introduce a new cash transfer
                 Automatic retail pricing mechanism applies.       program with improve-as-you-go targeting
                                                                   mechanisms by building the Unified Registry and
                 Electricity: Subsidized due to interruption of    adopting a proxy-means-test formula to target
                 natural gas supply from Egypt.                    the poor.
                 The government approved a five-year
                 electricity tariff adjustment plan (2013–17).
                 World Bank program: Jordan policy-based
                 guarantee on water and energy under
                 preparation. Support for development and
                 scale-up of renewable energy.
Palestinian      Fuel Prices: Not subsidized.                      The largest World Bank social safety net program
territories      Automatic retail pricing mechanism applies.       is a cash transfer program, which has been
                                                                   known for good targeting and outreach to poor
                 Electricity: Largely not subsidized.              populations, skills training of social workers, and
                 Prices adjusted by the electricity regulator.     maintenance of an up-to-date poverty database.
                 World Bank program: Support establishment         In 2012, the program reached over 100,000 poor
                 and operation of the electricity regulator.       households, covering more than half of the
                 Support energy efficiency and renewable           poorest quintile and devoting two-thirds of its
                 energy development.                               resources to the extreme poor.

Oil Exporting    Constitutes the overwhelming share of fuel        There are some serious considerations in some
Countries        subsidies in the region (US$204 billion out of    Gulf Cooperation Council countries to reform
(Gulf            US$237 billion).                                  subsidies. Kuwait is an example.
Cooperation      Iran had partially successful fuel subsidy
Council, Iran,   experience in 2010.
Iraq, Algeria,
and Libya)       Gulf Cooperation Council countries: Fiscal
                 deterioration brought subsidy reform on the
                 policy agenda with Dubai, Qatar, and Bahrain
                 undertaking limited ad hoc subsidy reforms.
                 Growing engagement on energy strategy and
                 energy efficiency in Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and
                 Kuwait.
                 World Bank program: Libya National Energy
                 Strategy with sector reforms financed by the
                 Middle East and North Africa Transition Fund
                 under preparation.
                 Iraq: Completed an integrated national energy
                 strategy and a study on natural gas pricing.
                 Investment in electricity distribution sector
                 (to reduce losses) under preparation.




           Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa              121
      Key Strategic Engagements
      The Bank has provided support to Middle Eastern and North African countries in multiple
      areas, through the use of a variety of instruments. In addition, the World Bank’s engage-
      ment has been characterized by the cross-sectoral collaboration among Global Practices,
      particularly Energy and Extractives, Social Protection and Labor, and Macroeconomics and
      Fiscal Management. Specific areas of support include:
      •	 Assessing benefit incidence
      •	 Developing reform scenarios
      •	 Supporting social safety net strengthening options
      •	 Supporting communication and public engagement strategies
      •	 In some cases, providing support to address political economy dimensions of sub-
         sidy/social safety net reforms

      Specific examples of operations include a blend of technical assistance, economic and
      sector work, funding, and capacity building. Examples of these types of approaches
      include the following:
      •	 The Bank produced a series of knowledge products on reforming energy subsidies
         and building social safety net systems in the region.
      •	 A number of technical assistance efforts have recently been provided to several Mid-
         dle Eastern and North African countries by the Bank to support governments in cus-
         tomizing the best scenarios of fuel subsidy reforms and strengthening their social
         safety net systems. For instance, through technical assistance supported by the Energy
         Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) Facility on Fuel Subsidy Reform,
         the Energy and Extractives Global Practice has supported the Government of Egypt
         better understand the benefit incidence of energy subsidies, explore the potential
         impact of the different options of subsidy reform, and develop a communications
         strategy for fuel subsidy reform measure to ensure effective public outreach. In addi-
         tion, the Bank has supported the Government of Egypt reform the energy sector
         through the Energy-SSN Sector Reform Transition Fund.
      •	 The Bank has been working closely with the governments of the region to strengthen
         the existing social safety net programs and improve their targeting through the adop-
         tion of proper targeting methodologies, improved access to central databases, and
         consolidation of programs. The ongoing regional Multi-Donor Trust Fund knowledge
         sharing and how-to initiative in subsidy reform reflects the importance of cross collab-
         oration between the Social Protection and Energy and Extractives Global Practices.




122   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
•	 The Bank also provides financial support to adopt improved targeting to the poorest.
   For instance, the Bank approved a US$500 million operation for the Government of
   Egypt to establish 1.5 million new house gas connections targeting poor and disad-
   vantaged areas.

While the technical analysis of poverty, impact, reform options, and design have been
the major success stories of Bank support, communications, citizen’s engagement, and
the political economy dimensions of subsidies and social safety net reforms remain crit-
ical elements of a solid strategy. The World Bank should emphasize these key aspects of
energy subsidy reform. Among other benefits, this would improve the enabling environ-
ment for reforms and minimize the risk of reversals.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   123
                                                                                                   Gender

Key Challenges

L    ow female labor force participation despite gains gender parity in human cap-
     ital. Compared to other regions, the Middle East and North Africa has the lowest
female labor force participation rate (19 percent for women compared to 72 percent
for men in 2010) (figure 3.5). Unemployment in MENA is also high among women in
MENA (20 percent for women compared to 9 percent for men in 2010), which indi-
cates significant constraints to women who do want to work. Some of the underlying
constraints of low female labor force participation and high unemployment are restric-
tions on mobility; social and cultural norms; legal framework (including regulations that
restrict work); critical skill mismatches between what is studied in school and what the
private sector demands; employers’ perception that women are more costly and less
productive; women’s concerns about reputation and safety in private sector jobs; and
constraints on women’s entrepreneurship including constraints on access to credit and
entrepreneurship training. Moreover, there are also policy dis-incentives, such as sub-
sidies designed to keep women at home as well as policies that discourage firms from
hiring women, which also serve as key constraints to greater participation of women in
the labor force.
Low levels of political participation, voice and agency. One of the key constraints on
women’s empowerment in MENA is the lack of voice, participation, and agency. One
indication of the lack of voice and participation is the low level of women’s political
representation: on average only 7 percent of seats in parliament in MENA countries are
held by women. Moving forward, capacity development programs and equal opportu-
nity initiatives for women hoping to enter politics and public service, such as candidate


            Labor Force Participation Rate (percent of male or female
Figure 3.5. 
            population ages 15+ (modeled ILO estimate), 2010

                                                                                  Women
                                                                                  Men
    100
                                 81                          80             79
     80           72                                                                       76
                                                  68
                                                                       62             63
     60                                                 53
                                             45
     40                     32
             19
     20
      0
              MNA            SAR              ECA         LCR            EAP           AFR

Source: World Development Indicators 2010.




           Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   125
      training, mentoring programs, recruitment initiatives, awareness-raising campaigns to
      counter gender stereotyping of candidates, and implementation of work-family balance
      programs in public service, are all measures that could strengthen women’s political
      participation. Two stark indications of women’s lack of agency in MENA are mobility
      restrictions and violence against women. Mobility restrictions, stemming from conser-
      vative gender norms, safety considerations, and legal framework, disadvantage women in
      the labor market and their access to services.
      Reforming the legal environment is essential to increase the rights of women and
      their ability to participate in the economy and promote socioeconomic develop-
      ment. It is important to note that although some progress has been made on these fronts,
      such as protecting women from domestic violence in Egypt, Jordan, and Morocco (UN
      Women 2011), there needs to be increased focus on implementation.

      Key Strategic Engagements
      Preparing country gender diagnostics and targeting gender interventions in the
      Bank’s country program. At the country-level, MENA strives to ensure that country
      strategy and dialogue is gender informed. A key activity has been the preparation of gen-
      der diagnostics such as comprehensive country gender assessments, gender policy notes,
      diagnostics on constraints to female labor force participation and entrepreneurship,
      and the integration of gender into country poverty assessments. Portfolio reviews have
      also been prepared for many countries to identify strategic areas where gender should
      be integrated into projects and into the Bank country assistance/partnership program.
      Recently, in the West Bank and Gaza, the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global
      Practice has supported the Country Management Unit (CMU) in the preparation of a
      Gender Action Plan Fiscal 2015–17, which identified women’s empowerment issues,


        Recent and upcoming gender Economic and Sectoral Work (ESW)
        in MENA
        •	   Opening Doors: Gender Equality in MENA (fiscal 2013)
        •	   West Bank and Gaza: Aspirations On Hold? (fiscal 2013)
        •	   Yemen Policy Note on Gender Challenges (fiscal 2014)
        •	   West Bank and Gaza Country Gender Action Plan (fiscal 2014)
        •	   Morocco Country Gender Assessment (fiscal 2015)
        •	   Iraq Poverty and Inclusion in Iraq (fiscal 2015)
        •	   Jordan Country Gender Assessment (fiscal 2015)
        •	   Tunisia Gender, Poverty and Social Assessment (fiscal 2016)
        •	   Djibouti Poverty and Gender Assessment (fiscal 2016)
        •	   West Bank and Gaza female labor market study (fiscal 2016)




126   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
established priorities within the portfolio, identified gender entry points in projects, and
established a monitoring and reporting framework. Enhancing the use of diagnostics that
identify specific constraints to gender equality is thus crucial.
Removing constraints to women’s economic participation. The Bank is focusing on
building the knowledge base on what works to enhance women’s economic empower-
ment in MENA. Pilots and programs addressing the constraints women face are being
implemented and tested for impact. A key focus is on programs to smooth the school
to work transition for young women, and fostering women’s entrepreneurship through
expanding access to credit and providing business development training and mentorship.
Recent noteworthy projects and engagements are summarized below.


  Jordan. In the New Work Opportunities for Women (NOW) Pilot Impact Eval-
  uation (2010–13), researchers studied the impact of an experiment (randomized
  controlled trial) in Jordan designed to assist female community college graduates
  find employment.
  Egypt. The Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small Enterprise Project
  (2013–15) aims to increase access to finance for small and medium enterprises,
  targeting in particular underserved populations such as women and youth in Upper
  Egypt.
  Tunisia. The Providing Integrated Support and Incubation Services for Graduates
  of a University Entrepreneurship Track (2013–15) supports the piloting and eval-
  uation of additional entrepreneurship and business development services, such as
  incubation and access to credit, to improve the effectiveness of the entrepreneurship
  track for women in Tunisian universities.
  Egypt. The Inclusive Regulations for Microfinance (approved fiscal 2014) project,
  an investment lending project, aims to promote gender-inclusive development of
  the Egyptian microfinance sector through developing the legal and regulatory frame-
  work for financial inclusion, establishing and operationalizing the microfinance unit,
  and promoting accountability, governance and consumer protection.
  Morocco. The Strengthening Micro-Entrepreneurship for Disadvantaged Youth in
  the Informal Sector (approved fiscal 2014) project adopts specific measures to over-
  come gender-specific constraints to employment and entrepreneurship thus con-
  tributing to reduce the stark female disadvantage in the labor market.
  Regional. The Women Entrepreneurship in DRM Program (fiscal 2014–15) rep-
  resents a collective effort between multiple public and private sector actors to
  launch the first women business plan competition in disaster risk management to
  promote the creation of risk management start-ups by women.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   127
      Increasing women’s voice and participation in project design and implementation.
      The Bank has stepped up gender mainstreaming of projects with a focus on service deliv-
      ery and infrastructure operations. This area of engagement reflects the large number of
      this type of projects in the region. Specifically, the Bank’s efforts aim to increase women’s
      voice and participation in decision-making, design, implementation and monitoring of
      projects in order to make infrastructure and basic services more responsive to women.
      These efforts are in line with the recent citizen engagement agenda in the region. Some
      examples of recent projects are presented below.

        Morocco. The National Initiative for Human Development 2 (INDH2) (approved
        fiscal 2012) is a nationwide social inclusion community driven development (CDD)
        program. The program is fostering women’s representation and improving the qual-
        ity of women’s participation in decision-making committees.
        Yemen. The Labor Intensive Public Works Project Additional Financing (approved
        fiscal 2014) project enhances women’s participation in implementation activities
        and project design and feedback.
        Lebanon. The Water Supply Augmentation Project (WSAP) (approved fiscal 2014)
        aims to increase the volume of water available to the Greater Beirut and Mount
        Lebanon area. Gender mainstreaming actions include focus groups with women to
        influence project design and capture anticipated project benefits through the gender
        lens; participation of women in decision-making activities of water use, and gen-
        der-responsive educational programs about water demand management.


      Moving forward, gender related activities will focus on three main areas:
      1.	 Systematizing gender mainstreaming in MNA operations by setting up up a MENA
          gender working group to provide strategic guidance on regional priorities; a system
          to identify gender entry points and monitoring indicators in projects; supporting the
          development of Country Gender Action Plans to feed into country strategies; and
          preparing a Regional Gender Action Plan in line with new Gender Strategy and the
          new MNA Strategy.
      2.	 Strengthening Bank engagement in priority areas by easing constraints to female labor
          force participation, including norms, mobility, educational segregation, the cost and
          availability of childcare, firm hiring practices; addressing the legal environment for
          women (asset ownership, family and employment laws) through diagnostics, and
          policy dialogue; enhancing women’s voice and participation through (a) increasing
          the representation and the quality of participation in the design and implementation




128   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
   of CDD, infrastructure, service delivery projects; and (b) leadership training pro-
   grams; and addressing gender based violence and male gender issues in fragile and
   conflict-affected situations.
3.	 Investing in knowledge creation, learning and capacity building by setting up a MNA
    Gender Innovation Lab to learn from rigorously evaluated pilot programs; increasing
    the collection and disclosure of sex-disaggregated data and strengthening country
    capacity in gender-sensitive analysis, design, and implementation in line ministries
    and implementing agencies.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   129
                                                                              Governance and Service Delivery
                                                                                     in Health and Education

Key Challenges

T     he quality of service provision in the Arab world lags surprisingly behind its poten-
      tial. Universal access to education and health is a constitutional right in most Middle
Eastern and North African countries, the region is predominantly comprised of mid-
dle-income countries with adequate human and material resources, and governments
are perpetually engaged in reform efforts aimed at better service provision. Yet citizen
dissatisfaction continues to be widespread. On average, about one-half of respondents
in the region conveyed dissatisfaction with education services and health care in their
countries, according to the Gallup Poll 2013, while about two-thirds perceived the per-
formance of their governments in improving basic health services as bad or very bad,
according to the 2010–11 Arab Barometer. Citizens in the Middle East and North Africa
tell pollsters that their governments should do better at ensuring service delivery and
fighting corruption. They expect their governments to provide services but express low
levels of trust in state institutions (Brixi et al. forthcoming). Moreover, given the exist-
ing institutional weaknesses, they are less likely than citizens in other regions to seek
accountability or voice their opinions to public officials (figure 3.6).

            Voicing Opinions to Public Officials: Middle East and North Africa and
Figure 3.6. 
            Other Regions, 2013
          100
          90
          80
          70
          60                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   No
percent




          50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Yes
          40
          30
          20
           10
           0
                                                                                      Palestinian territories
                        Jordan

                                 Lebanon

                                           Yemen

                                                   Algeria

                                                             Iraq

                                                                    Tunisia

                                                                              Syria



                                                                                                                United Arab Emirates

                                                                                                                                       Iran

                                                                                                                                              Kuwait

                                                                                                                                                       Qatar

                                                                                                                                                               Libya

                                                                                                                                                                       Saudi Arabia

                                                                                                                                                                                      Bahrain



                                                                                                                                                                                                MENA



                                                                                                                                                                                                             ECA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EAP



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Africa

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OECD
                Egypt




                                                                                                                                                                                                       SAR




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LCR




Source: Gallup Poll 2013.
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific; LCR = Latin America and Caribbean Region; MENA = Middle East and North
Africa; OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; SAR = South Asia.



                         Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa                                                                                                                           131
                   Education and health outcomes have improved in recent decades, but they have not kept
                   up with demand. Due to economic development, in most Middle Eastern and North
                   African countries, outcomes such as school enrollment and child mortality have reached
                   their expected levels. The quality of service delivery has not, however, kept pace with
                   the broader socioeconomic transitions. Middle Eastern and North African students score
                   low on international competency tests, and graduates struggle to find jobs. Health ineq-
                   uities based on income, gender, degree of urbanization, and age persist. Out-of-pocket
                   health expenditures are high by international standards, leading to impoverishment or
                   the forgoing of receiving health care due to costs. Information asymmetries are high,
                   as citizens typically find little publicly available information about the performance of
                   schools and health facilities or about fees at health facilities. This lack of transparency can
                   give rise to informal user fees. In fact, about one-third of citizens in Middle Eastern and
                   North African countries have reported paying informal fees in the education sector and
                   especially in the health sector (figure 3.7).
                   Service-delivery performance demonstrates weaknesses in the effort and capacity of pro-
                   viders at the local level. Surveys show that providers may not possess the qualifications
                   and professional autonomy necessary for delivering quality services, particularly in rural
                   localities. They also often lack key resources, such as teaching materials and medicines.
                   Importantly, their effort appears to be lagging. Thirty percent of students in Middle
                   Eastern and North African countries attend schools where principals report to TIMSS
                   surveys that teacher absenteeism is a serious problem (figure 3.8). Similarly, health pro-
                   fessionals show high levels of dissatisfaction, and absenteeism is over 30 percent in Egypt,
                   Morocco, and Yemen. Where observations exist, the adherence to curricula in schools
                   and to clinical care protocols in health facilities appears lower (figure 3.9). Dual employ-
                   ment in both the public and private sectors is widespread in education and health, which
                   can create conflicts of interest among providers. In Egypt, for instance, 89 percent of
                   private physicians also work in public facilities.


          . Percentage of Survey Respondents Who Reported Paying Informal Fees, by
Figure 3.7
          Sector: Middle East and North Africa Region and Globally, 2013
                                                                                                   Education
          60                                                                                       Medical and health
          50
          40
percent




          30
          20
          10
          0
               Algeria    Egypt        Iraq      Jordan     Morocco    Palestinian   Tunisia      Yemen        Global
                                                                       territories

Source: Transparency International Global Corruption Barometer 2013.




132                Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
            Percentage of Students Whose Principals Report that Teacher
Figure 3.8. 
            Absenteeism Is a Serious Problem in Their School: Middle East
            and North Africa Region and Globally, 2013

            60    56
            50
                         40
            40
  percent




                                   33
            30                                27             26        24     22
            20                                                                       18
                                                                                                                13                     12
            10                                                                                                                                7          7             5
                                                                                                                                                                                  2       1
            0




                                                                                     Palestinian territories
                 Syria

                         Morocco

                                    Tunisia

                                              Saudi Arabia

                                                              Jordan

                                                                       Oman

                                                                              MENA



                                                                                                               United Arab Emirates

                                                                                                                                      Qatar

                                                                                                                                              Bahrain

                                                                                                                                                        Lebanon

                                                                                                                                                                       non-OECD

                                                                                                                                                                                  OECD

                                                                                                                                                                                         Iran
Source: TIMSS 2011.


A majority of Middle Eastern and North African citizens face a cycle of poor perfor-
mance: weak institutions undermine performance, trust, and engagement; this, in turn,
generally fails to foster the engagement and pressures necessary for strengthening insti-
tutions. The cycle may be virtuous at the local level, as case studies demonstrate, but
appears stuck in a low equilibrium at the national level in most Middle Eastern and
North African countries. The initial factors underlying this cycle can be understood
through the region’s historical development, which has led citizens to place a high value


            Adherence to Care Protocols for Diabetes and Coronary Heart Disease
Figure 3.9. 
            in Health Facilities: Egypt, 2010
                                                                                                                                      chronic care observations (percent)

                                                                                     0                                                   25                       50                     75           100
                Measure the circumference of the hips
       Conduct an eye exam using an ophthalmoscope
               Measure the circumference of the waist                                                                                                                                           Diabetes
                    Measure the blood sugar with stick                                                                                                                                          CHD
        Examine the patient for sensations and reflexes
    Examine the back of the thorax with a stethoscope
          Examine feet or any wound or pressure points
                                     Weigh the patient
Examine the abdomen while patient is in supine position
                                    Examine the chest
                        Take blood pressure in the arm


Source: Egyptian Health Governance Survey 2010.




                  Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa                                                                                               133
      on education, health, and other services; has created expectations that the state should
      provide these services; and has fostered the establishment of weak institutions, includ-
      ing civil service as a privilege and limited accountability and incentives to meet citizen
      demands. Without dependable institutions and citizen trust, there is little engagement,
      institutions remain stagnant, and service delivery remains poor.
      A series of interconnected processes perpetuate the cycle of poor performance in Middle
      Eastern and North African countries. First, institutions in the region are rarely subject
      to internal and external accountability mechanisms. This is partly due to the shortage of
      performance information guiding centralized decisions and partly to the lack of incen-
      tives toward establishing accountability for performance at the center of government or
      within the education and health sectors, all the way down to schools and health facilities.
      Administrative institutions suffer from highly centralized bureaucracies and weak bud-
      geting systems, unable to efficiently allocate human and material resources or adequately
      manage performance. Social institutions emphasize obligations to social networks over
      national welfare, involving the widespread practice of wasta, a form of clientelism, as
      well as a willingness to accept informal payments as a necessary practice. Political insti-
      tutions are highly centralized, offering citizens little influence on policy formation and
      few opportunities to provide feedback on performance quality. The result is a lack of
      transparency, monitoring, and enforcement that could underpin accountability. As a
      result, Middle Eastern and North African countries experience a wide gap between pol-
      icy frameworks and their actual implementation, overall and specifically in the education
      and health sectors, and this undermines performance.

      Key Strategic Engagements
      Enhancing education—from preschool to technical, vocational, and higher education—
      and health services will not be achieved by policy reforms alone. To foster better perfor-
      mance, policy reforms need the backing of institutions—especially incentives embedded
      in both formal and informal accountability relationships—and the trust and engagement
      of citizens. Furthermore, for institutional and policy reforms to have impact, they need
      to emerge from problem-led learning processes, represent context-specific solutions,
      and engage broad groups to ensure that new institutions are shared, legitimate, and con-
      textually appropriate. They also need to recognize the actual incentives associated with
      specific problems in specific settings that prevail for stakeholders. Within the existing
      constraints, an incremental, problem-driven approach to institutional and policy reforms
      can combine considerations of feasibility and political support with considerations of
      possible solutions. It can also adapt reform design to more closely align with the existing
      reform space, thereby gradually expanding the space for reform.




134   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Complementing sector-specific institutional and policy reforms in the education and
health sectors, it will be important to seek a stronger social contract between public ser-
vants, citizens, and providers and to empower communities and local leaders in finding
“best fit” solutions. In addition, quick wins that are observable by citizens are needed—
especially in countries that are in transition or that are emerging from conflict and fragil-
ity—to gain and retain trust and make the cycle of performance virtuous.
Specific areas for collaboration between the Education and Health, Nutrition, and
Population Global Practices on one hand and the Governance Global Practice on the
other include performance management in the public sector and within the education
and health systems and the mechanisms to share and act on performance information;
accountability institutions, such as the courts, an independent auditor, and an ombuds-
man, to monitor service-delivery performance and assist in resolving complaints; inter-
ministerial coordination in multisectoral areas, such as early childhood development;
decentralization; the alignment across central and local government levels; and the
development of local autonomy and accountability in service delivery.
In addition, the inclusion of education- and health-related co-responsibilities as part of
social safety net programs can not only facilitate an uptake of essential services but also
the sharing of performance information—for instance, with regard to student learning
or school and health facility performance—and the creation of citizen feedback loops.
Finally, the impact of institutional measures, such as specific actions to improve external
and internal accountability on education and health service-delivery indicators and out-
comes must be measured with the joint involvement of relevant Global Practices.
Against the backdrop of the existing social contract, the education, skills, and labor mar-
ket nexus is at the core of the youth employability challenge in many Middle Eastern and
North African countries. The challenge and opportunity is to offer integrated solutions
so as to better orient: (a) education and skills development systems toward learning,
partnering with the private sector and meeting labor market needs; (b) social protection
and active labor-market programs aimed at incentivizing private sector employment and
expanding opportunities for women; (c) public employment aimed at performance with
conditions comparable to private sector employment rather than entitlement; and (d)
migrant admission schemes in natural resource-rich countries aimed at reducing the cost
differential between expatriates and nationals.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   135
                                             Private Sector Development and
                                                                Job Creation
Key Challenges

O     ne of the main challenges for the Middle East and North Africa region is the cre-
      ation of sustainable growth that delivers the quantity and quality of jobs needed.
An inclusive and competitive private sector has proven to be one of the most effective
and long-term solutions for creating and sustaining jobs.
However, for a long period of time, the region’s main driver for growth has been the
public sector, and several countries in the region are facing difficulties in shifting toward
private sector-led growth. Investment continues to be made largely through the cen-
tral government or through state-owned enterprises operating in a nontransparent and
uncompetitive environment and in sectors with low productivity and little effect on
long-term job creation (notably in real estate). There is a lack of public information on
contract awards as well as a lack of transparent and effective complaint mechanisms in
the region, which ultimately hampers investment and private sector growth.
As a result, the investment climate in most Middle Eastern and African countries remains
poor and, in most cases, is getting worse in the aftermath of the Arab Spring. The Doing
Business indicators reveal a relative decline of performance for virtually all countries in
the region (World Bank 2014a). Unless the Middle East and North Africa can make its
business environment more investment-friendly, including by improving mechanisms for
complaints, and introducing private investment in key sectors, including infrastructure
and social services, it will not achieve the levels of economic and job growth needed to
meet the socioeconomic expectations of the population.
Furthermore, low capital intensity1 results in weak competitiveness driven by a poor
business climate and low productivity. A lack of effective and well-enforced competi-
tion and investment policies undermines attempts to level the playing field so that mar-
ginalized or discouraged enterprises and entrepreneurs can compete fairly with large
enterprises.
Thus, while the public sector cannot hire new entrants to the job market as a result of
a tighter budgetary and fiscal environment, the private sector has not yet taken the lead
due to a mismatch between private sector demand and supply by a public sector-oriented
education. The lack of market dynamism combined with the disproportionate regional

1. Defined as limited assets being put to productive use and the inefficient use of those assets due to poor management
practices and weak skills.




             Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa                  137
      impact of investment climate constraints explains in large part the higher levels of unem-
      ployment outside of metro cities in the Middle East and North Africa. These constraints
      to business are forcing more businesses to stay informal and for all businesses to increas-
      ingly rely on informal labor arrangements.

      To this end, key constraints for credible private-led growth strategies and job creation in
      the region include:
      Absence of effective and inclusive policy making. Governments suffer from weak
      institutional capacities to own and implement reform visions and effectively and trans-
      parently pursue evidence-based policy dialogues with sufficiently representative private
      sector stakeholders to determine shared priorities.
      Absence of a transparent and competitive public procurement system. Public pro-
      curement has an impact on competition, trade, and investment. When it works well, it
      attracts investments and private sector growth.
      Limited access of small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to public procure-
      ment contracts. SMEs play a critical role in creating jobs in the region but are often shut
      out from public procurement opportunities.
      Formal (de jure) and informal (de facto) barriers. Such barriers include both compli-
      cated and superfluous regulations, weak regulatory capacity, and rent-seeking behaviors
      (borne inter alia, out of discretionary administrative power and nontransparent decision
      making) limit the entry of new firms and their growth, holding back competitiveness and
      the overall development of the SME sector and its associated job creation.
      Smaller firms stagnate in terms of employment growth—small firms stay small.
      This is not only due to the fact that many of the large entrepreneurs in the region are
      privileged and receive preferential treatment that puts the SMEs at a disadvantage (Schiff-
      bauer et al. 2014). It is also because in local communities, small businesses face day-to-
      day challenges as a result of the discretionary and nontransparent behavior of lower-level
      government functionaries. A comparison between Arab and Latin America countries
      demonstrates that firms start out larger in Arab countries but grow more slowly over
      time, so that firms in Latin America are about twice as large after operating for ten years.
      Weak involvement of the private sector in public sector service delivery. There is
      insufficient engagement of private sector expertise and financing in the delivery of public
      services. Expertise is lacking in social and infrastructure service provision and there is
      limited public sector capacity in public-private partnership mechanisms.




138   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
Access to financial services seen as among the main constraints to the survival of
young small firms. Arab firms are less likely to be linked into the financial system than
firms in other countries worldwide. Microfinance outreach is lower in the Middle East
and North Africa than anywhere else in the world. Recent surveys for the Middle East
and North Africa showed that SMEs were only able to access less than 10 percent of bank
credit in 2011, with a financial gap reaching more than 125 percent of current outstand-
ing banking finance to SMEs (Rocha 2011). Beyond credit, the availability of early seed
funds for start-up and early-growth firms is another key requirement to overall private
sector development in the region. SMEs suffer disproportionately from the burden-
some business climate. The large, well-established firms operate in a limited competition
regime while SMEs often strive to survive.
Weak framework for financial inclusion. The existing legal and regulatory framework
related to financial inclusion is either weak or nonexistent, particularly in the financial
infrastructure sector (credit reporting, payments systems, secured lending, capital mar-
ket development, and diversification).
Key sectors, such as tourism and agribusiness, are not competitive due to weak-
nesses in the value chain. Access to credit and insurance markets is a major challenge
facing the agricultural sector in the Middle East and North Africa. Moreover, poverty
and inequality are concentrated in rural areas with predominantly agricultural activi-
ties. Ultimately, the lack of key promotional and support services in critical growth and
employment sectors, such as tourism and agriculture, is a significant challenge, particu-
larly in more disadvantaged regions.



          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   139
      Key Strategic Engagements
      To date, the World Bank Group strategy for credible private-led growth and job
      creation has focused on: (a) developing a regulatory environment that fosters oppor-
      tunities for entrepreneurship and job creation; (b) facilitating access to a broad range of
      financial services for firms and for households; (c) mobilizing the private sector to offer
      better services, such as housing finance and insurance, to the poor as consumers; (d)
      supporting developing countries in building robust financial systems that are resilient to
      shocks; (e) measuring the development results of the World Bank Group’s private sector
      activities and helping to advance results measurement in the development community;
      and (f) increasing the employability of youth by aligning the demand from markets to the
      supply of skilled labor.
      Building transparent and fair public procurement systems. In addition, the Bank’s
      strategy for promoting private sector development and job creation has focused on
      building transparent and fair public procurement systems by improving regulatory
      frameworks, modernizing procurement tools (e.g., e-procurement), and making sure
      that SMEs have access to government contracts.
      Promoting policies, investment lending, technical assistance, and advocacy and
      knowledge. Bank assistance is delivered through a mix of support to: (a) policy-level
      actions (e.g., strategies, laws, and regulations); (b) investment lending, mostly in the
      financial sector for SMEs’ access to credit; (c) technical assistance and advisory services
      on specific subjects (regulatory simplification, review of incentives to investment, com-
      petition law, and support to microfinance institutions and education for employment);
      and (d) advocacy and knowledge (investment climate assessments, Doing Business, the
      Middle East and North Africa regional flagship report on private sector development in



140   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
2009—From Privilege to Competition, and the Middle East and North Africa financial sector
flagship report in 2011). In addition, with Bank support, public procurement heads and
high-level officials of the ministries of finance working on public procurement have estab-
lished the Middle East and North Africa Network of Public Procurement Experts. In fact,
the network has chosen the “promotion of SME participation in public contracts” as a pil-
lar of the regional strategy precisely because of its impact on job creation and prosperity.
Supporting the improvement of the business climate, and the creation of a more
competitive environment for business to invest and grow. This agenda will entail: (a)
increased and more liberalized trade and investment regimes aimed at growing foreign
direct investment and domestic investments; (b) the enactment of a legal and institutional
framework to bolster competitive behaviors; and (c) measures encouraging public service
delivery by the private sector to inter alia introduce renewed dynamism in the public sector.
Innovating and expanding in new areas. The World Bank is focused on building on
initial successes and promote efforts with different products, including early seed financ-
ing, micro-works programs, information and communications technology, handicrafts,
and tourism—all of which provide interesting employment opportunities for women in
the Middle East and North Africa region.
Supporting advocacy for a change in the private-public sector relationship in the
Middle East and North Africa. The Bank will continue to build on previous analytical
work and address the privilege and connectedness agenda, setting up mechanisms that
ensure that public investment opens up economic participation and benefits to lagging
regions and underserved populations and firms. There is also a broader need to rethink
the role of the private sector and its relationship with the public sector and state-owned
enterprises.
Promoting “economic governance.       ” There needs to be a greater engagement regarding
dismantling the conflicts of interest that exist between public figures and private enter-
prises. To this end, this agenda includes: (a) improving transparency and governance of
state-owned enterprises, (b) developing clear conflict-of-interest rules, (c) opening sec-
tors under monopoly to more competition, (d) improving transparency in the way public
incentives and public lands are granted, and (e) reinforcing the powers of competition
agencies and other agencies in charge of receiving and investigating complaints.
Furthering business environment reforms and eGovernance. The focus should be on
improving the predictability of how the laws and regulations are implemented in prac-
tice. In this respect, using innovative solutions and approaches like eGovernance is an
essential area where the Bank can work across Global Practices (e.g., Transport and ICT,
Trade and Competitiveness, and Governance) to promote transparency and predictabil-
ity. In the end, this will result in new job creation and formalization.




          Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   141
      Encouraging sector-specific approaches to connect large firms, SMEs, and MSMEs
      through a global value chain. There is a need for reforms that smooth the way for busi-
      ness and investment for micro-, small-, and medium-sized enterprises and public invest-
      ments that also catalyze private investments at the smaller and mezzo end of the scale.
      Focusing on public-private dialogue arrangements. This is a critical part of the
      renewed effort to mobilize innovative financing and private sector expertise, including
      in regard to early seed financing, the deployment of Development Impact Bonds, and
      public-private partnership initiatives across social and infrastructure service provision.
      Connecting the private sector agenda with the social agenda. Linking together social
      protection, education, microenterprise development, and microfinance into integrated
      solutions for the poor and vulnerable based on an approach that would build on and
      deploy individual and community assets to productive use.
      Identifying catalytic infrastructure development for growth and investment in
      order to direct public investment more effectively. This not only applies to major
      infrastructure, but also to mezzo-level infrastructure that can be transformational at a
      community or cluster level.




142   Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
                                                            Public-Private Partnerships

Key Challenges
Many countries in the MENA Region are opting for structured, coordinated and com-
prehensive Public-Private Partnership (PPP) programs versus an ad-hoc approach fol-
lowed in the past. However, some are now being challenged by the ongoing political,
social and economics transformations that were triggered by the Arab Spring. Some of
these challenges include:
PPPs have historically been undertaken in an ad-hoc manner. In some cases, PPPs
were undertaken without a clear overarching legislative, institutional or regulatory envi-
ronment. The approach was based more on a project-to-project basis, and primarily
focused on the power and transport sectors. Very little, however, has been done at the
sub-national level.
Weak public and private sector capacity. In many instances, the public sector capacity
to plan, structure, evaluate, procure, negotiate and monitor PPPs has been weak. Fur-
thermore, capacity at the sub-national level has been almost non-existent. In addition,
domestic private sector capacity to provide advice or bid for PPPs remains weak in many
countries. Past projects have relied on foreign advisory firms and private sector bidders.




              MNA, Volume of Private Investment Commitments in Infrastucture by
 Figure 3.10. 
              Country (2010–H1 2014)
              8
                                                                                                                        2010
              6                                                                                                         2011
                                                                                                                        2012
US$ billion




              4                                                                                                         2013
                                                                                                                        H1 2014

              2


              0
                  Algeria   Egypt,      Iran,    Iraq     Jordan   Lebanon   Morocco    Syrian    Tunisia   West Bank     Yemen,
                             Arab.    Islamic                                            Arab               and Gaza       Rep.
                             Rep.       Rep.                                           Republic


 Source: World Bank PPI Database.




                     Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa                  143
                    MNA, Volume of Private Investment Commitments in
       Figure 3.11. 
                    Infrastucture by Sector (2010–H1 2014)
                    8
                                                                                      Energy

                    6                                                                 Telecom
                                                                                      Transport
      US$ billion




                                                                                      Water and sewage
                    4


                    2


                    0
                        2010              2011          2012               2013             H1 2014
                                                                                      (telecom excluded)

       Source: World Bank PPI Database.



       Financing Challenges. There is a lack of local long term financing needed for project
       financing in PPPs. The supply side has been weak mainly due to a weak demand. In addi-
       tion, it should be noted that historically there has been a culture of users not paying for
       public services, which can make user-paid PPP structures more challenging to finance.
       Weak investment planning and management of fiscal commitments arising out
       of PPPs. Public investment planning is generally weak in the region and needs to be
       developed, while the process needs to be able to ‘filter-out’ potential PPPs. Moreover,
       countries often need support in terms of strengthening their capacity to estimate, record
       and backstop fiscal commitments (annuity payments, subsidies, grants, guarantees) aris-
       ing out of undertaking PPPs.
       Private Participation in Infrastructure (PPI) in MENA has mainly been in the
       telecom sector. Jordan, Algeria, Egypt and Morocco have been active with PPI, but over-
       all the total investment in the region is very low, and has the opportunity to be increased.

       Key Strategic Engagements
       Despite the challenges, and going forward, demand for PPP support in the MENA
       region remains strong. The World Bank Group has provided comprehensive support to
       many countries in the Region to put in place structured, coordinated and comprehensive
       PPP programs (such as in Morocco, Egypt, Jordan, and Kuwait). Similar support was
       also being provided to Syria and Yemen, but is currently stalled.
       Key support in the region moving forward will center around:




144    Maximizing the World Bank Group’s Impact in the Middle East and North Africa
              MNA, Volume of Private Investment Commitments in
 Figure 3.12. 
              Infrastucture by Contract Type (2010–H1 2014)
              8
                                                                                     Brownfield concession
                                                                                     Divestiture
              6
                                                                                     Greenfield project
US$ billion




              4


              2


              0
                    2010              2011               2012              2013              H1 2014
                                                                                       (telecom excluded)

 Source: World Bank PPI Database.




 Strengthening decision making on PPPs, including:
 •	 Building a robust pipeline of projects - developing a set of tools to assess coun-
    try and project readiness for PPPs and project level filters including the choice to
    do the project as a PPP. Tools will also be developed to guide on how to manage fiscal
    commitments arising out of undertaking PPPs.
 •	 Supporting during the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) stage. This would
    focus on identifying gaps in infrastructure and service provision that could be filled
    with PPP interventions.
 •	 Supporting during the development of Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF).
    This would identify key Bank interventions (menu of products and options; including
    lending or contingent support) that could help country PPP programs; benefiting
    from the SCD.
 Providing upstream policy, legal, institutional and regulatory PPP reform sup-
 port. This agenda can be supported through the drafting of policies, legislation, and
 business plans for PPP units.
 Developing and disseminating the global public goods agenda on knowledge, data
 and capacity building. Much of this is undertaken in collaboration with other Multi-lat-
 eral Development Banks (MDBs). Partnerships with these organizations serve as an open
 forum to discuss the challenges and opportunities for PPPs globally.
 Supporting capacity building efforts. The WBG is working with other MDBs in offer-
 ing different trainings and certifications for local officials to develop competencies in
 PPPs.



                  Selected Key Cross-Cutting Challenges and Opportunities in the Middle East and North Africa   145
                                                             References


Arab Barometer 2010–11. http://www.arabbarometer.org.

Brixi, Hana, Ellen Lust, and Michael Woolcock. Forthcoming. “Trust, Voice, and Incentives:
    Learning from Local Successes in Service Delivery.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Devarajan, Shanta, Lili Mottaghi, Farrukh Iqbal, Gabriela Mundaca, Maria Laursen, Maria
   Vagliasindi, Simon Commander, Isabelle Chaal-Dabi. 2014. “Corrosive Subsidies.”
   MENA Economic Monitor, Middle East and North Africa Region, World Bank, Wash-
   ington,      DC.     http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/10/20272046/
   mena-economic-monitor-corrosive-subsidies.

Egyptian Health Governance Survey. 2010.

Gallup Poll. 2013.

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2013. Energy Subsidy Reform: Lessons and Implications.”
    IMF, Washington, DC. http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/012813.pdf.

———. 2014. “Arab Countries in Transition: Economic Outlook and Key Challenges.” IMF
 Report for the Deauville Partnership Ministerial Meeting, Washington, DC (October 9).

———. 2014. Regional Economic Outlook: Middle East and Central Asia.” IMF, Washington,
 DC. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/reo/2014/mcd/eng/pdf/mreo1014.pdf.

Mottaghi, Lili, and Shanta Devarajan. 2015. “Plunging Oil Prices.” MENA Quarterly Economic
  Brief 4, World Bank Group, Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
  en/2015/01/23884278/plunging-oil-prices.

PEFA Secretariat Database 2014.

PovcalNet: The online tool for poverty measurement developed by the Development Research
   Group of the World Bank.

Rocha, Roberto R. 2011. Financial Access and Stability: A Road Map for the Middle East and
   North Africa. World Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INT-
   MENA/Resources/Financial_Flagship_Report_Middle_East_North_Africa_2011_Full_
   Report.pdf.




                                                                                             147
      Schiffbauer, Marc; Abdoulaye Sy, Sahar Hussain, Hania Sahnoun, Philip Keefer, Ishac
         Diwan, Dalia Al Kadi, Doerte Doemeland, and Bob Rijkers. 2014. “Jobs or Privi-
         leges: Unleashing the Employment Potential of the Middle East and North Africa.”
         Report 88879, Middle East and North Africa Region, World Bank, Washing-
         ton,       DC.        http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/06/19794535/
         jobs-or-privileges-unleashing-employment-potential-middle-east-north-africa.

      Sdralevich, Carlo, Randa Sab,Younes Zouhar, and Giorgia Albertin. 2014. “Subsidy Reform in the
         Middle East and North Africa: Recent Progress and Challenges Ahead.” International Mon-
         etary Fund, Washington, DC. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dp/2014/1403mcd.
         pdf.

      TIMSS 2011.

      Transparency International 2013. Global Corruption Barometer. http://www.transparency.
         org/gcb2013.

      World Bank. 2011. World Development Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://issuu.
        com/world.bank.publications/docs/9780821387092.

      ———. 2013. “Integration of Electricity Networks in the Arab World: Regional Market Struc-
       ture and Design.” Middle East and North Africa Report ACS7124. World Bank, Washington,
       DC. http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/
       2014/07/10/000442464_20140710112306/Rendered/PDF/ACS71240ESW0WH0I0an-
       d0II000Final0PDF.pdf.

      ———. 2014a. Doing Business 2015: Going Beyond Efficiency. Washington, DC: World Bank.

      ———. 2014b. “Over the Horizon: A New Levant.” Poverty Reduction and Economic Manage-
       ment Department, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://beta.cmimarseille.org/highlights/
       report-over-horizon-new-levant.

      ———. 2014c. World Development Indicators. World Bank, Washington, DC.

      ———. (forthcoming). “World Bank Support for School Autonomy and Accountability FY03–
       13.” World Bank, Washington, DC.




148   References
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
www.worldbank.org
