                                                                                                            96534
                  World Programme on Gender Statistics
             Progress Report from January 2014 to March 2015

     1. SUMMARY

During the period under review, UNSD organised the 8th Inter-agency and Expert Group Meeting on
Gender Statistics (IAEG-GS) and the 5th Global Forum on Gender Statistics; continued its work on the
World’s Women 2015; conducted two training workshops on gender statistics; and contributed to a
number of technical meetings on gender statistics.


2.     EXPECTED ACCOMPLISHMENTS FOR 2014 Tranche

The expected accomplishments for 2014 are as follows:

B1: Support the 8th Inter-agency and Expert Group meeting on Gender Statistics (IAEG-GS) as well
as the 5th Global Forum on Gender Statistics, in 2014

B2: Undertake two regional capacity building workshops for countries in Pacific and ESCWA
region, respectively. The workshops will be based on the UN Gender Statistics training manuals
(Integrating a Gender Perspective into Statistics and Guidelines on Producing Statistics on Violence
against Women: Statistical Surveys)

B3: Prepare the World’s Women 2015

B4: Support study tours for national statisticians participating in training activities on gender
statistics including on time use and emerging issues.

B5: Participate in major meetings on methodology and data availability of gender statistics



3.     REVIEW OF IMPACT AND ACTIVITIES

Expected                  Support the 8th Inter-agency and Expert Group meeting on Gender
Accomplishment 1          Statistics (IAEG-GS) as well as the 5th Global Forum on Gender Statistics,
(B1)                      in 2014

Results/Impact            In the reporting period, UNSD organized the 8th meeting of the IAEG-GS and
achieved for B1           the 5th Global Forum on Gender Statistics, held in Aguascalientes, Mexico, from
                          2-5 November 2014.

                          The IAEG-GS meeting discussed coordination issues with the international
                          statistical community and agreed on work priorities under the Global Gender
                          Statistics Programme for 2015 with the aim of improving gender statistics at the
                          national and international levels. Around 35 experts from NSOs and the
                          international statistical community participated in the meeting.

                          The 5th Global Forum on Gender Statistics was organized by UNSD, in
                          collaboration with INEGI, Mexico. The Forum promoted international standards for
                          the production, analysis, dissemination of relevant, reliable, harmonized and timely
                          gender statistics; reviewed and shared best practices on gender statistics at the
                   national and international level; and reinforced the dialogue between users (policy
                   makers, researchers, other stakeholders) and producers of gender statistics. Around
                   100 participants from NSOs, academia, women’s national institutes and the
                   international statistical community attended the Forum.

                   UNSD staff also participated as resource persons in the XV International
                   Meeting on Gender Statistics (a conference for Latin American countries),
                   organized by UN Women-Latin America, Inmujeres (National Institute for
                   Women of Mexico), ECLAC Gender Division, in collaboration with INEGI, 5-7
                   November 2014. The meeting brought together users and producers of gender
                   statistics from the Latin American region and around the world to reflect on
                   progress made in the area of gender statistics and discussed existing and future
                   challenges.
Expected           Undertake two regional capacity building workshops for countries in
Accomplishment 2   Pacific and ESCWA region, respectively.
(B2)
Results/Impact     In the reporting period, UNSD jointly with SPC, conducted the Pacific Region
achieved for B2    Workshop on Gender Statistics (4-6 August 2014). The workshop promoted the
                   integration of a gender perspective into national statistical systems; presented
                   training modules on work and health statistics based on the UN Gender Statistics
                   Manual: Integrating a Gender Perspective into Statistics and introduce the new
                   definition of work (19th ICLS Resolution); discussed the use of population and
                   housing censuses for producing gender statistics; reviewed violence against women
                   surveys and time use surveys in the region; and introduced the Minimum Set of
                   Gender Indicators and facilitate discussion among national statisticians on the data
                   collection and compilation needs for these indicators, within specific regional and
                   national contexts. Over 80 participants from NSOs, representatives from national
                   women’s machineries, human rights reporting sections of government in 13 Pacific
                   Island countries and UN agencies attended the workshop, organized jointly by
                   UNSD and SPC. This was the first workshop of its kind in the region bringing
                   together both producers and users of gender statistics, providing an opportunity for
                   data users to understand the challenges in producing gender statistics and for data
                   producers to better understand users’ needs.

                   UNSD also contributed to the ILO regional workshop on work statistics and labour
                   migration statistics for the same region by presenting the international standards and
                   definitions for producing labour migration statistics. UNSD also informed the group
                   of an upcoming UNSD manual on producing migration statistics using censuses and
                   surveys.

                   Another workshop on Integrating a Gender Perspective into the Production of
                   Statistics was conducted on 1 – 4 December 2014 in Amman, Jordan, organized
                   jointly by UNSD, UNESCWA, the Statistical, Economic and Social Research and
                   Training Center for Islamic Countries (SESRIC), in collaboration with the Jordan
                   Department of Statistics. The workshop participants learned the importance and
                   methods of integration of a gender perspective into national statistical systems and
                   also throughout the census process with the aim of improving the availability and
                   quality of gender statistic. The workshop also offered an opportunity for
                   participants to exchange knowledge and experiences on the production of gender
                   statistics. A total of 18 gender statisticians and census experts from 12 ESCWA
                   countries participated in the workshop.
Expected


                                             2/5
Accomplishment 3   Prepare the World’s Women 2015
(B3)
Results/Impact     In the reporting period, all chapters of the World’s Women 2015 – population and
achieved for B3    families, health, education, work, power and decision-making, violence against
                   women environment and poverty – were finalized for the review by an external
                   editor.

                   A brochure, the World’s Women 2015 – At a Glance was produced, to be presented
                   at the 46th Statistical Commission and the 59th Commission on the Status of Women
                   in 2015. The brochure highlighted key findings on the status of women and men
                   and progress made since 1995 in several key areas such as health, education, work,
                   power and decision making and violence against women.

                   The World’s Women 2015 will contribute to the stocktaking being done to mark the
                   20 anniversary of the Beijing Conference. It addresses the above-mentioned critical
                   areas in terms of current status of women and men and the progress made since
                   1995.
Expected           Support study tours for national statisticians participating in training
Accomplishment 4   activities on gender statistics including on time use and emerging issues.
(B4)
Results/Impact     In the reporting period, UNSD organized study tours for representatives from 3
achieved for B4    national statistical offices – Armenia, Georgia and Turkey – to attend the Training
                   Workshop on Measuring Household Production and the 36th Conference of the
                   International Association for Time Use Research.

                   The training workshop (29 July 2014) was to enhance capacity in measuring
                   household production via time-use data collection. Various methods in valuation of
                   household work, time and services based on the experience from Finland were
                   shared with participants.

                   The 36th Conference of the International Association for Time Use Research was
                   conducted from 30 July to 1 August 2014 and provided a platform for sharing of
                   national experiences in producing and using time-use statistics.

                   All participants in the study tour indicated that their participation in the training and
                   conference had enhanced their knowledge in the area and they would like to
                   implement that acquired knowledge in their work.

Expected           Participate in major meetings on methodology and data availability of
Accomplishment 5   gender statistics
(B5)
Results/Impact     In the reporting period, UNSD participated, as resource person(s) in the following
achieved for B5    meetings:

                       (1) Work Session and Workshop on Gender Statistics, 17-21 March 2014,
                           Geneva. During the meeting UNSD provided an update on the Global
                           Gender Statistics Programme as well as the ongoing revision of the
                           International Classification of Activities for Time Use Statistics
                           (ICATUS). UNSD also held a meeting with the ILO expert on
                           classifications to discuss the revision of ICATUS and the new definition
                           of work adopted at the 19th ICLS.
                       (2) The 62nd Session of the Conference of European Statisticians,


                                              3/5
                                    organized by UNECE, 9-11 April 2014 in Paris, France. During the
                                    meeting, UNSD discussed with OECD on the possibility in obtaining
                                    gender statistics on migration to be incorporated into the World’s
                                    Women 2015. UNSD also discussed with UNECE and countries in the
                                    region on their regional gender indicators as well as possible regional
                                    contributions to the forthcoming Global Forum on Gender Statistics.
                                (3) The WHO meeting on indicators on violence against women for the post
                                    2015 development agenda, 23-24 June 2014. During the meeting,
                                    UNSD presented the indicators of the Friends of the Chair (FOC) on
                                    indicators on violence against women (VAW) and the latest work
                                    undertaken by UNSD on measuring prevalence of selected types of
                                    violence, including the development of the Guidelines for the
                                    production of statistics on VAW from sample surveys. UNSD also
                                    introduced the minimum set of gender indicators agreed by the UN
                                    Statistical Commission and presented the two selected indicators on
                                    VAW (out of the 8 FOC VAW indicators) retained by the IAEG-GS as
                                    summary measures of prevalence of intimate partner violence (IPV) and
                                    non-IPV for the minimum set. UNSD also discussed with participants
                                    about ensuring the indicators proposed by WHO are in line with the
                                    FOC indicators on VAW.
                                (4) Training Workshop on Measuring Household Production and the 36th
                                    Conference of the International Association for Time Use Research. (29
                                    July – 1 August 2014, Turku, Finland) During the meeting, UNSD
                                    updated participants and discuss with countries the ongoing revision of
                                    the International Classification of Activities for Time Use Statistics
                                    (ICATUS).
                                (5) The Data2X roundtable conference, co-organized by the Data2X
                                    initiative and the International Labour Organization (ILO), in
                                    collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), on
                                    “Better Data to Better Monitor the Status of Women in Informal
                                    Employment, Unpaid Work and Work in Agriculture”, 1-2 October
                                    2014, in Geneva, Switzerland. The Roundtable reviewed progress,
                                    practices and coordination mechanisms, and assessed data gaps on
                                    gender statistics related to work, including on informal employment,
                                    unpaid work and work in rural areas and agriculture. UNSD presented
                                    relevant work undertaken by the Division under the Global Gender
                                    Statistics Programme, highlighting the role of the IAEG-GS as a well-
                                    established coordination mechanism for all issues related to gender
                                    statistics; and had a follow-up discussion with ILO colleagues on the
                                    finalizing the ICATUS revision.



4.       RELATED ACTIVITIES

     -   In the reporting period, UNSD continued to maintain the database for the Tier-I Minimum Set of
         Gender Indicators. The EDGE project, jointly implemented by UNSD and UN Women, also made
         progress in developing methodological guidelines for the collection of Tier-III gender indictors on
         asset ownership and entrepreneurship. Finally, UNSD continued to finalise the chapters for the
         World’s Women 2015.




                                                    4/5
5.     PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED

No specific problem has been encountered in the period: January – March 2015.




                                                 5/5
