                                           96545

                  NIGERIA


PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS TO SUPPORT THE SAVING ONE
          MILLION LIVES INITIATIVE




         TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT REPORT


                  March 31, 2015
1.     This Technical Assessment is broken down into the following sections : (i) Strategic
Relevance of SOML: (ii) Technical Soundness of the Program; (iii) Institutional Arrangements;
(iv) Monitoring and Evaluation; (v) the Economic Evaluation; (vi) Assessment of Specific DLIs.
The expenditure framework is discussed in Annex 1.

2.      Overview of Strategic Relevance. SOML addresses the major health issues facing
Nigeria where progress over the last two decades has been slow. Nigeria’s ability to address the
health MDGs is of global importance because it contributes disproportionately to global under-
five and maternal mortality. SOML’s relevance for Nigeria lies in the fact that it addresses almost
70 percent of the entire burden of disease. There is a strong rationale for Government intervention
in those areas covered by SOML and this is discussed in detail in the economic evaluation section.
The latter section also addresses the economic impact of SOML which would be expected to be
large and positive.

3.      Overview of Technical Soundness. SOML emphasizes a series of maternal and child
health and nutrition interventions that are highly cost effective (see Economic Evaluation). These
interventions also turn out to have very strong evidence of effectiveness based on multiple
randomized trials. SOML takes as its point of departure the limited progress that Nigeria has made
on delivering these services to broad swaths of the population and rightly emphasizes the
importance of both increasing coverage and improving the quality of care. The latter has not
garnered much attention previously but is clearly a serious issue. The technical soundness of the
SOML approach, which emphasizes a focus on results, strengthening accountability, and
encouraging innovation, can be discerned from those recent initiatives in Nigeria which have
achieved good results.

4.      Overview of Institutional Arrangements. There is broad support for SOML both inside
and outside Government. A PEIA was undertaken which has pointed out the complex institutional
relationships particularly at State level and below. Consolidating State-level authority for PHC in
one entity (“PHC under one roof”) is a necessary but not sufficient condition for su ccess. The
experience in UBEC (basic education) is likely not one worthwhile replicating. Tracking budgetary
flows is challenging but some progress should be possible towards having consolidated budgets.

5.       Overview of Monitoring and Evaluation. Up until recently the health system in Nigeria
suffered from a dearth of reliable and timely information. This was particularly true when it came
to data that was sufficiently disaggregated to provide management information at State level. Thus,
SOML’s focus on improving data availability and quality is entirely appropriate. The recent
progress on expanding SMART surveys and introducing health facility surveys reflects the
Government’s willingness to improve the M&E systems for SOML. While the routine health
information system has been getting considerable attention it faces some challenges that make it
inappropriate to use for evaluating progress on DLIs 1and 3. Collecting robust and useful
information on DLIs 1 and 3 will require the use of annual SMART surveys and annual health
facility surveys with appropriate care given to quality assurance.

6.      Overview of Economic Evaluation. Health care financing in Nigeria is mostly out-of-
pocket and only a modest increase in public expenditures in health is expected over the next few
years. There is a strong rationale for public investment in SOML arising from: (i) the public goods
nature of many of the interventions prioritized under SOML: (ii) the allocative and technical
efficiency of the SOML interventions, including their cost-effectiveness; (iii) the equity enhancing
nature of SOML; and (iv) the insurance market failures that SOML will help address. The
economic impact of SOML is expected to be substantial and will arise from the direct micro effects
of improved maternal and child health which will enhance human capital formation. It will also be
aided by hastening the demographic dividend Nigeria could enjoy if it goes through a rapid fertility
transition. The financial sustainability of SOML, if it is successful, is not a serious concern because
its incremental cost is only US$0.71 per capita per year. The Government could easily use some
of its existing budget allocations in a more results-based way.

7.       Experience with Results-Based Incentives to sub-National Governments and
Innovation Funds. DLIs 1 and 2 involve financial incentives to States based on their
performance. The experience in Nigeria and globally is that such incentives can be successful if a
few conditions are met; (i) the criteria for releasing the disbursements are clear and objective; (ii)
they are within the span of control of the Government; (iii) achievements are measured fairly and
transparently; (iv) sub-national Governments can use the funds flexibly and have sufficient
autonomy. The proposed disbursements under the PforR meet these criteria. Similarly the
experience with learning and innovation funds emphasizes the importance of: (i) clear selection
criteria; (ii) transparent and fair selection process; (iii) proper grant management; and (iv)
designing evaluation and learning right from the start. The innovation and learning funds proposed
under DLI 4 takes these lessons into account.

    I.      Strategic Relevance of SOML

8.      Improvement in U5MR and IMR. Over the last decade the trend in health, nutrition, and
population (HNP) outcomes in Nigeria is mixed. Data from the last three Nigeria Demographic
and Health Surveys (NDHSs)1 demonstrates a 36 percent decline during this period in the under-
five mortality rate (U5MR) and a 31 percent decline in the infant mortality rate (see Figure 1).
While the country is still not on track to achieve MDG4, these improvements are considerable.
Given the slow progress on service delivery (see below) it is an interesting question why Nigeria
has made progress on U5MR and IMR. It is possible that the decrease is due to increased access
to anti-malarial drugs and antibiotics that has come about due to the expansion of the private sector
even into remote rural areas. Increases in ITN coverage may also play an important role.




1
 The use of NDHS data, collected by the National Population Commission, allows for a consistent methodology
over time and facilitates cross-country comparisons. The data are also recent.
                   Figure 1: Trends in U5MR and IMR (per 1000 live births)

            250


            200     201


            150                   157
                                                                         IMR
                    125                         128
                                                                         U5MR
            100     100          99.3
                                                                         MDG4 Target
                                   75           73.9
                                                 69
             50


              0
                        2003         2008          2013
Source: NDHS.

9.       There Has Been Little Improvement in Other Health Outcomes. There has been almost
no progress on reducing maternal mortality (MDG5) which has plateaued at about 550 per 100,000
live births according to the NDHS. Fertility remains stubbornly high and has changed less than 10
percent in the last 25 years (see figure 7). Childhood malnutrition, during the last decade (see
figure 8), has actually worsened by some measures (low weight for age has increased by 21 percent
and wasting has increased 64 percent) and improved only modestly (12 percent) in terms of
stunting (low height for age).

                           Figure 2: Total Fertility Rate 1990 to 2013

       6            6                   5.7                5.7                  5.5
       5

       4

       3

       2

       1

       0
                  1990                  2003               2008                 2013
Source: NDHS.
               Figure 3: Nutritional Status of Children Under Five (%) 2003-2013

    2003       45         42     41
    2008       40                         37
    2013       35
                                                                                      29
               30
                                                                           24    23
               25
               20                                                18
                                                         14
               15                                 11
               10
                5
                0
                               Stunting                Wasting            Weight for Age
Source: NDHS.

10.     Nigeria Contributes Substantially to Global Under-Five and Maternal Mortality.
Nigeria’s ability to address under-five and maternal mortality will affect global progress towards
MDGs 4 and 5. Nigeria contributes 14 percent of all maternal deaths globally, second only to India
at 17 percent.2 Similarly, Nigeria accounts for 13 percent of all under-five deaths globally, again
second only to India at 21 percent.3

11.     SOML Addresses the Largest Part of the Burden of Disease and the most Lives Lost.
The burden of disease (BOD) in Nigeria remains primarily due to infectious diseases although
there is some evidence that the country is slowly going through an epidemiological transition.
Through its focus on improving maternal and child health, SOML addresses the most common
causes of premature death in Nigeria. Its six pillars target infectious diseases, maternal and
neonatal complications and nutrition deficiencies that together account for nearly 70 percent of
total years of life lost (YLL) according to a recent study. This may overstate the case a little as the
children only represent a portion of the BOD due to HIV. Nonetheless, SOML targets 9 of the top
10 causes of premature loss of life in Nigeria (see Figure 9).




2
  WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA and The World Bank, Trends in Maternal Mortality: 1990 to 2013, WHO, Geneva, 2014.
- See more at: http://data.unicef.org/maternal-health/maternal-mortality#sthash.a1DshUTs.dpuf
3
  United Nations Inter-agency Group for Child Mortality Estimation (IGME), UNICEF: Committing to Child
Survival: A promise renewed-Progress report 2014, http://data.unicef.org/child-mortality/under-five
               Figure 4: Burden of Disease – Years of Life Lost as % of the Total

                                                                                  Malaria
                                                                                  HIV
                                                         23
                                                                                  Pneumonia
                      31.6
                                                                                  Neonatal Sepsis
                                                                                  Diarrhea
                                                                                  Pre-term Birth
                                                                                  Malnutrition
                                                                8.3
                                                                                  Meningitis
                     0.7
                      1.3                                                         Neonatal Encephalopathy
                        3.1                               7.8                     Maternal
                           3.6                                                    Measles
                                 4.2               6.4
                                       4.3                                        Other
                                             5.7



Source: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation – Global Burden of Disease Study – 2010.

   II.     Technical Soundness of SOML

12.    Limited Progress on Health Service Delivery. The limited progress on HNP outcomes
observed in Nigeria is consistent with the picture in service delivery (see Figure 10). Over the last
two decades the coverage of key health interventions has stagnated at low levels. The lack of
progress on services such as family planning, antenatal care, and skilled birth attendance militates
against achieving MDG5 and makes it hard to argue that Nigeria has made much progress on
reducing MMR.

13.     Nigeria is Doing Less Well than its Neighbors. Progress on service delivery in Nigeria
generally has been slower than in some of its larger neighboring countries. For example, in looking
at immunization coverage as estimated by Demographic and Health Surveys it appears that Nigeria
has significantly poorer results than countries like Senegal, Ghana, and Cameroon. It has also made
slower progress over the last 25 years even though it started at a lower base (see figure 11).
                        Figure 5: Coverage (%) of Key Health Services 1990-2013


 100
                                                   Skilled birth attendance
                                                   Antenatal Care
  80
                                                   DPT3 vaccination coverage
                                                   Contraceptive Prevalence Rate (modern methods)
  60

  40

  20

    0
                 1990              1999             2003               2008             2013

Source: NDHS.


  Figure 6: Trends in Immunization (DPT3) Coverage (%) in Selected West African Countries


        100
         90
         80
         70
         60                                                                        Senegal
         50                                                                        Nigeria
         40
                                                                                   Ghana
         30
                                                                                   Cameroon
         20
         10
          0
              1986 1989 1991 1993 1996 1998 2000 2003 2005 2008 2010 2013

Source: Demographic and Health Surveys.

14.     Quality of Care is Low. The limited coverage of important interventions is further
aggravated by poor quality of care. Results from the Bank-supported Service Delivery Indicators
(SDI) Survey indicate that many health workers perform poorly on standardized tests of knowledge
and lack the skills to effectively treat common and important ailments in children or mothers (see
Figure 12). Of particular concern is that the cadre of health workers who provide primary health
care in public health centers have limited knowledge of how to handle common diseases such as
malaria, pneumonia, and diarrhea. SDI results indicate that Nigeria does a little better than Senegal
but less well than other large countries in Sub-Saharan Africa in terms of the knowledge and skills
of its health workers (see Table 11).


              Figure 7: Knowledge and Skills of Health Workers – SDI Survey 2013

                        Diagnositic accuracy (all cases)
                        Adherence to guidelines (main questions)
                        Management of maternal and newborn compications
                                                            47.5
                 40.2                                                                    37.3
   33.2                         35.9          33.7              36.0      35.1
                                                                             34.7
                                   31.4                                                     30.6
      24.0           26.3                        26.1              23.2
         17.5                          17.4                                       19.6          17.3
                         12.6                        12.0


  ANAMBRA         BAUCHI          CROSS         EKITI         KEBBI         NIGER           ALL
                                  RIVER

    Table 1: Knowledge & Skills of Health Workers Compared to Other Countries in Africa

                                                 Kenya Nigeria Senegal Tanzania Uganda
 Diagnostic accuracy                              74%   36%     34%      57%     58%
 Adherence to clinical guidelines                 43%   31%     22%      35%     35%
 Correct manage maternal and neonatal             44%   17%       --      --     20%
 complications
Source: Service Delivery Indicators (SDI) Survey 2013.

15.    What Things Have Seemed To Work And Why. While the rate of progress of PHC
services in Nigeria has been slow, the situation is by no means bleak. Some recent experiences in
Nigeria suggest means of improving health system performance. It is also important to understand
what does NOT explain the slow progress.

16.     Input-Related Problems Explain Little of the Problem. Issues that are important in
other parts of Africa do not seem to explain the slow progress of the health sector in Nigeria: (i)
lack of funding: while public expenditure on health is low compared to GDP and total budget,
funding alone does not appear to have much influence on service delivery. There is no correlation
between State level expenditures in health and health outputs such as skilled birth attendance (see
figure 13); (ii) lack of inputs such as drugs: while there is clearly a shortage of medicines in primary
health centers, the SDI survey also found no correlation between drug availability and patient
volume; (iii) lack of infrastructure: 67 percent of the population live within 30 minutes’ walk of a
health facility, 85 percent live within 1 hours walk (LSMS 2010/11). This compares favorably to
neighboring countries; (iv) shortage of health workers: the ratio of health worker to population is
substantially higher than neighboring countries (it is twice the sub-Sahara African average) and
many health facilities are actually over-staffed.
17.      Recent Experience with PBF Gives Some Hints about what Might Work.
Performance-based financing (PBF) was introduced in three pilot LGAs three years ago as part of
the Bank-funded Nigeria State Health Investment Project (NSHIP). Under PBF, individual health
facilities (both public and private) are provided cash payments (through electronic transfer to their
bank accounts) based on the quantity and quality of key maternal and child health services they
provide. The facilities have considerable autonomy in how they use the cash including for physical
upgrading, buying drugs, and providing monetary incentives to staff.

     Figure 8: Real per Capita Health Expenditure (Naira) and Skilled Birth Attendance (%)

  100

   80

   60

   40

   20

    0
        0           500           1000           1500          2000           2500          3000

Source: World Bank Analysis from State PEMFAR/PER/PEFA Reports and NDHS 2008.

18.      Example of How PBF Works. In the example described in table 12, if a health facility
fully immunizes 50 children in a quarter, they could earn US$100 (100 x US$2 per child fully
vaccinated). In PHC facilities under NSHIP there are in fact 20 specific services that are
incentivized. The total amount would be adjusted for the remoteness or difficulty of the facility
(equity bonus), since urban or peri-urban facilities could earn a disproportionate amount. In the
example below, this particular facility would earn 25 percent more because of the difficulties it
faces. The total would also be adjusted by a quality score based on a checklist administered at the
facility every quarter. This facility would earn 50 percent times 25 percent of its quantity payment.
Facilities can use the funds for: (i) health facility operational costs (about 50 percent), including
maintenance and repair, drugs and consumables, outreach and other quality-enhancement
measures; and (ii) performance bonus for health workers (up to a maximum of 50 percent)
according to defined criteria.
            Table 2: Example of How PBF Works at Health Facility Level Under NSHIP

  Service                                Number Provided             Unit Price      Total Earned
                                         Last Quarter
  Child fully vaccinated                 50                          US$2            US$100
  Skilled birth attendance               60                          US$10           US$600
  Curative care patient visit            1,800                       US$0.5          US$900
  Sub-Total                                                                          US$1,600
  Remoteness (Equity) Bonus                     +25%                                 US$2,000
  Quality bonus                          Score (50%) x 25% of volume                 US$200
                                                                             Total   US$2,200
  Use of Funds
  Drugs and consumables                                                              US$500
  Outreach expenditures                                                              US$250
  Repairs & maintenance of health facility                                           US$150
  Bonuses to staff in the facility                                                   US$1,100
  Savings                                                                            US$200

19.     Initial Evaluation of PBF. A recent household survey comparing the three PBF LGAs
with nearby control LGAs that did not implement PBF found some important results. After
controlling for socio-economic variables, contraceptive prevalence, antenatal care, and utilization
were significantly higher in the PBF LGAs (see Figure 14). Routinely collected data also suggests
large improvements in service delivery in PBF facilities (see Figure 15). The cost of PBF has been
modest, about US$1.20 per capita per year, meaning that it has leveraged existing investments and
is scalable given the available fiscal space. PBF has now been scaled up to 27 LGAs.

      Figure 9: Household Survey Results Comparing PBF Pre-Pilot LGAs with Control LGAs

 70
 60
 50
 40
                                                                                     PBF Pre-Pilot
 30
                                                                                     Control LGAs
 20
 10
  0
          Contraceptive    Consultation at    Did NOT use HF Did NOT use HF
         Prevalence Rate     Gov't HF        due to poor quality due to no drugs
        Figure 10: Coverage of Institutional Delivery in PBF Pilot LGAs since Dec. 2011

                   60%

                   50%

                   40%
                                                                              Fufole
                   30%
                                                                              Wamba
                   20%                                                        Ondo East

                   10%

                    0%
                          12   2    4   6    8   10 12     2    4    6    8     10 12


20.      Factors for Success and Lessons Learned. The success of PBF thus far appears to be
due to a number of factors, including: (i) it provides a clear signal to health staff about what is
important; (ii) it rewards staff for their efforts; (iii) it provides legitimate operating funds at health
facility level, something they have rarely, if ever, had before; (iv) it gives health staff, particularly
the officer in charge, substantial autonomy and this gives them the opportunity to innovate; and
(v) it has substantially strengthened supervision. PBF has also faced a few challenges that are
instructive, including: (i) delays in payment have a very deleterious effect on performance; (ii) the
quality of management at facility level appears to be a constraint that needs to be addressed; and
(iii) the system is dependent on robust assessment of performance that is independent.

21.     EMTCT has Made Significant Progress. Another seeming success Nigeria has enjoyed
is in HIV where prevalence and the estimated number of new infections has been declining. Of
note has been the increase in the number of HIV positive mothers who have been benefiting from
anti-retroviral therapy to prevent mother to child transmission (see figure 16). The improvements
have been faster than in other areas of mother and child health and may be due to: (i) the use of
non-governmental “implementing partners” by PEPFAR, the Global Fund and support of NGOs
under the Bank-financed HIV project; (ii) the fact that implementing partners have worked with
public sector facilities to improve performance; and (iii) that State AIDS control agencies (SACAs)
appear to have been strengthened.
               Figure 11: Number of HIV + Women Receiving ART for EMTCT

  70,000
                                                                                            57,871
  60,000
  50,000
                                                                            37,868 40,465
  40,000                                                 31,688 33,891
  30,000                                        26,084
                                       20,992
  20,000                     12,993
  10,000
       0
             2004     2005   2006      2007     2008        2009   2010     2011    2012    2013
Source: UNAIDS 2014.

22.     Some States have Performed Very Well. There are wide variations in the performance
of States over the last few years. An analysis of changes in 8 different MCH services from 2008
to 2013, based on the NDHS indicates that there is a very large variation in the extent to which
performance has improved (see figure 17). Importantly, baseline level of performance does NOT
appear to be a predictor of success. Also the most improved States come from all over the country
and are NOT concentrated in any particular geopolitical zone. For example, Enugu has not suffered
from security challenges but two other high performing States, Adamawa and Bayelsa, have been
affected by conflict. An ongoing analysis is examining predictors of success but the wide variation
in performance itself suggests that State governments can influence key PHC service delivery even
in the current context.


       Figure 12: Change in 8 Maternal and Child Health Indicators by State, 2008 - 2013

             Enugu
           Bayelsa
            Jigawa
              Ondo
              Ogun
        Akwa Ibom
        Cross River
        FCT -Abuja
             Lagos
              Delta
            Sokoto
               Oyo
            Plateau
  -40                 0               40               80             120             160
Source: NDHS.
    III.     Summary of Political Economy and Institutional Assessment

23.    There is Widespread Support for SOML. SOML was inaugurated by the President in
October 2012. There appears to be widespread support for SOML, and PHC more broadly,
throughout the country. The FGON has increased its health budget substantially in the last four
years and there has been a recent effort through the “Health Bill” to ring fence funds for PHC. The
NHSDP also supports much of the SOML approach explicitly.

24.     Complex and Fragmented Institutional Arrangements for Delivering Public Sector
Health Services. The public service delivery system in Nigeria is characterized by overlapping
and unclear institutional arrangements. 4 Although Local Governments are supposed to provide
primary health care (PHC) service, Federal, State and local Government all play roles in the
financing and delivery of services. PHC staff are employed by LGAs who have also been
responsible for funding the operating costs of the PHC system. The weakness of LGA financial
reporting and the range of additional State and Federal Programs for PHC means that it has been
in general impossible to make an accurate consolidated assessment of the resources used for PHC.
At the same time, because most of the spending on PHC is directed through either the Federal or
local Government, State Ministries of Health have had little capacity to manage the PHC system,
affect overall spending, or manage the deployment of resources across the State. Almost no
financial resources are directly managed at the primary health facility level, except in some States
where Drug Revolving Funds (DRFs) have been established or where user charges are collected.

25.     Federal Government Plays an Important Role in PHC. It is estimated that the Federal
Government contributes about 22 percent of all the funding for PHC. These resources are often
supplied in kind, such as the provision of commodities, vaccines and specialized drugs for HIV
and Tuberculosis, and technical support to the States and LGAs. In addition, the FGON has a
number of special schemes to support PHC, including activities under the National Primary
Healthcare Development Agency (NPHCDA) such as (i) the Midwife Service Scheme (MSS)
which pays the salaries and support costs for the deployment of many thousands of midwives to
under-served rural areas; (ii) the Subsidy Reinvestment and Empowerment Program (SURE-P)
which provides support, inter-alia, for infrastructure, development of human resources, and a
conditional cash transfer Program; and (iii) the MDG Fund which supports the construction of
additional health facilities among other things and relies partly on counterpart funds from the
States.

26.     Efforts are Underway to Simplify the System. The FGON, through the NPHCDA, has
been promoting the establishment of State Primary Healthcare Development Agencies
(SPHCDAs) as a way of consolidating the management of the PHC system at the State level.
Twenty-four out of 36 States have established SPHCDAs, but the extent to which PHC system
staffing and finance have been consolidated under the SPHCDA varies greatly between States.



4
  The Bank has carried out recent in-depth studies of the structure of primary health care in Nigeria as well as
governance more broadly, including: (i) Political Economy and Institutional Assessment for Results-Based Financing
for Health, 2011; (ii) Nigeria: Improving Primary Health Care Delivery: Evidence from Four States, 2009; and (iii)
The Politics of Policy Reform in Nigeria Peter Lewis and Michael Watts October 2013.
27.      Accountability Mechanisms are Weak. It is not surprising given the complex
institutional set up that accountability mechanisms are weak. Because funding and other resources
come from diverse sources, and fund provision is unpredictable and often unrelated to budgets,
managers in the PHC system are not held accountable for results. Except where functions have
been consolidated under the SPHCDA there is no central point of accountability for the State PHC
system as a whole.

28.     Incentive and accountability reforms in NSHIP States. Compared to 2011 study,
review of experience in the NSHIP States, found that both the process of transferring management
of the PHC system to the SPHCDAs and the PBF pilot had contributed to at least a potential
strengthening in the accountability relationships through the system. PBF has created an
accountability link from the PHC facility to facility users, strengthened the relationship with the
community (through the ward committee) which may have some accountability benefits, as well
as encouraging stronger supervision from LG PHC Departments.

29.    Strengthening SPHCDAs may be a Necessary but not Sufficient Condition for
Success. It appears plausible that transfer and consolidation of PHC services under SPHCDA is
likely to be a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for achieving significant system
improvement. The suggestions that emerge include:

 (i)     Potential actions to be supported through DLIs should focus on ensuring the effective
         functioning of key management systems, and could potentially include: (i) the
         completion of the transfer of management and budgeting of PHC services to the
         SPHCDA; (ii) the implementation of agreed supervision plans; (iii) the collection and
         use of monitoring information; and (iv) the execution of agreed budgets, focusing in
         particular on the provision of non-staff operational funding.

 (ii)    Selection of performance rewards (monetary and non-monetary) and pilot accountability
         mechanisms at different levels of the health system: Additional individual monetary
         rewards beyond a nominal level should be restricted to staff at the facility level under
         PBF arrangements. Non-financial incentives in terms of recognition, and the provision
         of resources to improve service provision, should be the principal rewards at higher levels
         of the system.

 (iii)   Approaches to design of the Innovation Fund: Important to draw a distinction between
         the use of a prize fund approach in order to encourage genuinely new and innovative
         ideas, and the provision of support to funding the roll out of established approaches (such
         as PBF or the completion of the transfer of functions to SPHCDAs). There is likely to be
         a case for supporting both types of measure but different forms of support would be
         required to do this.

30.     Finance for PHC – Flow of Funds and Bottlenecks From the 2011 Study. The 2011
study identified the flow of funds for PHC in the three States, as summarized in Figure 18.
                    Figure 13: Fund flows for primary health care, NSHIP States 2011
 elected               President       Senate          House of Representatives                          Federal
 admin
                            Federation                                        OSSAP - MDG                Donors
              FMF                                F MoH
                            account
                            allocation                                                   NHIS   NPHCDA
                            committee


    elected                 Governor      State House of Ass.
                                                                                                         State
              JAC      S MoF              S MoLG& CA         S MoH                                       Donors
 admin
                                   LGSC      AGLGs       SPHCDA        HMB


                                                                            Secondary
                                                                           health care
                                                                              provider



     elected          LGA chairman                     LGA Council
                                                                                                         Local
                                                     Supervisory councillor for health

 admin         Dpt of Gnl
               purpose &                        LGA PHC
               admin                                                                            WDCs

                                                             Primary                              VDCs
                                                              Health
                                                           Care Provider




Source: OPM (2011).

31.     Factors Affecting Funds Flow to Facilities. The key bottlenecks in the flow of funds to
PHC facilities were: (i) the release of funds by the FAAC to State and LG Joint Accounts, made
in accordance with a fixed formula but dependent on receipts from oil sales; (ii) the release of
funds by the JAC to LGAs, nominally controlled by the SMoLG, but in practice subject to direct
influence from the Governor; (iii) decisions on the allocation between sectors of funds received by
LGAs, made by the F&GPC but subject to direct influence from the LG Chair. Because there was
no earmarking of financial transfers between levels of Government, funding for PHC ultimately
depended on decisions about priorities made at LG level in response to extremely uncertain
releases of funds to LGAs. The decision process at LG level was extremely opaque and lacked any
systematic reporting, let alone being subject to effective accountability against budgets. Since
delays in salary payment were likely to have an immediate political cost, salaries were prioritized
and the burden of fluctuations in resources fell on operational and capital spending. Where there
were DRFs these provided some level of resources under facility control and subject to some
community accountability. Capitation payments under the NHIS-MDG Program potentially
provided resources under facility control in Ondo, but in practice expenditure decisions were still
made at State level through the SIC.

32.    Changes in Health Financing. Although the process of transfer of financing and
functions to SPHCDAs is ongoing with the result that a process of consolidation of PHC financing
is taking place, considerable challenges were encountered in obtaining financial data to provide
any clear picture of funding trends for PHC. The problems of overall fiscal management resulting
from revenue uncertainty are reflected in the fact that revenue performance varied from 128
percent of budget in 2011 to 54 percentage in 2013 in Nasarawa, and from 67 percentage of budget
in 2011 to 90 percent in 2012. Only 65 percent of the budget was executed in Nasarawa in 2012,
and 52 percent in 2013. Information on expenditure out-turns in Ondo was only available for two
years (2010 and 2012) since 2009, where budget execution increased from 52 percent to 108
percent (although total expenditure increased), because of a sharp reduction in budgeted spending.
Overall, there does not yet appear to have been progress in moving towards more realistic
budgeting. However, the consolidation of all PHC spending in SPHCDAs provides some hope
both that information on PHC expenditure will be more transparent and better managed to focus
on priorities. In comparison to the financial flows in 2011 described earlier, the changes that are
taking place in the NSHIP States are the following:

       (i)      The role of the SMoLG and of LGAs in decision-making on PHC spending is ending,
                except to the extent that an LGA may decide to put additional resources into the sector
                beyond the core spending managed through the SPHCDA.

       (ii)     Since the SPHCDA budget comes under that of the SmoH, there should now be a single
                consolidated State health sector budget, with management of PHC expenditure
                consolidated under the control of the SPHCDA. This process should greatly increase
                transparency, accountability and remove the lowest level bottleneck to financial flows.
                In addition to the changes resulting from the consolidation of PHC functions under the
                SPHCDA, in facilities where PBF has been implemented, an additional direct flow of
                funds under the control of the facility has been established.

33.     Comparison with UBEC. A comparison may be made of the consolidation of PHC
spending under the SPHCDA with the establishment of the State Universal Basic Education
Boards (SUBEB) in the education sector.[1] In the education sector, the Universal Basic Education
Commission (UBEC) manages the Intervention Fund, a source of Federal Government funding for
basic education. Grants from this Fund are distributed annually to all States that are able match
UBEC funding for the infrastructure component (on a 50-50 basis) via the SUBEB. The majority
of basic education funding is transferred to the service delivery points (e.g., schools) via SUBEBs,
who are responsible for managing both salary and non-salary education spending. Salaries are
deducted from LGA allocations each month and these funds are transferred to SUBEBs for onward
transfer to personnel, including teachers. The State Ministries of Education (SMoE).

34.     Funds for Basic Education Flow from Three Distinct Channels: (i) direct Federal
funding from the UBEC to the SUBEBs, (ii) State resources, including matching funds for the
UBEC infrastructure component, and (iii) LGA budgets. UBEC funding is transferred directly to
the SUBEB, which utilizes the funds without any involvement of the SMoE. Matching funds from
the State to the SUBEBs (and allocations for other implementing agencies) are provided for under
the SMoE capital budget. The UBEC Program has significantly expanded the role and
responsibilities of the Federal Government in the funding of basic education and is a potential
source of tension between State Governments and UBEC. The matching fund system, the way it
[1]
      This discussion is based on OPM (2014).
is structured, does provide an incentive for State Governments to increase spending on basic
education, but in recent years the number of States qualifying for matching funding appears to be
falling.

35.     Some States Find the Federal Government’s Conditions Overly Stringent as They
Substantially Reduce State Autonomy and Flexibility in Strategic Planning for the Education
Sector. In addition, States are also concerned that the parallel management system is inefficient.
Importantly, UBEC funds are not tied to improved results or improved measurement of educational
outcomes. It is widely believed that additional funds are reaching the States and schools, but there
are differing views as to UBEC’s success. UBEC was established in 2004 but, despite 10 years of
experience and the expenditure of billions of dollars, no systematic Program evaluation has been
carried out.

   IV.     Summary of M&E Assessment

36.     Household Surveys. There are three major sources of household survey data in Nigeria
that are broad in coverage and focus beyond single diseases or interventions, NDHS, SMART, and
MICS.

37.      Nigeria Demographic Health Survey (NDHS). The NDHS collects demographic, health
service utilization, and basic health status information, and is implemented by the National
Population Commission (NpopC) with technical support from ICF Macro. The NDHS is conducted
using a well standardized methodology and rigorous sampling and has been carried out on average
a little less than every 5 years. Previous surveys were conducted in 1990, 1999, 2003, 2008 and
most recently 2013. NDHS obtains the majority of its support from USAID.

38.     Standardized Monitoring and Assessment of Relief and Transitions (SMART)
Survey. The SMART survey was developed as an annual household survey to provide State-level
information on nutritional status and related information for children and women. It has expanded
to meet the data needs of other Programs, primarily the SOML, to include information for basic
reproductive and child health indicators. It was initially implemented in 11 States (2012), but in
2014 it covered all States (36+ FCT). SMART is implemented by the National Bureau of Statistics
(NBS) with technical support and funding from UNICEF. It provides State-level estimates for key
indicators and information for scorecards used by the States to monitor their SOML progress.

39.     Quality Assurance for SMART. The results from SMART closely correlate with those
from the NDHS. For example, comparing State level immunization coverage in NDHS to SMART
yields a highly significant correlation coefficient with an R2 = 0.85 (see figure 19). Data is collected
on tablets which allows for various quality assurance checks. Extensive technical support
continues to be provided by UNICEF. The FGON has undertaken to continue to use the same
sampling methodology, same questionnaire, and same quality assurance mechanisms so as to
ensure comparability of data over time and ensure data remain robust. UNICEF has indicated its
continued interest in providing technical support for SMART at least until 2017.

40.     Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS). The MICS survey covers multiple aspects
of health and health practices focusing on women and children. It is implemented by the National
Bureau of Statistics (NBS), with technical support from UNICEF. Primary external partners are
UNICEF, UNFPA, and Department for International Development (DFID). The MICS was
conducted most recently in 2011 and provides zonal and urban-rural level estimates for key
indicators.

                Figure 14: Correlation of Penta3 Coverage (%) at State Level in NDHS v. SMART

                100
                90
                80
                70
   SMART 2014




                60
                50
                40
                30
                20
                10
                 0
                      0    10       20      30      40     50        60      70       80        90
                                                    NDHS 2013

Source: SMART 2014 and NDHS 2013 – Staff calculations.

41.     There are a few Other Relevant Surveys that Could Help Triangulate Results. These
include: (i) NSHIP baseline and follow-on surveys conducted by NpopC with technical support
from a private company: (ii) National HIV and Reproductive Health Survey (NARHS) most
recently conducted in 2012 by the FMOH in collaboration with the National AIDS Control Agency
(NACA), Society for Family Health (SFH) and NpopC which collects information on key
HIV/AIDS and RH indicators; and (iii) disease-specific surveys such as the Malaria Indicator
Survey.

42.     The Routine Health Management Information System (HMIS) is Rreceiving
Considerable Attention. The FMOH introduced a new HMIS system, called the District Health
Information System version 2 (DHIS-2): in 2010 to ensure standardized and harmonized reporting
across the country. The DHIS2 is a computer-based platform for the routine (monthly) collection
of HMIS data from facilities in each State. Facilities use standardized data collection forms and
submit a standardized report, either electronically or on paper, on a monthly basis. The DHIS2
website is open access (dhis2nigeria@org.ng) with a dashboard that shows reporting rates in real
time and is managed by the FMOH through the Health Planning Research & Statistics Division.

43.    DHIS-2 Faces Some Challenges. Some identified weaknesses which make the DHIS
impracticable for calculating the DLIs include the following:
 (i)      Differing levels of completeness for Government facilities. Routine HMIS information
          is currently submitted from approximately 61 percent of primary health care facilities —
          with reporting rates ranging from 96 percent to 0 percent across States. The accuracy of
          the denominators for reporting rates (number of public and private facilities) vary greatly
          by State—particularly for private facilities with only 38 percent of private facilities
          currently submitting reports. Although information is received from only primary health
          care facilities at present, by the end of 2014 secondary and tertiary facilities are expected
          to be reporting.

 (ii)     Lack of routinely applied internal checks for data consistency and routine systems for
          data quality assessments (DQA) to validate reported data against source data. Data
          validation assessments are being developed at the national level but are not presently
          being implemented.

 (iii)    Existence of significant differences in estimated coverage based on DHIS reports and
          population-based surveys, even for immunization services that are almost completely
          provided through the public sector. For example a comparison of SMART results and the
          appropriate DHIS2 data shows an insignificant and negative correlation with an R2 =.055
          (See Figure 20).

Figure 15: Correlation of Pentavelent3 Coverage (%) - SMART 2014 v. DHIS-2 2013


                        100
                         90
                         80
                         70
           SMART 2014




                         60                                       R Squared = 0.055
                         50
                         40
                         30
                         20
                         10
                          0
                              0   20           40            60            80            100
                                                DHIS 2013
         Source: SMART 2014 and NDHIS-2, staff calculations.

44.      There are Few Sources of Routine Information on Quality of Care. Some routine
practices being promoted by the FMOH to support and monitor quality of care include health
facility registration; Quality of care (QOC) checklists used at secondary level facilities and primary
level referral centers focusing on the service environment (e.g., triage/records/ organization); and
Integrated Supportive Supervision tools for assessment of quality of care at secondary level
facilities (first level referral facilities). However, the only systematic supervisory checklist
available for PHC facilities is the one used for PBF.

45.     Until Recently there were Almost no Health Facility Surveys in Nigeria. Until now
health facility surveys have not been carried out on a large scale with the exception of the Bank-
sponsored SDI survey. Plans are underway for the conduct of the first national level SARA survey.

46.     Service Delivery Indicator (SDI) Survey. The SDI is a standard survey conducted
through the World Bank to provide comparable data across countries. In Nigeria SDI was carried
out by a private sector firm. The focus of SDI is on service readiness (equipment and supplies at
the facility), finance and budget at the facility level human resources at the health facility (HF),
and service provider knowledge based on responses to vignettes. The SDI was conducted in 12
States Nigeria in 2014. Findings were consistent across States with results from the first six States
showing that an average of 36 percent providers accurately diagnosed conditions and 32 percent
adhered to clinical guidelines when interviewed using a vignette. Only 17 percent adequately
demonstrated knowledge for management of maternal/newborn complications. About 45 percent
of facilities had essential drugs available and about 18 percent equipment and infrastructure
required for basic services. There was more diversity in results between States for the availability
of items assessed using the facility audit.

47.     Service Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA). The SARA is a standard health
facility survey for primary health care and Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric and Neonatal
Care (CEmONC). The standard tools are adapted to each country. A Nigeria SARA is in the final
planning phase with main donors GAVI and Global Fund. It will be implemented early 2015 by
the NBS with technical support for all aspects of the survey by Measure Evaluation/John Snow
International (ME/JSI) and will cover both private and public facilities in all States.

48.    NSHIP Baseline Facility Survey. As part of the baseline for the NSHIP impact evaluation
a health facility survey was conducted in 6 States by NBS with technical assistance from the
University of South Carolina. NBS experienced delays in completing the survey.

49.      Recommendations for SOML PforR. At this time DHIS 2 is still evolving and will not
be able to provide credible data on DLIs. Also, some of the proposed DLIs will require population
based information while others need facility level data. Therefore, the proposed approach includes
a combination of SMART population based survey for population based indicators and health
facility surveys for quality of care indicators. The latter should be based on a harmonized SDI-
SARA methodology that is being developed at global level.

50.     Confidence Intervals. Using the sample sizes from the SMART and the published design
effects form NDHS 2013 (to take into account the effect of cluster sampling) it is possible to
calculate the expected confidence intervals (CIs) for SMART surveys at the State level for
immunization coverage (DPT3), contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR), and skilled birth attendance
(SBA). The CIs at zonal or national level would be substantially narrower but even at State level
they are reasonably narrow and would be able to detect Programmatically important changes (see
Table 13).
                 Table 3: Expected Confidence Intervals in Percentage Points of
               Selected Indicators from SMART Surveys for State Level Estimates

           Indicator Baseline Coverage (%) 95% CI + 90% CI + 80% CI +
                                       All States
           CPR                 10                2.74 2.13     1.40
           DPT3                38                7.20 5.61     3.68
           SBA                 38                7.83 6.11     4.00
                                   North West Zone
           CPR                 3.6               2.20 1.71     1.12
           DPT3               13.9               5.23 4.08     2.67
           SBA                12.9               5.44 4.24     2.78

   V.      Summary of Economic Evaluation

51.     Health Care Financing is Mostly Out-of-Pocket and Public Expenditure is Unlikely
to Increase Much. It is difficult to get reliable information on health care financing in Nigeria as
efforts by the Bank, WHO, Children’s Investment Fund Foundation (CIFF), and DFID can attest.
The Bank is in the process of carrying out a resource tracking study and this is proving challenging,
as have previous public expenditure reviews. While keeping in mind the limitations of the data,
there are a few salient points on which there is widespread agreement:

 (i)     There is high out-of-pocket (OOPs) expenditure representing about two/thirds of total
         health expenditure. This is consistent with the wide use of the private sector as described
         above, low levels of public expenditure on health, and the very limited use of risk
         pooling;

 (ii)    Public expenditure on health is low by any standard and represents less than 2 percent of
         GDP. With the recent re-basing of the GDP, public expenditure on health may be as low
         as 1 or 1.2 percent of GDP;

 (iii)   Public expenditure is inefficient, partly because there is little non-salary recurrent budget.
         What little there is does NOT end up at health facility level;

 (iv)    As described above, public expenditure is NOT correlated with actual results in Nigeria
         and there is little reliable information for making decisions about how to better use
         resources;

 (v)     Public expenditure is not equitable with more than half of public funds going to hospital
         care where the benefit incidence is pro-rich and fewer public funds going to primary
         health care which is significantly more pro-poor; and

 (vi)    Public health expenditure may increase as a result of economic growth and increased
         commitment to health (as exemplified by the recent passage of the “Health Bill”).
         However, the Government’s heavy dependence on oil (which accounts for about 75
            percent of its revenues), makes it unlikely that overall public revenues will increase
            substantially over the medium term. In this context increases in public expenditure on
            health are likely to be modest in the next few years, on the order of US$1-US$2 per capita
            per year.

52.     Public Financing and Enhanced Fiscal Federalism. The Bank has recently carried out
a review of fiscal federalism in Nigeria. 5 Nigerian federalism exhibits important positive features
that are associated with successful federations elsewhere such as the substantial autonomy enjoyed
by State Governments, hard budget constraints, and allocation of revenues among States according
to an objective formula that is consistently applied over time with little intrusion of political
concerns. However, Nigeria could take better advantage of these positive features of its federalism
to enhance the delivery of health and other services. Global experience suggests that conditional
transfers to subnational Governments can be effective in achieving national priorities so long as
the transfers are based on clear criteria and objectives, the conditions focus on outcomes and the
application of standards rather than inputs and processes, and that subnational Governments
manage the transferred resources themselves. Nigeria’s experience with conditional transfers is
limited but appears to confirm global lessons. The Universal Basic Education Program (UBE) is
generally seen not to be working well because of excessive Federal Government incursion into the
management of resources at State level. By contrast the experience with the MDG conditional
grants Program appears to have been more successful because there was less Federal involvement
in the management of transferred resources. This PforR can build on this experience and help the
FGON provide conditional disbursements to States based on objective criteria, measured
independently, and where management of transferred resources resides with State Governments.
The disbursements to State Governments envisioned under DLI’s 1, and 3 will provide an
opportunity for testing such a results-based approach.

53.     Recent Signing of the National Health Bill. The President of Nigeria in December 2014
signed into law the National Health Bill. The Bill is expected to give significant impetus to efforts
to reduce maternal and infant health indices in the country. One of the major provisions of the Bill
is the increased availability of funding for primary healthcare services through the Basic Health
Care Provision Fund (BHCPF). The law stipulates that not less than one percent of the
consolidated revenue of the Federal Government will be used to finance the BHCPF which in 2013
would have amounted to a little more than US$500 million. The increasing fiscal space for health
in Nigeria is both a reflection of Nigeria’s economic growth and recognition of GON to improve
health outcomes. However there is a possibility that the increased revenues through the BHCPF
annual grant could crowd out normal budgetary allocations to the health sector – it is unclear how
this will play out but critical to note that budgetary allocation releases to the health sector in Nigeria
are inconsistent and at best only partially implemented. It may as well turn out that rather than be
an additionally it could fill the role of unreleased budget allocations.

54.     NHIS will Receive 50 percent of the Funds and Already Employs a Results-Based
Payment Mechanism. The National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS) is the Government body
responsible for implementing the Social Health insurance scheme, which began implementation
in 2005. As Stated in the bill it will be responsible for the provision of basic minimum package of
health services to citizens and the NHIS hopes to procure MCH services through its network of
5
    Nigeria Economic Report No.1, May 2013.
public and private providers. The benefit package as envisaged by the NHIS closely aligns with
the indicators in the SOML package. The modus operandi of the NHIS is a performance based
financing mechanism, which pays for outputs. Providers in the NHIS are paid through capitation
and Fee for Service (FFS) payments. The capitated payments ensures providers maintain the
enrollees under them are healthy and hence will require less treatments whilst the FFS are
consumed when needed after clearance from a third party intermediary. The actual mechanism for
managing the funds to be received by the NHIS remains unclear but it is likely that it will continue
to utilize the funds as described. This is a mechanism, which further reinforces the proposed
operation in two ways: it is aligned with the cost effective health interventions and guarantees the
sustainability of an approach that pays for results.

55.     NPHCDA will Manage 45 Percent of the Funds but the Mechanism is Less Clear. The
NPHCDA will manage 45 percent of the funds from the BHCPF. The bill States that the agency
will disburse money to the States on the attainment of certain criteria (mostly commitment to
counterpart funding). Even though the bill does not explicitly State the basic minimum package of
health as it did for the NHIS it assumes that PHC boards will focus on basic minimum package as
well. There are specified amounts in the bill set aside for drugs and supplies, health facility
construction, and health worker training. This may limit the opportunity to make it results based
but the Bank has been asked by the FMOH for assistance in ensuring the most efficient use of the
funds. The projects financed under this part of the bill will be cleared by the NPHCDA and the
NPHCDA also has the power to withhold further disbursements to State and local Governments
for improper use of the funds.

56.     Economic Justification. The economic justification for a PforR is whether public
investment in the Program is warranted. For SOML there is a strong justification for Government
financing based on (i) addressing market failures; (ii) improving the allocative and technical
efficiency of public spending: (iii) improving equity; and

   a. Addressing Market Failures

57.     SOML is Designed in Part to Address Market Failures in Health in Nigeria. Low
immunization rates and low use of insecticide treated nets (ITNs) and other services that address
malaria represent market failures due to large externalities from controlling communicable
diseases. High immunization coverage and increasing ITN use provide “herd immunity” even to
those children who are not vaccinated or don’t sleep under ITNs. Increasing behaviors that promote
good health (such as family planning) also exhibit features of public goods. The design of the
PforR operation, through for example its selection of DLIs, further strengthens the incentive
systems to address public good features and large social externalities in the health sector.

   b. Allocative and Technical Efficiency

58.     The PforR will Help Nigeria Use its Health Resources More Efficiently. Compared to
other investment instruments, the PforR will help Nigeria move toward more optimal allocation
and achieve gains in technical efficiency in the following ways:
      (i)     Increased Allocations to the “Most Efficient Producers”: The PforR will help
              increase allocative efficiency by providing more funds to the best performing States (as
              measured by their rate of improvement). DLI 1 will act as a quasi-market mechanism
              to reward the most efficient producers of health services in terms of both quantity and
              quality. The more efficient the State the more resources they are allocated. This differs
              from a more traditional input financing model under which results achieved do not
              determine allocations to the various actors;

      (ii)    Incentive Effect will Increase Technical Efficiency. The PforR provides incentives
              to States and State officials to get better results from the resources they are already
              spending. The better results they achieve (i.e., the better their technical efficiency) the
              more benefits they will receive (including both financial incentives and non-financial
              rewards such as recognition, training, and “bragging rights”). This compares to
              previous investment approaches that did not focus on incentives to enhance efficiency.

      (iii)   Increasing Public Financing of Private Sector Delivery. Through DLI 4, the PforR
              will provide the State Governments the opportunity to work with the private sector
              much more than they have in the past. Contracting with private providers (both for-
              profit and non-profit) to deliver publicly financed services— will be a more efficient
              use of public resources than having the public sector deliver those services itself.

59.     SOML is Designed to Improve the Allocative and Technical Efficiency of Public
Spending on Health in Nigeria and the PforR will Build on that Objective. There has been a
mismatch between the disease burden and public budget allocations to health. Of special concern
are remaining high maternal and child mortality rates. SOML prioritizes services that are highly
cost effective6, 7, 8 (see table 14) in terms of the estimated cost per disability-adjusted life year
(DALY) saved. SOML interventions represent very efficient investments compared to other
possible expenditures such as the treatment of childhood leukemia or congenital defects. Sadly
many of the highly cost-effective SOML interventions are not reaching large proportions of the
population, especially the poor. SOML and the support it will receive through the PforR operation
is expected to increase the attention paid to currently under-funded and under used services thereby
increasing the allocative efficiency.

                 Table 4: Cost Effectiveness of Selected Interventions – US$/DALY


                                                                                        Cost Effectiveness
              Condition                              Intervention A
                                                                                          (US$/DALY)
    Malaria                             Insecticide Treated Nets (ITNs)                         11

6
  Laxminarayan R, Chow J, Shahid-Salles SA (2006) Intervention cost-effectiveness: overview of main messages.
In: Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, Alleyne G, Claeson M, Evans DB et al (eds) Disease Control Priorities
in Developing Countries, vol 2. World Bank/Oxford University Press, Washington, DC.
7
  Ruth Levine, Ana Langer, Nancy Birdsall, Gaverick Matheny, Merrick Wright, and Angela Bayer (2006)
Contraception. In: Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, Alleyne G, Claeson M, Evans DB et al (eds) Disease
Control Priorities in Developing Countries, vol 2. World Bank/Oxford University Press, Washington, DC
8
  Imdad A et al. Vitamin A supplementation for preventing morbidity and mortality in children from 6 months to 5
years of age. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010, (12):CD008524.
                                                                              Cost Effectiveness
           Condition                           Intervention A
                                                                                (US$/DALY)
 Unwanted Pregnancy                Family Planning Programs                          117
 Tuberculosis, diphtheria-         Additional coverage of traditional
 pertussis-tetanus, polio,         Expanded Program on                             7
 measles                           Immunization
 Tuberculosis                      Directly Observed Treatment                   301
 HIV/AIDS                          Voluntary Counseling and Testing               47
 Stroke (Ischemic)                 Aspirin                                       149
                                   Increased overall quality of care
 Maternal Mortality                                                               86
                                   and coverage
                                   Intermittent preventive treatment
 Malaria                                                                          19
                                   with Sulfadoxine –Pyrimethamine
 Integrated Management of          Integrated Management of
                                                                                  39
 Childhood Illnesses               Childhood Illnesses
 Ischemic Heart Disease            Coronary Artery Bypass Graft                36793
 HIV/AIDS                          EMTCT                                         192
 HIV/AIDS                          Antiretroviral therapy                        922
                                   Second opportunity measles
 Measles                                                                           4
                                   vaccination
 Breast Cancer                     Radiation therapy                           23,300
A
  Interventions in bold are those prioritized by SOML.
Source: Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, Alleyne G, Claeson M, Evans DB et al (eds)
Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, vol 2. World Bank/Oxford University Press,
Washington, DC 2006.

60.    Results-Based Approaches will be More Efficient than Input-Based Strategies. The
experience of the Bank, for example through the Second Health Systems Development Project
(HSDP II), is that providing input financing does not obviously yield increased service delivery.
By contrast, the funding under NSHIP does indicate that results-based approaches will produce
more and better quality health services. For the reasons noted above SOML’s results-based
approach is expected to improve resource allocation and achieve greater technical efficiency gains
compared to an input-based strategy.

   c. Improving Equity

61.     SOML’s Stated Objective is to Improve Equity in the Health Sector in Nigeria, and
the PforR will Support that Objective. As indicated in table 5 below maternal and child health
outcomes in Nigeria are poor on average and are especially bad for the poorest two income
quintiles. The poorest two income quintiles suffer from similarly poor HNP outcomes and have
nearly a one in five chance of dying before their fifth birthday. The ratio of the poorest to richest
quintiles varies is significantly higher than the average in West Africa. Children from the poorest
quintile are 3 times more likely to be stunted than children from the wealthiest quintile. Access to
care is even more unequal with the wealthiest quintile 11 times more likely to be fully immunized
or to have a skilled birth attendant than the poorest quintile. As can be appreciated in the bottom
part of Table 5, the differentials in access to, and utilization of, health services by income quintile
are extreme (see Figure 21).

                    Table 5: Health Outcomes and Outputs by Income Quintile

                                         Q1            Q2          Q3    Q5
                                                                         Q4     Ratio of
   Outcome Indicators                 (Poorest)                       (Richest) Q1 to Q5
   Infant mortality rate per 1000         92            94   71   65     48       1.9
   Under-five mortality rate per 1000    190           187 127 100       73       2.6
   Stunting children under 5 (%)        53.8           46.1 35.1 26.3   18.0      3.0
   Underweight children under 5 (%)     41.9           34.8 25.7 22.1   15.6      2.7
   Output Indicators
   Fully immunized children (%)          7.0           18.5 39.7 60.0             79.5      11.4
   Skilled Birth Attendance (%)          5.7           17.3 39.9 62.1             85.3      15.0
   Antenatal care 1+ visits (%)         24.6           44.8 67.8 85.2             94.5       3.8
Source: NDHS 2013 and Staff Calculations.

       Figure 16: Coverage of Services Among the Richest and Poorest Income Quintiles

           100                              94.5
            90                                              85.3
                          79.5
            80
            70
            60
            50                                                                           Poorest
            40
                                     24.6                                                Richest
            30                                                                 23.4
            20
                      7                               5.7
            10                                                           0.9
             0
                  DPT3/Penta3     Antenatal Care    Skilled Birth       Modern CPR
                                                     Attendance
         Source: NDHS 2013.

62.     SOML Emphasizes Equity in Practical Ways. SOML’s commitment to improving
equity is evident from; (i) its focus on essential intervention where coverage among the poor is
very low; (ii) its focus on the North East and North West regions of the country (see table 6 and
Figure 17); and (iii) its desire to strengthen primary health care facilities where the benefit
incidence is significantly pro-poor (See Figure 18).

63.     Geographical Inequity – The North East and North West Lag far Behind. In addition
to income inequality, there are also important geographical inequities. The U5MR is twice as high
in the North West compared to the South West (185/1000 and 90/1000 respectively) and service
delivery is also far behind. For example, immunization coverage (DPT3/Penta3) is 14 percent and
21 percent in the North West and North East respectively compared to 70 percent in the South and
80 percent in the Southeast (see Table 6). It does not appear that the geo-political zones have
different rates of progress which is surprising because it should be easier for the North   East and
the North West to improve given their low baselines (see Figure 22).
                 Table 6: Key Health Outcomes and Outputs by Geopolitical Zone
 Indicator                          North- North- North             South        South-     South
                                     East       West Central        South         West      -East
 Under-5 Mortality Rate               160        185       100         91          90        131
 Stunting (low height for age)       42.3       54.8       29.3       18.3        22.2       16.0
 %
 Total Fertility Rate                 6.3        6.7        5.3        4.3         4.6        4.7
 DPT3 Vaccination coverage,          20.6       13.9       43.9       69.8        65.5       80.7
 %
 Skilled Birth Attendance, %         19.9       12.3       46.5       55.4        82.5       82.2
Source: NDHS 2013.

               Figure 17: Antenatal Care Coverage 2003-13 by Geopolitical Zone
  100

   80                                                                             North Central
                                                                                  North East
   60
                                                                                  North West
   40                                                                             South East
                                                                                  South South
   20
                                                                                  South West
    0
                2003                  2008                 2013
Source: NDHS.

   a. Addressing Insurance Market Failures

64.     SOML has the Potential to Address the Inefficiency and Inequity of a Health System
that Relies Heavily on out-of-pocket Spending due to the Lack of Insurance and Weak Public
Sector Funding and Delivery of Basic Services. The nascent National Health Insurance Scheme
(NHIS) currently covers only 3-4 percent of the population, mostly Federal Government
employees. The vast majority of people have no access to risk pooling, leaving them vulnerable to
catastrophic spending and potentially unable to pay for health expenses. SOML will increase the
coverage of vaccines, nutritional supplements, antenatal care and delivery attendance to everyone,
regardless of insurance status. This allows the uninsured majority to access basic healthcare and
reduces the risk of serious morbidity and catastrophic spending while insurance markets continue
to develop. In this way SOML contributes to Universal Health Coverage (UHC).
       Figure 18: Utilization of PHC and Secondary Health Facilities by Income Quintile

            35
                                                               31
            30      27
            25           23                               23             Q1 (Poorest)
                              21
            20                     17             17 18                  Q2
            15                          12   13                          Q3
            10                                                           Q4
             5                                                           Q5 (Richest)
             0
                          PHC                   Secondary
          Source: Service Delivery Indicators (SDI) Survey 2013.

65.     SOML Provides Public Financing but is Not Restricted to Public Provision of Health
Services. In order to reach people where they seek care, SOML envisions increased engagement
with the private health sector. The SOML Program document commits to finding ways of
Government engaging with the private sector in meaningful ways. It explicitly encourages Public-
Private Partnerships.

66.     Private Sector is a Major Provider of Health Services. While the data are a bit sparse
and sometimes uncertain, it is clear that the private sector is an important provider of HNP services.
According to the NDHS 2013, 69 percent of children with fever are treated by private providers
while 37 percent of skilled birth attendance and 55 percent of family planning services are provided
by the private sector (see figure 24). It is NOT the case that the private sector only serves the
richer income quintiles. Analysis of the 2013 NDHS indicates that among people with fever, 72
percent of the poorest income quintile get their care in the private sector. This is actually a little
higher than the richest income quintile where 69 percent of patients source their care in the private
sector. Patent and proprietary medicine vendors (PPMVs) provide care to 65 percent of poor
children with fever who access the private sector. Thus any attempt to improve HNP service
delivery will need to address the challenge of how to constructively engage with the private sector.
Until recently, the FGON has had little interaction with the private health sector and is only now
starting to strengthen its links with private providers. The PforR’s innovation fund (DLI 4) further
incentivizes private sector engagement including many kinds of public-private partnerships.
                               Figure 19: Sources of Care by Sector


  100
   90
   80
   70
   60
   50                                                                                Public Sector
   40                                                                                Private Sector
   30
   20
   10
    0
           Treatment of      Treatment of     Family Planning   Birth Attendance
           Fever/Cough         Diarrhea


Source: NDHS 2013.

67.     Efficiency Estimates. In the past, Nigeria has suffered relatively low efficiency in
improving coverage of basic services. Based on estimations from the PDU, annual total
Government expenditure on PHC ranges between US$849 and US$1,642 million. Comparing this
against the improvement in coverage of these services shown by Nigerian DHS 2008 and 2013, it
appears that for each percentage point increase in the index (consisting of six key indicators in DLI
1), average cost is between US$134.9 and US$260.7 million.

68.     With the Implementation of SOML PforR, Incentives will be Introduced for State to
be more Results Focused and More Efficient. This shift which will help catalyze the impact
and efficiency of Government spending on primary care. It is expected that more results will be
achieved under PforR, and even taking account of additional fund for incentives, the cost per
percentage point increase in the index will still decrease. Table 17 shows that the cost of a
percentage point increase in the index can be reduced between 9.6 percent and 47.8 percent,
depending on the scenario used. Four scenarios were examined based on (i) the proportion of all
public health expenditure dedicated to PHC is 29 percent or 15 percent; and (ii) the increase in the
index is 13 percentage points per year (the target for the operation) or is 8 percentage points per
year (2 percentage points higher than the current rate of improvement). The proportion of the
Government health budget spent on PHC was estimated by the PDU using a careful examination
of budget line items in a sample of States. The 15 percent estimate is a very conservative figure
used as a lower bound. Seeing as salaries account for most public expenditures on health and there
are more Government health workers involved in PHC it is unlikely that PHC expenditure could
be lower than this. As part of DLI 5, each State will be incentivized to report on its expenditure on
PHC. Thus, better estimates of Government spending on PHC will be available during the
Program, allowing for an updated analysis of efficiency.
                        Table 7: Cost Effectiveness PforR Under Various Scenarios


                                     Proportion of           Expected              Reduction of unit
                                      government          percentage point        cost per percentage
                                     spending on          improvement in           point increase in
                                         PHC             index under PforR          index ( percent)
                Scenario 1               29%                    13%                     47.8%
                Scenario 2               15%                    13%                     44.4%
                Scenario 3               29%                     8%                     15.2%
                Scenario 4               15%                     8%                      9.6%

70.     Economic Impact of SOML. The economic impact of SOML is likely to be very large
and may derive from creating the conditions for economic take-off particularly improved human
capital formation through greater returns to education and speeding up the demographic
dividend.

71.     Nigeria Cannot Rely on Growth Alone to Produce HNP Outcomes. While middle and
high income countries have better health outcomes on average, greater wealth does not inexorably
lead to better health. In oil-driven economies in Sub Saharan Africa – including Nigeria as well as
Gabon, Angola and Equatorial Guinea— high under-five mortality rates persist despite relatively
high GNI per capita. Even in countries where economic growth and HNP outcomes are both strong,
wealth did not lead to health. In the East Asian economies improvements in health outcomes
preceded rapid growth (see Figure 25). 9 Nigeria’s experience highlights that economic growth
does not inevitably lead to better health and specific concerted efforts are required. However, there
is evidence that suggests improvements in health may contribute to economic growth.

72.      Economic Impact of the Human Capital Improvements. Micro-economic evidence
shows that improving health can contribute to economic growth by promoting human capital
formation and increasing labor supply and productivity. In Africa and Latin America, child health
interventions to improve nutrition, provide vitamin supplementation, promote breastfeeding and
institutionalize deworming – all activities included in SOML—have been shown to produce
economic returns as well as health benefits. In addition:

      (i)      Micronutrient deficiencies alone in Nigeria add up to an estimated loss of over US$1.5
               billion in GDP every year.
      (ii)     In Kenya, deworming was found to be a cost effective approach to improving human
               capital formation, increasing school attendance by a year for only US$ 3.50 per student.
               Adults who received deworming as children have been found to work an additional 5
               hours per week and to earn 20 percent more on average. They are also more likely to
               be employed in the formal sector.
      (iii)    In Guatemala, boys who benefited from an early childhood nutrition intervention had
               46 percent higher earnings 30 years later. 10


9
    “Health or Wealth: Which Comes First?” Africa Health Forum: Finance and Cap acity for Results. 2013.
10
     Ibid.
                                    (iv)   A randomized impact evaluation in Nigeria showed that the offer of a workplace based
                                           malaria testing and treatment Program increases worker earnings by approximately 10
                                           percent.11

                                     Figure 20: Health before Wealth - Infant Mortality Rates & GNI per capita in East Asia



                                                 CHINA                                                           SOUTH KOREA
                         100                                         7000                                   80                 25000
 Infant Motality/1000 live births




                                                                                                            70




                                                                             GNI per capita (current US$)
                                                                     6000
                                    80                                                                                         20000
                                                                                                            60
                                                                     5000
                                    60                                                                      50                 15000
                                                                     4000
                                                                                                            40
                                    40                               3000                                   30                 10000
                                                                     2000                                   20
                                    20                                                                                         5000
                                                                     1000                                   10
                                     0                               0                                       0   1962          0
                                                                                                                 1966
                                                                                                                 1970
                                                                                                                 1974
                                                                                                                 1978
                                                                                                                 1982
                                                                                                                 1986
                                                                                                                 1990
                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                 1998
                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                 2010
                                           1993
                                           1969
                                           1973
                                           1977
                                           1981
                                           1985
                                           1989

                                           1997
                                           2001
                                           2005
                                           2009




                                            MALAYSIA                                                              THAILAND
  70                                                                     12000 100                                             6000
  60                                                                     10000                                                 5000
                                                                                                            80
  50
                                                                         8000                                                  4000
  40                                                                                                        60
                                                                         6000                                                  3000
  30
                                                                                                            40
                                                                         4000                                                  2000
  20
  10                                                                     2000                               20                 1000
                  0                                                      0                                   0                 0
                                     1962
                                     1966
                                     1970
                                     1974
                                     1978
                                     1982
                                     1986
                                     1990
                                     1994
                                     1998
                                     2002
                                     2006
                                     2010




                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                 1967
                                                                                                                 1971
                                                                                                                 1975
                                                                                                                 1979
                                                                                                                 1983
                                                                                                                 1987
                                                                                                                 1991

                                                                                                                 1999
                                                                                                                 2003
                                                                                                                 2007
                                                                                                                 2011




73.    SOML Supports a Fertility Transition which may allow Nigeria to Accelerate Growth
by Capturing a Demographic Dividend. Nigeria has an opportunity to obtain the kind of
demographic dividend that has played an important role in the growth of East Asian and other
economies. A demographic dividend is achieved when the ratio of economically productive adults
to (mostly younger) dependents rapidly increases. When Nigeria will capture its economic
dividend crucially depends on how quickly fertility declines (see figure 26). Capturing a
demographic dividend requires (i) a fertility transition to a substantially lower level than Nigeria
has so far achieved; (ii) an improvement in human capital formation and (iii) the creation of

11
  Health information, treatment, and worker productivity: Experimental evidence from malaria testing and treatment among
Nigerian sugarcane cutters, Dillon et al, 2014.
roughly 2 to 2.5 million new jobs per year. SOML aims to accelerate the fertility transition by
increasing the contraceptive prevalence rate and reducing child mortality through prevention and
treatment of common childhood illnesses. Improving child health and nutrition also promotes
human capital formation. Creating jobs as well will require good governance, solid
macroeconomic management, a carefully designed trade policy, efficient infrastructure, and well-
functioning markets. The Bank is working with the Government of Nigeria to develop
infrastructure, increase trade and ultimately create jobs.


                                   Figure 21: Dependency Ratio Over Time in East Asia and Nigeria
                                                    (with Different Population Projections)
                                          2.5
             non-working-age population
               Ratio of working-age to




                                          2.0




                                          1.5




                                          1.0
                                            1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
                                             East Asia   Nigeria low Nigeria medium   Nigeria high


74.     If Nigeria can Achieve a Fertility Transition and Improve Institutions Critical to the
Economy, a Substantial Acceleration in Growth is Within Grasp. Specifically, if Nigeria
achieves the medium fertility scenario posited by the World Population Prospects, increases life
expectancy to the world average, and improves institutions (such as rule of law and bureaucratic
efficiency) in keeping with similar countries, it is estimated that, by 2030 (i) its per capita GDP
would be 31 percent higher; (ii) an additional 32 million people would be lifted out of poverty;
and (iii) its economy would be 50 percent larger as compared with a status quo scenario with no
demographic dividend.12 By promoting a fertility transition and contributing to human capital
formation through better health and nutrition, SOML creates an opportunity for Nigeria to reap the
economic benefits of a surge in productivity relative to the age structure of the population. On the
contrary, if the status quo of a sluggish fertility transition and uneven improvements in child health
persists, Nigeria will not be able to capture a demographic dividend.



12 Bloom D, Finlay J, Humair S et al. 2010 Prospects for Economic Growth in Nigeria: A Demographic
Perspective. Paper presented at the IUSSP Seminar on Demographics and Macroeconomic Performance held at
Novotel, Gare de Lyon, Paris, France 4-5 June 2010.
75.     Financial Sustainability. The incremental costs of the PforR are modest, about US$0.71
per capita per year. Even with possible decreases in oil revenues the Government of Nigeria likely
has the fiscal space to finance such an increase in health expenditures. Importantly, the PforR tests
a way of effecting fiscal transfers that would increase the efficiency of public expenditure, even
without increases in overall budget allocations. For example, the MDG Conditional Grant Scheme
could employ the same results-based approach of the PforR at no additional cost. Even up to
ministerial level, health expenditures are perceived to suffer from a low benefit/cost ratio. The
result-based approach of the proposed PforR directly links budgetary expenditure with
improvements in health service delivery providing an opportunity to institutionalize this more
efficient means of using scarce public resources.

VI: Assessment of Specific DLIs

76.    This assessment looks at the global and Nigerian experience with approaches that are
relevant to the design of the DLIs 1 and 4. It looks at: (i) the evidence on improved management
capacity on health services; and (ii) the effectiveness of results-based grants to sub-national
Governments; and (iii) innovation and learning funds in the private and public sectors.

       a. The Effects of Good Management on Delivery of Health Services

77.      DLI 1 relies on improved management at State level to influence what happens in health
facilities so the latter become more effective and efficient. Below in roughly ascending order of
methodological rigor is the evidence supporting the effect of better State/district management on
service delivery:

 (i)      Anecdotal Evidence in Nigeria. It is a cliché to say that “management matters” but the
          experience in Nigeria with PBF indicates that this is true. When the officers in charge
          (OICs) of poorly-performing are changed and new OICs are assigned, performance often
          changes, sometimes quite dramatically. Similarly, many observers feel that the surprisingly
          good performance of PBF in Adamawa (very rapid progress despite a difficult security
          situation) is due to the talented management of the SPHCDA Executive Director supported
          by high quality consultants.

 (ii)     Variation in State Performance in Nigeria. As described above (see figure 12) there is
          very wide variation in the performance of Nigerian States in terms of their change in
          coverage levels from 2008 to 2013. There are 5 or 6 States that have made remarkable
          progress, much higher than the national average while there are other States where
          performance deteriorated substantially. There is no simple explanation for the wide
          variation and it does make sense that it reflects State level management.

 (iii)    Correlation Studies in Coronary Care Units. A recent study13 in 579 American coronary
          care units demonstrated that management practices that focused on standardizing care,
          tracking of key performance indicators, setting targets, and incentivizing employees had a
          very large effect on decreasing 30 day mortality rates from acute heart attacks. These kind
          of management practices are similar to the ones envisioned under the PforR.
13
     KJ McConnell et al; Management Practices and the Quality of Care in Cardiac Units, JAMA 2013 March 18.
 (iv)   Effect of Systematic Supervision. A recent Cochrane Collaboration meta-analysis14 of
        studies in low income settings suggests that supervision can have an influence on provider
        behavior and the care that they provide. More work is needed and the rigor of the studies
        needs to be improved.

 (v)    Contracting-In Managers. There is a long tradition of getting private sector managers to
        manage publicly owned assets. In the health sector this has been done on a large scale in
        Pakistan where it covers districts with a population of more than 100 million people. The
        results have been encouraging and represent large efficiency gains because the incremental
        costs have been essentially none. Given that contracting in managers does not change the
        health workers or basic arrangements, the experience in Pakistan and elsewhere indicates
        that improved management can make a hug difference.

 (vi)   Contracting Out Service Delivery.          A quasi-experimental study in Cambodia
        demonstrated a very large improvement in service delivery (a 1 baseline standard
        deviation) when NGOs were contracted to deliver health services. Interestingly the NGOs
        had to rely on existing health workers which gave rise to the first recorded use of
        performance-based financing (PBF). Other studies from other settings confirm these results
        and strongly suggest that it is the improved management that contracted organizations
        bring that determines their success.

     b. DLI 1: Experience with Results-Based Grants to Sub-National Government

78.     Lessons from the Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) Intervention Fund
are discussed under the institutional arrangements section above.

79.     Global Experience. Performance based grant systems are intended to be integrated into
national systems of intergovernmental fiscal transfers as a strategy for the delivery of public goods
and services. Through incentives, sub-national Governments are influenced to improve
performance (especially the cost, efficiency, quality and effectiveness of service provision),
comply with central Government policy imperatives and improve service delivery. Although there
is a dearth of RCTs, evidence from case studies and evaluations shows that performance-based
transfers are effective in improving service delivery and local Government performance. Overall,
performance-based incentive schemes in the health sectors of several low and middle income
countries, including Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Indonesia, have had positive impacts on
performance with resulting efficiency and accountability gains, quality and equitable service
delivery. Results from Argentina’s ‘Plan Nacer’ and Brazil are discussed in more detail below but
they confirm the conclusion that where national financial transfers to States and municipalities are
linked to verifiable results, there can be an improvement in health outcome indicators and
achievements of agreed service delivery targets.

80.   Gates Immunization Leadership Challenge. Recognizing the critical role of political
commitment at the State level in the fight to eliminate polio and improve routine immunization

14
  X Bosch-Capblanche et al: Managerial supervision to improve primary health care in low and middle-income
countries. Cochrane Collaboration 2011.
(RI), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), launched the Immunization Leadership
Challenge in September 2011. The objective was to use incentive based advocacy to stimulate
direct oversight and leadership by State Governors.

81.    The Challenge Identified Seven Winning States. One best performing State from each
geopolitical zone and one State with overall most improved performance based on a set of pre-
defined indicators. In addition to recognition from Bill Gates at an awards ceremony, each
winning State was awarded a grant of US$500,000 to be used for a priority health intervention
which could potentially be increased to US$1,000,000 if the State provided counterpart funds of
US$250,000.

82.     The Challenge Appears to have Galvanized the Governors to Pay Closer Sttention
to RI and Polio Eradication. Although it is a little difficult to ascribe specific successes to it. It
is unclear whether it has improved RI. However, Nigeria has now gone more than 4 months
without a case of wild polio. For many State officials, the monetary incentive though
appreciated, was less of a motivation than meeting Mr. Gates. Furthermore, the ’bragging rights’
that come with being able to outperform their peers appears to have been a good motivator.

83.     Millennium Development Goals Conditional Grant Scheme (MDGs CGS). In
2005, Nigeria successfully negotiated a US$18 billion debt relief package from the Paris Club
of creditors, giving rise to annual debt savings of roughly US$1 billion. The Conditional Grants
Scheme (CGS) channels these debt relief gains (DRGs) to States and local Government areas
(LGAs) in a bid to address Nigeria’s most pressing developmental needs and catalyze the
achievement of the MDGs. States and LGAs apply competitively for grants from the CGS,
which is dedicated to supporting sectoral initiatives, to help attain the MDGs.

84.      Under the Scheme, States and LGAs are Required to Provide Matching
Counterpart Funds for Supported Projects in Priority Sectors and Areas. Access to grants
is conditioned on several criteria including a needs assessment, community participation, public
expenditure reforms and modernization of State budget processes. Though there has been no
formal evaluation of the Scheme, an assessment of a sample of State projects funded by the
CGS between 2007 and 2009 shows that the CGS has largely met its objectives with high
completion rates of 98 percent in 2007, and 88 percent in 2008. The Scheme’s success has been
attributed to wide stakeholder engagement, competitive access to funds, flexibility to State
priorities and accountability for funds. Furthermore, by requiring States to have public sector
reforms underway, particularly in managing public expenditure and developing human
capacity, as part of the criteria for applications, the grant can be used to successfully leverage
reform in the public sector.

86.     Brazil’s Family Health Program (PSF): Created in 1994, the Family Health Program
is a primary care Program which seeks to provide a full range of quality health care to families
in their homes, at clinics and in hospitals. Based on this approach, the family health team
includes doctors, nurses, dentists and community health agents. In 1998, due to the slow uptake
of the Program by municipalities, the PSF performance based financing scheme was
implemented to provide incentives, as cash grants, to municipalities to establish the Program
and expand to the poorest Brazilians. A flat one-time transfer is provided by the Federal
Government for establishing each new PSF team and variable transfers are given to incentivize
continuous coverage extension.

88.     Recent Reforms have Focused on Improving Coverage, Effectiveness, Quality and
Efficiency of PSF. In particular in large cities with financing from the Federal Government
varying according to compliance with performance indicators. There has been an increase in the
number of family health teams across the country and analysis of achievements in health service
indicators, such as maternal and child health (prenatal coverage) and reduction in hospital
admissions for ARI and diarrhea show improvements commensurate to the level of PSF coverage
in participating municipalities.

89.      Argentina’s Plan NACER. Plan Nacer, the provincial social insurance Program that
targets uninsured pregnant women and children under six years of age, was launched in 2004 in
nine provinces in Argentina with a nationwide roll-out in 2007. The objective of Plan Nacer is to
provide an established MCH package of services using a capitation-based grant transfer between
different levels of Government. Of the funds transferred to the Provincial Government, 60 percent
are ‘monthly base transfers’ determined by the number of eligible beneficiaries enrolled in Plan
Nacer. The remaining 40 percent of the payment is released based on the achievement of Stated
targets for ten output and outcome health indicators (tracers) calculated quarterly. The Provincial
government subsequently reimburses the providers- public and private- on a fee-for-service basis.
Quarterly audits are carried out in each province by independent auditors who verify enrollment
eligibility of beneficiaries and achievement of tracer targets. By 2009, the Program had reached
80percent of the target population in five States with significant increases in immunization rates
as well as proportion of women seeking prenatal care and receiving four prenatal visits.

   c. DLI 4 – Experience with Innovation and Learning Funds

92.    Experience with YouWiN! Currently in its fourth cycle, Youth Enterprise with
Innovation in Nigeria (YouWiN!) is a FGON initiative, with development partner support, with
the objective of creating jobs and encouraging innovation and youth entrepreneurship. It is
implemented through annual business plan competitions providing grants of between 1million and
10 million Naira (US$6000 and US$60,000) to about 1,200 to 1,500 awardees to establish new
businesses or expand existing ones.

93.     The Results Emerging from YouWiN! Appear Positive. People close to the Program
feel that some of the factors that were helpful to YouWin! include a focus on merit, independent
adjudication of proposals by business experts, placing a premium on innovation, feasibility as well
as a demonstrable track record of entrepreneurial capabilities. Additionally, a systematic
mechanism for grant disbursement in tranches triggered by external validation of attainment of
pre-determined milestones; and capacity building through training “boot camps” and mentorship
Programs for awardees have resulted in successful Program implementation.
94.    Global Experience with Challenge Funds: Innovation and Learning Funds have been
used by a number of development agencies and recent reviews15 of experience have highlighted
the importance of the following:

     (i)    Defining a clear and explicit rationale with a very clear and operational definition of
            innovation.

     (ii)   Establishing transparent and predetermined criteria for awarding grants.

     (iii) Defining the maximum and minimum grant sizes and funding period.

     (iv) Defining the cost-sharing expectations and how the grant may be used.

     (v)    Identifying any additional support that may be provided such as technical assistance.

     (vi) Including fund management costs which have typically represented 20-50percent of the
          total budget.

     (vii) Deciding on whether there should be some performance-based or additional incentive
           element to the grant (e.g., some additional reward for success).

     (viii) A strong emphasis on monitoring and oversight to ensure grants are not misused.

     (ix) A strong emphasis on lesson learning, evaluation and impact assessment, recognizing that
          success should be judged against actual and potential scope for broader uptake, not just on
          the success or failure of individual projects.

     (x)    Weaknesses in past experience with Innovation Funds to promote innovation have included
            a failure to ensure that funded projects are innovative, potentially replicable, and genuinely
            additional, as well as paying insufficient attention to evaluating impact.




15
 Sources: (i) Brain, A., N. Gulrajani and J. Mitchell, Meeting the challenge: How can enterprise challenge funds be
made to work better? EPS PEAKS, April; (ii) SIDA Challenge Funds – Guidelines, Swedish International
Development Agency.
