                                    96548


INCLUSIVE HOUSING FINANCE PROGRAM




                    1
                                    THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT

                                           Currency Equivalents
                                  Unit of Currency = Egyptian Pound (LE)
                                  US$ 1 = LE 7.63 (as of March 31, 2015)
                                                Fiscal Year
                                               July 1–June 30
                                      ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS



AHS       American Housing Survey                          LSDF      Local Service and Development Fund
ALMO      Arm’s Length Management Organization             M&E       Monitoring and Evaluation
AMP       Affordable Mortgage Program                      MBA       Mortgage Bankers Association
          Central Agency for Public Mobilization and
CAPMAS                                                     MFA       Mortgage Finance Authority
          Statistics
CBE       Central Bank of Egypt                            MFC       Mortgage Finance Company
CIDA      The Canadian International Development Agency    NA        Not Applicable
CONAVI    La Comisión Nacional de Vivienda                 NAHB      National Association of Home Builders
DLI       Disbursement-Linked Indicators                   NAR       National Association of Realtors
DPL       Development Policy Loan                          NHP       National Housing Program
EFSA      Egyptian Financial Supervisory Authority         NPV       Net Present Value
FHFB      Federal Housing Finance Board                    NUCA      New Urban Communities Authority
ELMPS     Egypt Labor Market Panel Survey                  NUO       National Urban Observatory
EMRC      Egyptian Mortgage Refinance Company              PD&R      Policy Development and Research
ESA       Egyptian Survey Authority                        PforR     Program-for-Results Financing
FONHAPO   Fondo Nacional de Habitaciones Populares         PPP       Public Private Partnership
FY        Fiscal Year                                      REIT      Real Estate Investment Trusts
GACH      General Authority for Cooperative Housing        REPD      Real Estate Publicity Department
GDP       Growth Domestic Product                          SEDESOL   Secretaría de Desarrollo Social
GOPP      The General Organization for Physical Planning   SHF       Social Housing Fund
GSF       Guarantee and Subsidy Fund                       SOMA      Survey of Market Absorption
HBRC      Housing and Building Research Center             TA        Technical Assistance
HDB       Housing and Development Bank                     UAE       United Arab Emirates
HPI       House Price Index                                UK        United Kingdom
HUD       Housing and Urban Development                    USA       United States of America
                                                                     United States Agency for International
LE        Egyptian Pound                                   USAID
                                                                     Development
LIHTC     The Low Income Housing Tax Credit                US$       United States Dollar




                                                      2
                                             INCLUSIVE HOUSING FINANCE PROGRAM
                                                             TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.     PROGRAM DESCRIPTION.......................................................................................................... ……...4
       A. Government Program…………………………………………………………………………………………4
       B. Inclusive Housing Finance Program (the “Program”)………………………………………………………..4
II.    PROGRAM STRATEGIC RELEVANCE .................................................................................................. 6
       A.   National Context……………………………………………………………………………………………...6
       B.   Government Commitment to Social Housing………………………………………………………………...7
       C.   Snapshot of the Housing Sector in Egypt…………………………………………………………………….8
       D.   Distortions in the Housing Market Impacting Affordability……………………………………………...…11
       E.   Recent Housing Reforms………………………………………………………………………………...…..13
       F.   An Opportunity to Transform the Housing Sector………………………………………………………......15
III. TECHNICAL SOUNDNESS ................................................................................................................... 15
       A.   Role of the SHF in Housing Policy and Finance …………………………………………………………...16
       B.   Housing Programs Supported by the “Program”……………………………………………………………17
       C.   Egypt’s Mortgage Market…………………………………………………………………………………...29
       D.   Location of New Housing Units…………………………………………………………………………….33
IV. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS ................................................................................................... 40
       A.   Overview of Existing Housing Entities ……………………………………………………………………..39
       B.   Structure and Institutional Arrangements of the SHF………………………………………………………41
       C.   Consolidation of Entities …………………………………………………………………………………...43
       D.   Assessment of the SHF’s Organizational Structure and Institutional Arrangements……………………….44
V.     PROGRAM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK .......................................................................................... 45
       A.   Evolution of Social Housing Expenditures in Egypt ………………………………………………………..44
       B.   Historical Funding Predictability……………………………………………………………………………46
       C.   Projected Revenue of the SHF………………………………………………………………………………46
       D.   SHF Expenditures…………………………………………………………………………………………...48
       E.   Sustainability of the SHF……………………………………………………………………………………49
       F.   Program Expenditures….……………………………………………………………………………………50
VI. PROGRAM RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND M&E ................................................................................ 52
       A.   Results Framework and Results Chain……………………………………………………………………...55
       B.   Disbursement-Linked Indicators…………………………………………………………………………....57
       C.   Program Results Framework………………………………………………………………………………..59
       D.   Assessment of Housing M&E Capacity in Egypt…………………………………………………………..62
       E.   SHF M&E Systems and Capacity………………………………………………………………………..…64
       F.   Use of M&E in SHF Resource Allocation Decisions…………………..………………………………..…64
VII. PROGRAM ECONOMIC EVALUATION .............................................................................................. 67
VIII. INPUTS TO THE PROGRAM ACTION PLAN....................................................................................... 68
IX. TECHNICAL RISK RATING ................................................................................................................ 69
X.     INPUTS TO THE IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN ........................................................................ 70
       A. SHF Policy, Programming, Research and M&E…………………………………………………………….70
       B. Affordable Homeownership…………………………………………………………………………………70
       C. Rental Housing Sector……………………………………………………………………………………….71
ANNEXES
ANNEX 1: Evolution of Housing Policies in Egypt and their Impact on the Housing Market ..................................... 72
ANNEX 2: The SHF’s Cash Flow Model ................................................................................................................. …79

                                                                           3
I.       PROGRAM DESCRIPTION
1.     The proposed Inclusive Housing Finance Program (the “Program”) will assist the
Government of Egypt to improve the performance of the housing sector, especially increasing
access to affordable housing to low-income households. It will do this by strategically
consolidating housing entities and programs under the umbrella of the newly established Social
Housing Fund (SHF). This will be done in order to achieve improved performance and efficiency,
as designing and implementing new programs will address gaps in the current menu of housing
programs for low-income households.
A.       Government Program
2.      In the wake of the January 25th Revolution, a Cabinet decree established the Social
Housing Program with a goal of providing one million homes for low-income households.
Commitment to the one million homes goal has persisted through multiple transitions in national
and ministerial leadership. To implement the Social Housing Program, Social Housing Law 33 of
2014 was ratified by a Presidential Decree in May 2014. It assigns to the Ministry of Housing,
Utilities and Urban Development1 the mandate to “propose, plan and release social housing
projects, and supervise their implementation, to secure suitable residence for low income citizens
and land lots for medium income citizens”. The Law also provides for the establishment of the
SHF a legal entity whose Executive Director is nominated by the Minister of Housing, Utilities
and Urban Development.
3.      The SHF has the mandate to finance, manage and release social housing units, and provide
commercial and vocational services necessary for these housing projects, using dedicated
resources from multiple sources. To this end, the main responsibility of the SHF is to coordinate
social housing policy, as well as, design, monitor, and oversee a sustainable and comprehensive
set of support programs for the poor. Accordingly, the SHF will strengthen existing programs and
develop new ones for the low and middle-income housing sector, both on the supply-side (direct
construction of units) and the demand-side (financial support linked to households and
investors).2 The SHF will work on improving the housing sector, through: (i) the consolidation
and coordination of different housing entities, and social housing functions of the various
agencies within and outside the Ministry; (ii) the introduction and formulation of legislation,
decrees, regulations and procedures to support social housing, as well as the unification of
existing ones; (iii) the development of new social housing programs for rental and ownership; and
(iv) the improvement of the management systems for housing programs, which will be done
primarily through building the institutional capacity at the SHF; the establishment of research
capabilities and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems; the maintenance of a complete social
housing project and beneficiary data base; establishment of a transparency and accountability
mechanism for the social housing sector; and the collection of land and social housing market
data.
B.       Inclusive Housing Finance Program (the “Program”)
4.     The Program will support the following aspects of the Government’s Social Housing
Program: (i) institutional consolidation and capacity building: (ii) development of housing policy,
and the design of regulations and program guidelines; (iii) measures to improve the effectiveness,

1
 Thereafter referred to as the Ministry, unless otherwise specified.
2
 The program boundaries supported by the World Bank are limited to the demand-side. This is explained later in the Project
Appraisal Document (PAD).
                                                            4
transparency, and accountability of housing programs; and (iv) demand-side housing programs,
including financial support to low-income households to help them access housing or housing
finance. It will also assist in developing incentives for private rental investors to rent out their
units to low-income tenants. This ensures sustainability of the Program, and allows the
Government to focus on housing solutions for the lowest income and underserved segment.
Housing programs that involve the direct construction of housing units are not part of the
                       Figure 1: Scope of the Inclusive Housing Finance Program




          Source: World Bank (2014).

Program. A schematic overview of the Program is presented in Figure 1.
5.      The program will support the SHF in expanding its social housing programs (in size and
geographic reach), and strengthen its existing demand-side ownership program through the
development of financial products that will promote homeownership for those currently excluded
from attaining formal homeownership, and in particular the poor and the informally employed. It
will help create a new demand-side subsidy program for public rental housing, and provide an
incentive package for investors in private or employer rental housing, in addition to the
complementary demand-side subsidies for tenants.
6.      The purpose of the subsidy programs is the improvement of housing consumption by
underserved households and increasing the supply of affordable housing. In countries with
inefficient housing markets, the most efficient and effective type of subsidy mechanism to reach
these goals has proven to be demand-side subsidies (vouchers) to households linked to well-
defined housing programs—both rental and ownership. These types of subsidies can be designed
to be progressive with income and can be applied to ownership and rental housing. For ownership
programs, demand-side subsidies can be linked to a maximum affordable loan, this will therefore,
reduce the required subsidy amount relative to subsidizing the overall cost of housing, and
provide the beneficiaries with a choice of housing options.
7.      Designing the optimal package of housing subsidies is critically important. In the past,
most governments supported the housing sector through direct supply-side subsidies—Egypt was
no exception. However, international experience demonstrates that supply side subsidies do not
work well for the housing sector; as they do not allow proper targeting of beneficiaries, are not
portable and are prone to misallocation by developers. Moreover, they are often off-budget and
lack transparency, and therefore allow for inefficiencies in the management of public investments
                                                  5
and resources. The most complete comparative housing subsidy analysis was conducted in the US
in the 1970s, the Experimental Housing Allowance Program, where housing vouchers/demand
side subsidies were proven to be most efficient and least distortive. Another option would be to
provide households with unconditional cash-transfers, and leave the choice to households to find
better housing. Studies have shown that cash transfers will not necessarily be used for the
improvement of housing, nor will they translate into increased supply of affordable housing
because of market inefficiencies and market incompleteness.3
8.     The other important observation is that one type of housing subsidy cannot serve all
underserved households. Segmentation of underserved households according to housing
requirements, income and employment are the first steps in the design of a comprehensive
subsidy package. Households that could, with some assistance, access credit for housing should
leverage their capacity to borrow and therefore reduce the need for subsidy. Households that will
not be able to acquire a mortgage need rental solutions or may be assisted to manage the
construction of their own house, with the use of short-term lines of credit. These studies and
observations have guided the choice of demand-side subsidies.
9.       Chile was one of the first emerging market countries to use demand-side subsidies in the
form of vouchers to be disbursed towards the down-payment to increase access to formal housing
for middle and lower middle-income groups and stimulate the supply of affordable housing
(initiated in 1978). Many countries in Latin America, including Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Peru,
and Costa Rica, have since introduced demand-side voucher subsidies linked to finance. The US
and many European countries have introduced demand-side subsidies for rental housing.4 The
program supports only demand-side subsidies for both ownership and rental housing.

10.     The total number of Program beneficiaries is expected to reach more than 3.6 million
individuals or 827,400 households with an average household size of 4.3 individuals (Table 10).
Based on a preliminary estimate of the distribution of units across Governorates, the total number
of beneficiaries that are below the Household Poverty Line is expected to reach 1.6 million
individuals, which represents 37 percent of total Program beneficiaries, and around seven percent
of the total poor in Egypt (22 million individuals based on poverty rate of 26.3 percent in year
2012/13).
II.      PROGRAM STRATEGIC RELEVANCE
A.       National Context
11.     Egypt’s economic recovery is proceeding—economic activity grew by 6.8 percent in the
first quarter of Fiscal Year (FY) 2015, the highest rate since the financial crisis, on the backdrop
of improved sentiment, rebound in tourism, and base effect. This followed better economic
activity in the third and fourth quarter of FY14. However, growth for the whole fiscal year
remained subdued at 2.2 percent. Net exports continued to limit growth, while investments started
to contribute positively to growth alongside accelerated disbursement of stimulus spending.

3
  See also Olsen, Edgar O. "Getting More from Low-Income Housing Assistance." Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, The
Hamilton Project, (2008). Ibid "Housing Programs for Low-Income Households." In Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the USA,
edited by Robert A. Moffitt. 365–441, National Bureau of Economic Research, (2003).
4
  Hoek-Smit, Marja C and Douglas Diamond, (2003) “Subsidizing Housing Finance”, Housing Finance International, June 2003,
London, UK. Hoek-Smit, Marja, Subsidizing Housing Finance, in Loic Chiquer and M. Lea, Housing Finance in Emerging
Markets, World Bank, (2009); Susin, Scott. "Rent Vouchers and the Price of Low-Income Housing." Journal of Public Economics
83, No. 1, (2002): pages. 109-52; Peppercorn, Ira Gary, and Claude Taffin. Rental Housing: Lessons from International
Experience and Policies for Emerging Markets. World Bank Publications, (2013).
                                                            6
Economic recovery is important to establish stability ahead of the Parliamentary elections (a
major milestone in Egypt’s political roadmap), which were expected to be held by March 2015,
but were postponed due to a supreme court verdict that deemed some articles of the electoral law
unconstitutional. However, the President requested that these amendments take place in a month,
to allow the elections to be carried out at the soonest.
12.     Fiscal consolidation measures are finally being adopted, yet sustaining reform momentum,
as well as additional efforts are needed over the medium-term to put public finance in order. The
budget deficit is expected to decline to 11-11.5 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in
FY15, compared to a preliminary figure of 12.8 percent in FY14, and 13.7 percent of GDP in
FY13. The projected decline in deficit is notable given that FY15 includes 0.4 percent of
exceptional receipts compared to more than three percent of GDP in FY14. Yet more efforts are
needed to bring the fiscal and debt paths back on a sustainable track, address growing gross
financing needs, and meet the Government’s medium-term debt target of 80-85 percent of GDP.
13.     Egypt’s economy continues to be negatively affected by the prolonged political tensions
since 2011. The official unemployment rate reached 13.1 percent as of end of September 2014 up
from 8.9 percent in the same quarter of 2010. Out of the 3.6 million currently unemployed
persons, some 64.3 percent are between 15 and 29 years old, making youth unemployment the
main challenge for economic inclusion and stability. Unemployment rates among males and
females stand at 9.6 percent, and 24.5 percent, respectively. Urban areas recorded a higher
unemployment rate (16 percent) than rural areas (10.9 percent). The latest poverty data indicate
that 26.3 percent of the population was living below the national poverty line in FY13. The
construction and housing sectors are amongst the most labor intensive and largest employment
sectors in Egypt, with close to 12 percent of total employment at the end 2012, with around 2.8
million employees.
B.     Government Commitment to Social Housing
14.     The Government has a long-established commitment to social housing. The first project to
address the needs of the poor and working classes was the Workers City, which began in 1952 in
a suburb of Cairo. From that time until 2005, it is estimated that government entities delivered
about 2.4 million public housing units. As a point of comparison, the United States of America
(USA) has only 1.2 million public housing units; over 5 million council housing units were built
in the United Kingdom (UK) between 1945 and 1980.
15.      Expanding housing options for the lowest income groups, particularly the impoverished
youth, and improving their access to housing, public services and employment became key
priorities for the Government post-revolution. On the housing demand-side the Government
adopted a stimulus program in 2014, with the housing sector being a priority. The Central Bank of
Egypt (CBE) implemented a second stimulus for the housing sector through an infusion of below-
market-rate funds, totaling LE 20 billion, into the mortgage sector to stimulate the financing of
houses for low- and middle-income groups. The low-income component of the stimulus provides
mortgage loans at seven percent interest rates with a 20 year term. This stimulus will allow for the
provision of mortgage-linked subsidies to creditworthy households with incomes just below the
20th percentile of the income distribution. Funds are made available through banks and their
affiliated mortgage companies. The economic rationale for investing public funds in the housing
sector is a proven stimulus to domestic job creation and economic growth.
16.    The Social Housing Program was launched in the wake of the Egyptian revolution with
the goal of providing one million houses. The Social Housing Law 33 of 2014 was ratified on
                                                 7
May 2, 2014, establishing the SHF with the objective of providing houses for low-income
households. The SHF was mandated to “propose, plan and release social housing projects, and
supervise their implementation, to secure suitable residences for low-income citizens, and land
management for low and middle-income citizens.” The SHF is the implementing entity of the
Social Housing Program within the Ministry which is charged with designing housing laws and
regulations and social housing programs, as well as providing oversight for their implementation
in consultation with relevant housing entities, and managing financial resources for social
housing. It is a legal entity whose Executive Director is nominated by the Minister, and appointed
by the Prime Minister. The entire housing stimulus programs of the SHF will positively contribute
to generating job opportunities for skilled and unskilled labor. Based on an elasticity of
employment in the construction sector of 1.5, it is estimated that the total number of jobs
generated through the SHF over a six year period is 1.5 million job-years. Another critical
economic rationale to assist the housing sector that is closely linked to the strategic goals of
poverty reduction and shared prosperity is improving the link between housing and labor market.
17.     The CBE stimulus is part of a larger economic stimulus package provided by the Gulf
States. Funds were made available by Saudi Arabia to CBE under the stimulus plan, which
provided funds to banks at below-market rates in order to stimulate mortgage lending, hence,
increase house construction and employment. In addition, the United Arab Emirates (UAE)5 has
signed an agreement for a LE 6.5 billion contribution for low-income housing construction
through the SHF—50,000 units have recently been completed Funds are offered to the banks at
3.5 percent and 4.5 percent for on-lending to low-income households at seven percent and
middle-income households at eight percent respectively. Current market rates are in the order of
15 percent to 16 percent.
C.        Snapshot of the Housing Sector in Egypt
18.     Access to affordable housing in Egypt remains a major challenge for low- and middle-
income households. The housing backlog, as estimated by the Ministry, is up to three million
units. Egypt requires approximately 300,000 new housing units per year to house newly formed
households, plus an additional 254,000 to gradually deal with the backlog of housing over five the
past years.6
19.     Homeownership is dominated by the highest income quintile especially in urban areas,
where 52 percent of owned houses belong to the 5th quintile (the highest income segment). The
poorest quintile has a very low share in homeownership. Indeed, the Egyptian housing market
suffers from major gaps, especially for the lower income segments of society (Table 1):
         Formal homeownership without subsidy is accessible for households with incomes in
the top 30 to 40 percent of the household income distribution.
         Subsidized new formal ownership housing has been the dominant type of Government
housing program during the past few decades. Previous programs had unsustainably high
subsidies on the supply side and through the financing of units, and suffered from difficulties to

5
  In terms of UAE support to the housing sector in Egypt, there are two distinct programs: (i) UAE Government support to Egypt,
amounting to LE 6.5 billion (equivalent to US$ 900 million), targeted to low-income households. This program comprises 50,000
units, with LE 135,000 unit cost, which were allocated in-kind to the Ministry. The proceeds from the sale of units will be utilized
to capitalize SHF; and (ii) UAE private sector investments through Arabtec Company, targeted to provide housing units to middle
and high-income households, over a five-year period (2015-2020). The unit price starts from LE 400,000, thus not targeting social
housing and not at all part of the SHF. This project has been approved by the Government of Egypt in April 2015.
6
  Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Development, Database (2014).
                                                                 8
     verify beneficiary incomes and eligibility. A new, more efficient subsidy program linked to
     mortgage was launched in 2010, which serves households with income as low as LE 1,000 (below
     the 2nd decile of the income distribution).
              Subsidized self-construction options existed in the past, but were poorly managed and
     have been discontinued.
              New formal rental market serves mainly middle and higher income households. No
     new formal private rental housing is constructed for low-income households. Public rental
     programs delivered only a small number of units. Rental units under old rent control contracts
     serve middle and higher income households disproportionally.
              Informal rental and ownership housing provide the most important housing options
     (estimated at 50 percent of urban units) and are utilized by very low to middle-income
     households.
     Table 1: Product Gaps in the Egyptian Housing Market

     Income groups                                          1              2                 3                 4                    5
     Income bracket (LE per month)                       <1,450      1,450–1,900       1,900–2,400       2,400–3,200             >3,200
     Median Household Income *                            1,100          1,700           2,100              2,700                4,100
     Income Category                                    Very Low         Low             Middle           Upper Middle           Upper
     Market Ownership
     Subsidized Ownership (demand-side)
     Rental Market (new rental law)
     Rent Control (decreasing)
     Informal (rental and ownership)
                        Potentially Available (to the
                                                                                 Partially Served                               Not Served
                        entire bracket)
    * Median monthly income by quintile based on the Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) Income and Expenditure
    and Consumption Survey (2012/2013).
    Source: CAPMAS, Income and Expenditure and Consumption Survey (2013).

     20.     The provision of low and middle income housing over the past decades was dominated by
     public entities through planning, land policies, direct construction, and finance. The Ministry is
     the central policy making and project funding institution, implementing its programs through
     local governments or its own affiliated housing entities. Briefly, the primary entities involved in
     the social housing sector include:
               Governorates. The 27 Governorates have delivered the majority of publicly-built
     housing units since the early 1980s, either with their own limited resources or with funding and
     implementation support from the Ministry;
               New Urban Communities Authority (NUCA). NUCA, established in 1979 as an
     affiliated entity under the Ministry to develop new towns on desert land, is the second largest
     producer of publicly built housing;
               Housing Cooperatives. The housing cooperatives, operating under an umbrella
     organization within the Ministry, provided considerable numbers of public housing units in the
     past, but have since dwindled7; and
               Housing and Development Bank (HDB). The HDB was established in 1979 as an
     affiliated entity under the Ministry to provide the long-term financing for publicly-built houses in

7
 There are some smaller housing supply entities within the Ministry—remnants from previous international development projects.
Functions and programs are not necessarily coordinated.
                                                                          9
 the form of soft loans.
 21.     Other line ministries—Defense, Interior, Endowments ‘Awkaf’, built houses for their own
 staff. Together, these entities delivered 1.26 million publicly-built housing units during the period
 from 1982–2005, accounting for 36 percent of all formal housing units built during this period in
 urban areas—mainly for homeownership, and mostly at fairly high standards (63 m2 to 75 m2
 finished units in multifamily buildings). However, with the exception of an increase in public
 construction between 2010 and 2012, the participation by private developers expanded and the
 direct role of the public sector in the construction of houses decreased to 22 percent over the last
 decade (Figure 2).8 Aware of the lack of sufficient funding and capacity, the Government has been
 keen on increasing private sector participation in formal housing production for the moderate
 income groups.
                     Figure 2: Formal Housing Units Built by the Public and Private Sector in Egypt




Source: Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Development (2014).


 22.     Over the past decades there have been multiple attempts to reform the housing sector.
 Measures undertaken included streamlining the land and property registration system, formulating
 an improved Real Estate Tax Law and a Unified Building Code, developing land contracts for
 private developers for the construction of low-income housing, and expanding the variety of
 affordable housing typologies for the lowest income households offered under social housing
 programs (e.g. self-built schemes and subsidized rental housing). In addition, in order to develop
 a mortgage market, in early 2001, the Real Estate Finance Law 148 of 2001 was passed,
 establishing the legal and regulatory framework, and allowing the formation of non-bank
 Mortgage Finance Companies (MFCs) that would have a greater interest in serving lower income
 households. A liquidity facility—the Egyptian Mortgage Refinance Company (EMRC) was also
 established in June 2006 to provide long term funding for primary mortgage institutions. The
 Guarantee and Subsidy Fund (GSF) was also established9 with the dual function of delivering

 8
   Under the NHP (2005-2011) 320,000 units have been produced and 27,000 are still under construction; 150,000 by government
 entities, 70,000 by the private sector, and 100,000 self- construction parcels. In addition, government gives out approximately
 70,000 to 80,000 parcels of 300 to 400 m2 to individuals per year at varying costs, and about 1,500 to 2,000 acres of land for
 residential development to developers.
 9
   With the amendments of the Real Estate Finance Law 148 of 2001 in July 2014, the GSF has now moved from under the Ministry
 of Investment to come under the Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Development.
                                                                       10
subsidies to low-income households to expand access to mortgage finance down-market and
providing a guarantee to lenders to protect them against short-term inability to pay by the
borrowers.
23.    Prior to the revolution, private developer participation in the low-income market segment
was increasing. In fact, during the latter years of the National Housing Program (NHP)(2005-
2011), which aimed to deliver 500,000 housing solutions over six years, 22 percent of the
completed units were built by private developers who assumed all risk for the development and
sale of affordable units, while government entities only produced less than 50 percent of
completed units.10
24.     However, despite these reforms, the existing systems and programs have been insufficient
to address the housing shortages for the low- and middle-income market, and most importantly
they have not been well coordinated and have lacked a coherent vision. In response to these
challenges, the Government has recently undertaken substantial policy reforms, to further
strengthen the legal, regulatory and institutional framework in the housing sector.
D.       Distortions in the Housing Market Impacting Affordability
25.     The Egyptian housing market suffers from some fundamental inefficiencies related to poor
policies—a dysfunctional rental market, high vacancy rates, growing informal housing
production, and an increasingly distorted growth pattern in urban areas.
26.     Rental Sector. With regards to the dysfunctional rental sector, a large proportion of the
housing stock in Greater Cairo was, and still is, frozen under the old rent control laws introduced
in the 1940s and 1950s. The proportion of units under rent control was estimated at 27 percent of
the housing stock in Greater Cairo in 2006.11 Even though rent control was abolished when a new
rental law was passed—Law 4 of 1996, as amended by Law 137 of 2006—the grandfathering
conditions allowed for a long phasing out period and avoidance is common. While the number of
units under rent control has decreased since 2006, it is still substantial and greatly constrains
residential mobility, locks a large proportion of units out of the market, causes lack of stock
maintenance, and distorts the overall housing market. Rent controlled units are, moreover,
occupied disproportionally by upper-middle and higher income households. It is worth noting that
the new rental laws of 1996 and 2006, improved the climate for rental investment considerably
and works at all income levels. It facilitates eviction procedures without resorting to courts, and is
overwhelmingly used for new rental contracts. Nevertheless, rental investment is hindered by
unfavorable tax laws, limitations of rental contract conditions and cumbersome eviction
procedures.
27.     Vacancy. An extremely high vacancy rate is one of the main characteristics of the housing
market in Egypt. Around 3.4 million units in the urban areas were vacant in 200612, and the trend
to leave units vacant does not appear to have abated. The long period of rent control created a
tradition of keeping investment properties vacant. Many families buy houses for future use by
their children, but will not rent out the house for fear of not being able to access the house when
they would need it; or would leave it unfinished. In addition, housing has served as an inflation-
proof savings and investment mechanism based on value appreciation without need of the rental

10
   Under the NHP (2005-2011) 320,000 units were produced until 2011; 150,000 by government entities, 70,000 by the private
developers, and 100,000 self- construction parcels.
11
   United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Demand Study (2008).
12
   Based on the 2006 Census.
                                                           11
yield. In the absence of penalties for keeping properties vacant,13 the proportion of vacant units
continues to be high, even in areas with the highest housing needs and in the newly built
government schemes (exacerbated by misallocation of subsidies and poor location in new towns).
28.      Previous governments have tried to give shape to rental programs, both public and private,
for the lowest income groups, and to find ways to deal with the vacant stock. NUCA has
developed several public rental options, however, the targeted low-income households showed
little interest in a small pilot program (mostly because units of 42 m2 were considered too small),
causing units to remain vacant. Minimum unit size for public rental units has been increased to
55m2. Without a separate budget for operation and maintenance and other implementation
support, neither NUCA nor the Governorates have been keen to subscribe to the rental programs.
With the current low rent ceiling (LE 225 per month to make units affordable to households with
incomes below LE 1,200) potential private rental investors have shown little interest.
29.     Informal Housing. At the same time, there has been a rapid growth of informal housing
production estimated at half of all housing production, sometimes more. It is estimated that 12 –20
million people live in informal housing areas.14 New formal construction was only a fraction of
that number in the past few decades, constrained by high building and zoning standards, a
bureaucratic and costly permit process and uncompetitive building sector. The result was that a
buoyant informal housing market on the fringes of existing urban areas began to cater to the needs
of low- and middle-income households. These areas were unsuccessfully proscribed by the
authorities and continue to grow at an alarming speed.
30.     Geographical Mismatch between Housing, Jobs, and Services. Another challenge is that
housing policies have had a significant and negative impact on the growth of metropolitan areas.
The lack of market mobility due to decades of rent control led to stagnating neighborhoods that
should have undergone change as part of urban and employment transformation (e.g., the
downtown area of Cairo). In addition, most of the new housing was located in new towns in
desert areas far away from employment opportunities for middle- and low-income families,
forcing a large proportion of the labor force to commute long distances to work. Moreover, the
lack of investment in adequate road and transportation linkages between new residential areas and
employment centers, created unbearable traffic congestion in most urban and metropolitan areas.
31.     All social housing in Egypt has been and continues to be located exclusively on State land,
which means in most cases on desert land far from existing urban networks. Social housing
estates located in the new towns (and also in some newer governorate projects) are almost all in
remote areas that require journeys of many kilometers to reach centers of employment, major
commerce, and services. Moreover, most social housing estates are in remote locations within the
new towns, all of which are developed on vast land parcels at very low densities. This location
problem creates fundamental difficulties for Egypt’s social housing efforts to meet its goals; for
newer social housing projects the search for large tracts of empty State land has become more and
more difficult and involves seeking land further afield.
32.    The costs of poor location are several. First, living in remote housing estates, especially in
new towns, imposes a significant transport cost on inhabitants. In addition, moving around within
a new town is inconvenient and expensive, and in government housing estates local shopping is

13
   The Real Estate Tax has been introduced in August 2014, including for vacant units, meaning that there would be real expense
for property owners choosing to keep their units unoccupied. This expense, together with incentive packages (see paras 72-86
below) may convince owners of vacant units to rent their units out.
14
   CAPMAS (2013).
                                                             12
poor and goods are considered expensive. Most households in social housing rely on public
minibus transport; in urban Egypt less than 15 percent of households have access to a private
vehicle. Secondly, the targeted beneficiaries of social housing programs are struggling to make
ends meet on very limited incomes. A lower level government employee or worker in a factory
cannot live on this salary alone, and it is common for such wage earners to also have a second
casual job or a small business. The main source of such secondary income is the informal
economy that thrives in dense urban areas. As many studies have shown, casual and informal
economic activities rely heavily on personal contacts and geographically-specific markets. For
someone living in a new town or isolated governorate housing estate, accessing the informal
economy will require such a high daily transport bill that may nullify the income gained.
33.     Targeting. A major concern has been that housing subsidies are not reaching the targeted
income groups and lack transparency. Previous programs have been plagued by widespread
cheating on income questionnaires, and a point system developed to improve allocation to the
most deserving households (low-income, families with children and those living in the poorest
living conditions) was not enforceable because of lack of sound data. Many units have ended up
in the hands of higher income households and the connected, leaving low-income households
with no housing and many of these units vacant. Double subsidization is a problem because there
is no unified data base. Privileged families have had access to several housing subsidies under
different program, while others have no access at all. An attempt to improve allocation by
providing the subsidies to developers failed as well, and most developers simply increased their
profits rather than lower the price of the house, as there was no monitoring system. The
Affordable Mortgage Program (AMP) was designed to address that problem by tying the subsidy
to a maximum affordable mortgage loan and on a scale that increases the subsidy for lower
income households. Both the GSF and the lender have to verify the income. Cheating on income
would qualify the borrower for a lower mortgage loan amount and, therefore, for a smaller unit.15
34.     Housing Finance. The mortgage finance market has confronted major constraints.
Despite the issuance of the law, the creation of the EMRC and the GSF, the mortgage-to-GDP
ratio accounts for less than 0.5 percent of GDP, lagging behind many neighboring economies.
This is mainly due to the relatively small proportion of existing units with property registration,
not well tested foreclosure procedures; and inadequate long-term financing.16 Also, the population
is not familiar with the mortgage product and the payments-to-income ratio stipulated in the Real
Estate Finance Law (now amended) made it hard for low for low-income households to qualify
for a mortgage loan.
35.     Revolution. Access to affordable housing for the low- and middle-income households
became more challenging during the transition period post revolution. The turbulent political and
economic environment during the period of transition, limited the expansion of developer
participation in the low-income housing program. The numerous changes in regime, Cabinets and
Ministers led to major uncertainty in the sector. The old land contracts were questioned after the
revolution and undeveloped land allocated to private developers was retracted. This caused
uncertainties and delays in the construction pipelines of private sector developers. At the same
time, mortgage interest rates increased during the transition time, limiting mortgage lending and

15
   The initial phase of the million houses program, which does not yet involve private developers, but rather private contractors
building houses under government contract, has one standard house-type for ownership, eliminating the advantage of offering
multiple types and sizes of units for different income groups according to affordability.
16
   The vast majority of newly built properties in Egypt are purchased either for cash or pursuant to an installment loan system
provided by the real estate developer.
                                                              13
making it extremely difficult to build housing that is affordable for low-income households. Many
developers have moved to higher income segments using installment sale contracts (up to seven
years).
E.     Recent Housing Reforms
36.     In response, after the June 2013 Revolution, the Government put the expansion of housing
options for the lowest income groups high on its list of priority reform, along with improving their
access to infrastructure and employment as part of advancing the social housing objectives. The
Government’s commitment to improve accessibility and affordability for low- and middle-income
households is evident in the undertaking of key legal and regulatory reforms aiming at increasing
housing options for the poor, most notably improving building codes; introducing regularization
of informal areas; initiating reform of subsidies; improving real estate transaction and property
registration systems; promoting private sector participation; enhancing inclusion and facilitating
access to mortgage loans; and streamlining foreclosure procedures. These reforms were
complemented by the strengthening of the institutional framework for social housing through the
adoption of the law establishing the SHF, expanding housing options for the lowest income
groups, as well as improving their access to services and employment
37.      First, an inclusive process was started in 2013 to improve real estate transaction and
property registration systems. An inter-ministerial committee with participation from developers,
lenders, EMRC and other industry groups prepared a Real Estate Transactions Registration in
New Communities Law, which was issued by the Ministry of Justice. The law allows: (i) NUCA
authorities to issue a certificate for the property or the unit that is financed via mortgage finance;
(ii) the chairmen of the authority’s administrative apparatuses to sign tripartite mortgage finance
contracts to streamline the registration process; and (iii) part registration of large projects. These
measures will make mortgage lending in NUCA territories, where most of the new units exist,
possible and easier. The related Decree 10 of 2014 was issued by the Ministry on February 3,
2014allowing for the streamlining of land and property registration in urban areas through a
tripartite agreement between the Ministry of Housing, Ministry of Justice, and NUCA, allowing
the chairmen of the authority’s administrative apparatuses to sign tripartite mortgage finance
contracts to streamline the registration process. In addition to streamlining property registration,
there has been a significant reduction in land and registration fees from three percent of property
value to a flat fee not exceeding LE 2,000.
38.     Second, in order to promote the increase in private sector participation in the housing
sector, various measures were undertaken by the authorities. In early June 2014, the Ministry
renegotiated old land contracts with the main residential developers, and a resolution committee
was formed to settle any debatable land contracts with the private sector and many cases were
solved. As a result, the industry showed renewed interest in the housing sector. Moreover, the
Government’s commitment to support the expansion of the sector, particularly after the CBE
announced the subsidy on mortgage credit focused on the lower-income sector, enhanced the
private sector confidence in the market. The Ministry is currently finalizing new contract
agreements to incentivize private developers to enter the low-income housing market.
39.    Third, CBE implemented in June 2014, an economic stimulus for the housing sector
through an infusion of funds, totaling LE 20 billion, into the mortgage sector to stimulate house
construction for low- and middle-income groups. The low-income component of the stimulus (at
seven percent interest rates) targets the same income level as the AMP. This stimulus will allow
the AMP to extend housing credit well into the low income segment or below the 20th percentile.
                                                 14
Funds are made available through banks and their affiliated mortgage companies and upfront
subsidies for qualifying low-income households are provided through the AMP. The program
received 155,000 applicants under the new CBE program.
40.      Fourth, the long-awaited amendment to the Real Estate Finance Law 148 of 2001 was
ratified by the President in July 2014, allowing greater flexibility in setting limits to the
proportion of income to be allocated to mortgage payments, and in establishing qualifying income
levels for mortgage-linked subsidies. The regulator, the Egyptian Financial Supervisory Authority
(EFSA), immediately increased the maximum allowable payment-to-income ratio and, therefore,
eligibility of lower-income households to access mortgage finance improved. This allowed AMP
to offer mortgage-linked subsidies to lower income households. During the political transition
time, the overall economic uncertainty and increases in mortgage interest rates prevented the
AMP from going to scale, but recent economic and political developments have yielded some
positive results. With the recent amendments to Real Estate Finance Law 148 and the stimulus
package of the CBE, the program is growing rapidly and it has already approved more than
40,000 applicants. It is able to reach households just below the 2nd decile of the urban income
distribution or an income group as low as LE 1,000 per month.
41.     Fifth, a law on the regularization of informal areas was approved by the Cabinet and the
State Council in July 2014 .It allows informal residential buildings, built without a license on
private land, to be regularized upon payment of a penalty. This law will incentivize the
formalization and regularization of houses, making it possible to extend services, utilities, and
infrastructure to informal areas. This facilitates property registration and borrowing for
improvements.
42.    Sixth, and most important to this operation, the Social Housing Law 33 of 2014, which
was ratified by a Presidential Decree, solidified the SHF into a sustainable entity for the provision
of low-income housing. The SHF is responsible for coordinating social housing policy, as well as,
implementing and developing a sustainable and comprehensive set of support programs for the
poor.
F.     An Opportunity to Transform the Housing Sector
43.    The SHF will consolidate the various housing programs and funds that have been
operating in silos, to ensure synergies, and effective coordination and improve efficient use of
funds. This integration of programs will allow for the general use of the national unified database,
based on national IDs to prevent any double subsidization, cheating, and fraud.
44.     It cannot be underscored enough how important the establishment of the SHF is for
transforming the housing sector in Egypt. Bringing together dedicated streams of financing,
policy and programming control, inter-agency coordination, and high-level commitment to reform
will help to incrementally shift the Egyptian government from being a producer of social housing
to being an enabler of the housing sector as a whole.
III.   TECHNICAL SOUNDNESS
45.    The SHF has an immediate mandate to support one million residential units for low- and
middle-income households. Of the total, approximately 85 percent of the units are expected to be
for ownership and 15 percent for social rental housing, to be decided by the implementing entities
(Governorates or NUCA) based on household demand. It will incorporate existing, well-
functioning low-income housing programs and develop new ones. The SHF received LE 10

                                                 15
billion in stimulus funds to launch the program. The SHF will have access to various sources of
funds in order for it to be sustainable once the funds from the stimulus packages end (see Section
V for more detail on the financial sustainability for the SHF).
46.     The SHF will work at a national scale through Governorates and NUCA which will decide
on the mix of social housing programs required based on local demand, where potential
beneficiaries make the ultimate choice.17.The SHF has asked the Governorates and NUCA to
provide appropriate sites for social housing and the Social Housing Law 33 of 2014 has
established criteria for site selection which include access to infrastructure and services. It is
anticipated that all new housing developments will be built on publically owned, undeveloped
land that is allocated, auctioned, or disposed of through a Public-Private-Partnership (PPP)
arrangement with the selected public or private developer. A campaign is underway to explain the
program to local authorities. For its ownership programs the SHF works with banks and mortgage
companies which participate in the AMP/CBE program. The GSF administers both the mortgage-
linked upfront subsidies for beneficiaries and the CBE low-interest program in collaboration with
banks. Fourteen banks have signed up and training of the banks and their branch managers has
started by the GSF director. The construction is done by private developers and NUCA. The
current rental program is implemented through the Governorates and NUCA as well, which are
responsible for operation and maintenance, however, uptake of public rental is expected to remain
low, until an improved subsidy scheme is developed.
47.    The Government is keen on seeking ways to increase the participation of private sector
developers in affordable housing, and giving out preferential incentives under special conditions
if used for low-income housing—so that the Government focuses on playing the role of the
regulator. Private sector developers showed renewed interest in the lower-income sector,
especially after the CBE announced its stimulus program on mortgage credit focused on the
lower-income sector.
A.       Role of the SHF in Housing Policy and Finance
48.     The SHF is an agency within the Ministry of Housing, Utilities and Urban Development
tasked with designing housing laws and regulations, designing social housing programs, with
overseeing their implementation in consultation with relevant housing entities, and with managing
financial resources for social housing. As stated in its Executive Regulation, the SHF’s main tasks
include:
        Proposing Social Housing programs, laws and regulations to the Minister of Housing,
         Utilities and Urban Development in the fields of social housing, affordable housing, and
         participation of private sector in supplying affordable housing;
        Setting guidelines for social housing and affordable housing programs: location, house-
         types/size, costs, beneficiary qualifications, rent setting, management, financing, and
         subsidies systems. Such guidelines are approved by the Minister and implemented by the
         SHF through its implementing entities (NUCA, Governorates);
        Making recommendations for implementing the Social Housing Program and for meeting
         the target number of units set by the Ministry (current target is one million new units in
         the next six years);
        Proposing to the Minister an annual Social Housing program;

17
  The Ministry and NUCA already abandoned one type of rental program for which demand was insufficient.
                                                            16
        Managing all funding for social housing and affordable housing;
        Administering funds from foreign donors and lenders;
        Allocating funds and monitoring their use;
        Collecting data from housing entities via its own information technology system and
         according to guidelines it establishes;
        Quantifying existing supply and demand-side subsidies; and
        Possibly, engaging, as contracting authority, in contracts with housing entities for the
         construction and management of housing units.
49.     The SHF issues guidelines for social housing programs and affordable housing programs
for all of Egypt. Such guidelines are approved by the Minister and are binding for all public
housing entities and Governorates. The SHF also has the role of allocating funding to housing
entities that are not under its direct authority, including NUCA and the Governorates.
50.     Planning. Based on objectives and priorities set by the Government and the Ministry, and
based on the budgets allocated to the Fund, the SHF sets a multi-year and annual target of new
housing units to be built and other program targets, and the overall cost. The program is approved
by the Minister and endorsed by the Government. It is binding for the entities covered by the
program. For the implementation of the program, the SHF enters into contracts with the different
entities and Governorates, each contract sets out objectives, budgets, reporting indicators.
51.     To prepare the multi-year plan and annual targets, the SHF maintains a waiting list of
applicants to social rental and ownership affordable housing units. The SHF relies on the data
collected from its national waiting list and from Governorates. The SHF prepares a program for
construction and financing of housing units which sets out the broad allocation of types of units
and programs (public rental programs, private rental programs, affordable ownership housing),
geographical location of units, initial allocation of units among housing entities, and indicators for
performance reporting.
52.     Policies, Laws, and Regulations. The SHF is the sole authority in the Ministry in charge
of drafting laws, executive regulations and guidelines for social housing programs and affordable
housing programs. The Minister may demand that the SHF drafts laws, regulations and guidelines
as needed. The SHF can propose to the Minister, draft laws, regulations and guidelines.
53.     Data Collection and M&E. The SHF is entitled to collect data from all public housing
entities (NUCA, Governorates, NGOs and other participating entities in the social housing
program). The SHF defines the format and type of data to be collected by each agency, after
proper consultation with each agency. An agreement with each entity defines the rules for the
collection of data. The SHF may use the data for the following tasks; research, M&E, and policy
design.
B.       Housing Programs Supported by the “Program”
54.    Affordable Mortgage Program. The core home-ownership program of the SHF is the
Affordable Mortgage Program (AMP). AMP provides demand-side subsidies to complement an
affordable mortgage (with a maximum term of 15 years and a minimum 10 percent down-
payment) for the purchase of a new or existing house. The transparent and targeted subsidies
reduce the down-payment requirement for savings-constrained households and/or the monthly
payment for income-constrained households. The subsidies are set to increase with decreasing
income levels, and are linked to a maximum affordable mortgage loan by a financial institution of
                                                 17
the beneficiary’s choice. As part of the verification and underwriting process, incomes are
assessed by both the program and the lender. The underreporting of income has a negative impact
on the affordable loan amount, and thus affects the type and price of the house that can be
55.     The AMP serves households with incomes between LE 1,000 and LE 2,500 per month,
reaching just below the 20th percentile of the income distribution and with a median beneficiary
income of LE 1,750 per month.The average subsidy is in the order of LE 19,000 per household
under the current subsidy program. The additional and temporary CBE interest rate subsidy is
substantially higher in Net Present Value (NPV) terms18 (by 50 to 100 percent) given the current
high interest rates. The combination of the AMP and CBE subsidies effectively decreases the
inherent regressivity of the CBE interest rate subsidy as the combined subsidy decreases with
higher incomes.19 To date 14,000 subsidized loans have been issued under the market mortgage
rate program, and around 10,000 loans were made under the new CBE low-interest rate program
by December 2014. The AMP received 155,000 applications after the announcement of CBE
stimulus program, which are gradually being processed. It has to reach another 70,000 to 80,000
subsidies by July 2015 and needs to enhance its capacity for subsidy processing. SHF/GSF is the
administrator of the CBE’s stimulus program for the mortgage sector and coordinates bank’s
enrollment in the program and the allocation of funds. The GSF has 55 staff members.
56.      Background and history. The GSF was established by Presidential Decree in 2003 as part
of the Mortgage Finance Authority, the regulator for the newly established MFCs under the
Ministry of Investment. The GSF has the mandate to develop innovative products to stimulate the
private housing finance industry to grow in scale and expand down-market. The GSF had by Law
three types of mechanisms to fulfill its mission: (i) issuing guarantees/credit enhancement
initiatives (with the full faith and credit of the Government); (ii) providing upfront subsidies to
qualifying beneficiaries; and (iii) engaging in physical development of low-income housing for
which it would receive government land free of charge.
57.    The land development function was considered as a means to raise revenue and create
opportunities to initiate mortgage lending. The GSF was capitalized with 1200 residential units
(and some shops) and roughly LE60 million in cash and LE274 million in receivables. The
residential units were sold to qualifying GSF beneficiaries who also obtained upfront subsidies
and were matched with mortgage lenders. With amendments to Real Estate Finance Law 148 in
2014, this function of the GSF was eliminated.
58.     The guarantee component of the GSF provided a three-month nonpayment insurance for
which it charged a one percent fee (on the loan amount) to lenders. The program was never
capitalized separately and was considered ineffective and an additional cost by MFC lenders
without providing much credit risk protection.
59.     The subsidy component was targeted to low-income households (as defined in the Real
Estate Finance Law 148 of 2001). The subsidy was a flat LE 10,000 subsidy to households (later
increased to LE 15,000) towards the purchase of a low-cost house and was linked to a mortgage
by MFCs and banks. In 2005, the NHP set the standards for a low-cost flat of 63m2, which could
be delivered for a maximum value of LE 90,000 because of other subsidies on land and
infrastructure. While the subsidy program was an improvement over the subsidies to developers
provided by the NHP, its budget was constrained, its design was inefficient and administrative
18
    Using a discount rate of 9.75 percent and a market rate of 14 percent, a house price of LE135,000 and down-payment of 15
percent
19
   The AMP subsidy amount decreases with increasing income, while the CBE subsidy increases with higher loan amounts.
                                                            18
procedures between GSF, households, and lenders were cumbersome. The program remained
small.
60.     In 2008 it was decided by the Ministry to create an integrated transparent household
subsidy that would be scaled according to income and linked to a market-rate mortgage loan and
would be adjusted according to a measure of house-prices and interest rates. The Ministry had,
through its HDB and other financial entities within the Ministry provided subsidized loans, which
had a negative impact on the viability of its financial institutions. An agreement was reached
between the Ministry and the Ministry of Investment to make GSF the administrator of the new
subsidy program in close collaboration with mortgage lenders. Income levels for qualifying low-
income households were at that time determined by Real Estate Finance Law 148. The World
Bank was asked to support the design of the new program and the establishment of the
administrative and technical systems and procedures. A Development Policy Loan (DPL) for
US$ 300 million was approved in 2009 (US$ 200 million disbursed to date) and, after
establishing the administrative and technical systems, the new Affordable Mortgage Program
began operations in 2010. The GSF improved its governance system and established transparent
guidelines for its program, and rules of engagement with lenders and beneficiaries.
61.     The AMP was however severely constrained by conditions on loan-to-value ratios set in
Real Estate Finance Law 148 (a maximum of 25 percent), legally stipulated income levels and by
rising interest rates. Amendments to the law were sought but the revolution of January 2011
interfered. The Amendments were finally passed in April 2014 and included the following:
      Delegation to EFSA (the new regulator of the non-bank MFCs to set Payment-to-Income
       ratios and Loan-to-Value provisions for mortgage lending.
      Delegation to the Board of GSF “to issue decisions on determining the rules and
       conditions of entitlement to low-income subsidized housing as well as establishing the
       criteria of low-income housing projects”.
      Defining the GSF as an entity under the supervision of the Ministry. The functions of the
       GSF are expanded and include: “responsibility of subsidizing the mortgage finance
       activities in the field of sale or use of housing units, or leasing them through the rent to
       own system. It may also support the housing lease for low-income categories by all
       means, including payment of a part of the value of installments in cases of sale or lease
       ending with ownership, in a way that reduces the burdens of finance to the limits
       affordable by their income and provided that the installment shall not exceed the
       maximum limit determined by the Board of Directors”.
      The GSF’s guarantee program for non-payment was eliminated but it kept the option to
       “assume activities to eliminate the risk of non-payment of the obligations arising from
       mortgage finance”.
      The GSF was given the right to establish strict rules on fraud by beneficiaries in obtaining
       and using subsidized housing units, and setting heavy penalties in case of fraud, including
       imprisonment.
62.     With these amendments, GSF became part of the Ministry, and GSF and the Ministry had
much greater flexibility in deciding on the parameters of the program when market conditions or
policies would change. However, mortgage lending had virtually stopped during the unstable
financial period since the revolution with high inflation rates and rising mortgage rates.
Developers moved to a higher income customer who could pay for housing by shorter term
installments.
                                                19
63.      In May 2014, when the CBE decided to create an economic stimulus program focused on
the housing/mortgage sector, it adopted the same criteria to define low-income household
eligibility for its program as the GSF. It provided LE 20 billion in funds to be utilized by banks
for mortgage lending to low-income households at seven percent at a fixed margin of 4.5 percent.
SHF/GSF administers the program with the banks and its subsidy program is now linked to the
special CBE financed loans.
64.      The AMP has been able to reduce the subsidy amounts and reach a lower income group as
a result of the CBE program. CBE and the Ministry/SHF will have to coordinate their programs
closely when the CBE decides that the macro-economic situation allows for a phasing out of the
stimulus program. Discussions have focused on how such coordination may best be
institutionalized. As a first step, the CBE has been included as a member of the board of the SHF.
65.     Program performance. Prior to the announcement of the CBE stimulus, 14,000 subsidies
were provided by the AMP through the market rate mortgage channel. After the CBE stimulus
was announced the AMP received 155,000 applications, and an additional 10,000 subsidies were
issued by the end of 2014. The AMP is yet to increase its capacity to process subsidy applicants
and expand its interface systems with participating banks and bank branches in order to reach the
scale required to achieve the SHF’s short-term one million houses. A breakdown of beneficiaries
shows the following:
      AMP reaches households well within the low-income target group of LE 1,000 to LE
       2,500 per month with a median income for beneficiary households of LE 1,700, or just
       above the poverty level established for Egypt by the World Bank. That is a major
       achievement with relatively small average subsidy amounts of LE 19,000 (US$ 2800). In
       comparison, most upfront subsidy programs in Latin America require subsidies of double
       that amount. Subsidy amounts are, however, difficult to compare because Egypt still
       provides additional supply side subsidies on land and infrastructure.
      AMP has a broad geographic reach and while under the old regime subsidies mostly went
       to households in NUCA developments around the major cities, under the new SHF
       program with CBE loan conditions its beneficiary pool includes households from 16
       Governorates spread over the Delta, Upper Egypt and Greater Cairo.
      AMP includes an above average proportion of female headed households in the income
       brackets its serves. The third and fourth percentiles of the national income distribution
       include 20 and 15 percent female headed households respectively and AMP includes
       24 percent female headed households in its program to date. For a mortgage-linked
       subsidy program this is a rare achievement.
66.     Delivery mechanism. When a new tranche of the AMP is publicly announced, interested
households submit an application to the GSF. The GSF enters the applicants in its computer
system and checks whether the applicant has received a previous housing subsidy. Incomes and
residences are verified by two external firms reporting to the GSF. The GSF includes the credit
bureau report in the applicant’s file. Once approved the applicant selects a lender of its choice
from a list of participating financial institutions for the mortgage loan. The GSF sends the
electronic beneficiary file to the bank. Computer systems are linked in real time. The bank
underwrites the household, if found acceptable and creditworthy, issues the loan and pays the
developer at the same time that the GSF pays out the subsidy. The GSF rejects roughly 25 percent
of applicants and the banks an additional 10 to 15 percent. Beneficiaries can choose any housing
unit on the market (existing and new) that is affordable to them under the conditions of the AMP
                                               20
(i.e., income levels and other program requirements, down-payment and mortgage loan
requirements). Table 2 shows details of the allocation of subsidies under the old subsidy regime
across regions, gender and income.
67.     However, the numbers reached are small even if the program operated only for a short
period before the revolution interrupted the demand for the product. Lack of housing units in the
market and low LTV ratios that limited low income households’ ability to qualify for a mortgage,
were the main reasons given for its small size. However, GSF did little to advertise the program
and refrained from embarking on a publicity campaign. It did post educational material on its
website, but the public had no way to find out about the program. With the official announcement
of the CBE program (in May 2014), the true demand for the product has come into perspective—
155,000 applications were received within days of the announcement. What needs to happen now
is to scale up the capacity of SHF/GSF to process applications. In addition, the SHF has to entice
private developers to re-enter the market and increase production levels of qualifying units. They
will need to have confidence that the CBE program will remain in place until mortgage rates have
come down, before embarking on project design.
68.     The SHF and the CBE are effectively coordinating their housing programs. The CBE
stimulus has offered LE 20 billion to banks and their affiliated MFCs to make seven percent, 20
year mortgage loans to households qualifying under the AMP program and intends to expand the
program with growing demand. To date 14 banks have signed up for the program for a total
amount of LE 12 billion. The SHF and the CBE are coordinating program implementation, and
apply their subsidies to the same targeted low-income group. In addition, the CBE is on the Board
of the SHF, as well as on the GSF’s Board. Bi-weekly progress reports are prepared on
disbursements under the CBE-AMP programs. While the CBE program is currently still in
expansion mode, the SHF and CBE intend to closely coordinate the future phasing out of the
program when interest rates come down and a stimulus is no longer needed. The CBE will review
and adjust its stimulus program in close coordination with the SHF in the next months in order to
accelerate its optimal use, in particular for the low-income bracket, for which the demand from
banks is higher due to the increased availability of finished homes.
69.     Strengthening the program to reach targeted numbers of beneficiaries. As the core
program of the SHF, the AMP will need to issue at least 150,000 subsidies per year within three
to four years and going forward in a steady state. This will require funding, system improvements
and expansions, including:
      Increasing funding in order to reach required numbers of beneficiaries;
      Expanding IT systems and automating the process of applicant screening and data
       entering;
      Improving outreach programs to beneficiaries in order for self-screening to work more
       efficiently;
      Integrating systems into the unified subsidy database of the Ministry; and
      Increasing consumer education programs, and instruction programs for local authorities to
       improve their understanding of the AMP, in order for them to better guide applicants and
       enforce program rules.




                                               21
                                     Table 2: Affordable Mortgage Finance Program Applicants by Income Band—up to May 2014


                                                    Delta Governorates                Greater Cairo           Upper Egypt Governorates   Male    Female
Income        Total       Percentage
                                              Male       Female     Total     Male        Female      Total   Male    Female     Total

1,000          416             3.9             42          20            62   258           84        342      12        7        19     312      111

1,100          614             5.7            127          51        178      371           91        462      1         3         4     499      145

1,200         1,066           10.0            251          94        345      646          141        787      5         3         8     902      238

1,300          702             6.6            168          50        218      433           85        518      6         2         8     607      137

1,400          733             6.9            146          62        208      441           87        528      21        6        27     608      155

1,500         1,348           12.6            234          53        287      946          174        1,120    18        7        25     1,198    234

1,600          883             8.3            140          39        179      643           90        733      12        2        14     795      131

1,700          938             8.8            166          43        209      652          106        758      10        7        17     828      156

1,800          589             5.5            121          31        152      408           55        463      9         4        13     538      90

1,900          387             3.6             80          30        110      257           37        294      4         3         7     341      70

2,000          575             5.4            132          36        168      386           36        422      2         1         3     520      73

2,100          360             3.4             65          35        100      237           30        267      4                   4     306      65

2,200          409             3.8             70          39        109      280           35        315      7         3        10     357      77

2,300          301             2.8             63          35            98   178           37        215      2         5         7     243      77

2,400          440             4.1             81          57        138      269           35        304      4         1         5     354      93

2,500          397             3.7             81          29        110      277           37        314      11        5        16     369      71

Total        10,700          100.0            1,967        704      2,671     6,682       1,160       7,842   128       59        187    8,777   1,923

 Source: Guarantee and Subsidy Fund (2014).




                                                                                     22
70.     As a champion of the low-income mortgage sector, SHF/GSF will also need to play a
strong leadership role in finding ways to include existing housing units in the mortgageable
property pool and help design incentives for lenders to expand into more risky segments of the
market. It may need to work with mortgage insurers to develop special products to alleviate
increased credit risks they may be exposed to when moving into down-market segments.
SHF/GSF may also consider developing a special lender guarantee program to stimulate lending
to creditworthy informally employed.
71.    An additional task GSF may be able to embrace is in the development of non-mortgage
housing finance products together with financial institutions that operate in that space and in
finding ways to connect subsidies linked to such products.
72.     Public Rental Subsidy Program for Tenants. A new public rental program has been put
in place by the Government to urgently provide housing for households with incomes below
LE 1,500 per month. This is an ongoing program administered by the Ministry, which is part of
the SHF. Units are fully paid by the Government so that rents only need to cover maintenance
and management. Current rent levels are indeed set at a level that makes rents affordable to
households in the lowest decile of the income distribution, based on a rent-to-income ratio of
25 percent. The SHF intends to review rent-to-income ratios, and introduce supplementary
demand-side subsidies to accommodate households with very low incomes, while making sure
that rental incomes are sufficient for real estate companies to take on the management of the
stock. The Program will support the design, implementation and financing of this demand-side
subsidy and related management system for low-income tenants.
73.     For example if the monthly income is LE 900, the rent level would be set at LE 225
(which is the maximum rent to income ratio which has been set at 25 percent), this would allow
for the unit to be affordable without an additional subsidy. Whereas if households have an
income of LE 800 for example, the amount of monthly subsidy would be equal to the difference
between the rent (LE 225) and the household’s contribution of LE 200 (25 percent of 800) of its
income, thus leaving LE 25 which is unpaid amount in need of subsidy. Similarly it would
amount to LE 75 for an income of LE 600 and so on. Special attention should be paid to
households with very low-incomes for whom 25 percent of income is still a high burden. Under
an income level to be defined, a small but flat contribution may be preferable. The Government
is considering a refundable security-deposit of LE 1,000 as a protection for non-payment in
addition to a LE 1,000 deposit for maintenance. The SHF will have to consider if these deposits
will be possibly covered by an additional demand-side subsidy, not to eliminate lowest-income
applicants due to eligibility.
74.    Delivery mechanism. Assuming the management of the public rental units is outsourced,
which the World Bank strongly recommends. The subsidy should be paid monthly by the SHF to
the manager of the unit, thus ensuring that the money is used to pay the rent. The tenant would
then be charged only for the difference between the rent due and the subsidy provided. The
manager would warn the SHF immediately in case of relocation of the tenant, or the non-
payment of the rent. This will allow the SHF to discontinue the payment of the subsidy.
75.    Monitoring. This type of subsidy requires not only an initial assessment of the
beneficiary’s income but also its periodic update. In homeownership programs, those applicants
who would try to declare a lower income in order to get a higher subsidy would be penalized by


                                              23
not getting their loan or getting a lower amount than expected. With a rental subsidy, such a
counterweight does not exist, which makes assessment of income quite a challenge.
76.     An initial statement along with a periodic income statement (including all types of
income from all household members) will be required. The difficulty arises in verifying the
information provided. If administrative data exists, it needs to be also checked whether the
household is enrolled in any other social benefit programs, and if so penalties should be enforced
(such as the loss of right to maintain occupancy). For example, assuming that the units are
allocated to the beneficiary for a seven year period, it is strongly recommended that the incomes
are checked at the mid-term point, which is after three and a half years of their presence in the
premises. The tenant should also be allowed to ask for an earlier revision of his/her subsidy in
case he undergoes –and can prove- an important and durable income change.
77. International Experience. Direct subsidies to tenants have been introduced in most
developed economies because they proved to be more effective, that is to say better targeted,
more transparent and more flexible than subsidies provided to builders or investors. However,
they have a few drawbacks, including:
       They entail heavy fiscal commitments: their cost to the budget is 0.8 percent of GDP in
        France and 1.5 percent in UK; applicable rents must therefore be capped or the number of
        assisted household limited USA;
     They require the collection and update of information on beneficiaries: this is an obstacle
        to their introduction in emerging countries which have not developed the sophisticated
        interconnected databases on social programs beneficiaries that are in use in developed
        economies; and
     They have a limited impact on quantity and quality of the private rental housing sector.
78.     Most European countries use a combination of tenant and investor subsidies. As their
social housing stock had become sizeable, they tended to emphasize tenant subsidies but very
few (Netherlands) stopped subsidizing the supply of social rental housing. In the few countries
which have not adopted tenant subsidies (Belgium, Luxemburg, and Portugal), the rent in the
social housing sector is first calculated based on a cost-rent method and then adapted to
household income. This system is complicated to manage and often requires the payment of
balancing subsidies to the landlord. In the USA, project-based rental subsidies given directly to
landlords are based on a similar mechanism. This type of subsidy was the most common form in
the USA in the 1970s but now plays only a small role.
79.     Nowadays, the most popular forms of these types of subsidies are allowances and
vouchers:
     Housing allowances in the form of direct payments to the tenants to assist them with
        monthly payments are given in most European countries; and
     Vouchers are given to tenants in the USA so that they can find affordable accommodation
        in the private rental sector. The tenant selects the dwelling, and the landlord receives the
        difference between a portion of the tenant’s income and a predetermined rent. Sometimes
        this is done on the basis of a formula; other times the amount of assistance is determined
        by an assessment of area market rents.
80.   Private Rental Subsidy Programs for Investors (new, unfinished, and vacant). As
mentioned above, tenants’ subsidies are not usually sufficient to increase the supply of private

                                                24
affordable rental units. Incentive packages are therefore necessary to attract private investors to
rental housing for moderate income households. They consist of two distinct demand-side
programs, for investors and for tenants. Incentive schemes will be offered to private rental
investors who would commit themselves to rent out their units to households with moderate
incomes (in the range of LE 900 to LE 2,500) for a given period of time. The scheme would
concern investors buying newly-built units from developers or renting out previously-owned
units that were either left unfinished, or kept vacant. The Program would support the design of
the investor incentive program, which may include upfront subsidies by the SHF.
81.      Rental housing is an attractive investment only if the after-tax net rate of return compares
favorably with that of alternative investments that have similar risk and liquidity. In theory, the
benchmark for this type of comparison is the government bond of a frequently used maturity
(10 to 15 years), plus some additional return to compensate for the actual or perceived risk.
When data on tenants’ default are not available, investors tend to overestimate this risk. When
the rental law is unbalanced and favors tenants, or when court decisions are not enforced, the
rental risk is high and investors will add a high risk premium.
82.     Targeting and subsidy size. Two types of private investors or landlords are usually
distinguished, individuals or small-scale owners, and institutional investors. The first category is
the most numerous in almost all countries, individuals own 70 percent of all rental units in
Mexico, more than half in the USA, and 67 percent in Germany. In the second category of
landlords are medium- and large-scale institutional owners, such as insurance companies,
pension funds, or real estate investment trusts (REITs). These entities typically invest in all asset
classes. Housing is usually a small share of their portfolios, mainly for diversification purposes,
and it is often limited to the top-of-the-range part of the market. Even if they are few, it is
important to have them on the market, because they will play the role of “champions” and drag
along in their wake the numerous small scale investors who do not have their knowledge of the
market.
83.    Incentive schemes should thus be offered to private rental investors committing
themselves to rent out their units to households with moderate incomes for a given period of time
(to be determined). The schemes could concern both investors buying newly-built units from
developers or renting out previously-owned units that were either left unfinished, or kept vacant.
84.     The amount of the subsidy will be based on the calculation of the risk-adjusted rate of
return agreed upon by investors and the Government, given the commitments accepted by the
investor (maximum rent charged, and number of years). The form of the subsidy should be
different for individuals and institutional investors. The former will prefer short term incentives
such as upfront subsidies or tax cuts, whereas soft loans may better suit the latter, which are
long-term investors. Different types or scales of subsidies should apply to new investment and
unfinished or vacant units.
85.     Delivery and monitoring. Subsidies will be administered by the GSF as long as they
consist of soft loans or in the form of upfront subsidies, because the monitoring would be the
same (see below). Only if they were in the form of tax subsidies, they would of course be
allocated by and be under the control of the Internal Revenue Service.
86.     International Experience. Specific incentives for private investors are not often met
because rental housing is neglected by many governments (in Brazil the official reason is that it
is a speculative activity). The best example is probably Germany. This country supported the

                                                 25
construction of a large rental stock after World War II with a combination of direct subsidies,
loan guarantees and accelerated depreciation to all investors against administrative tenant
allocation and maximum rent for a limited period. In France, tax incentives have been granted to
individuals investing in newly-built rental housing since 1984, in order to boost the house
building sector in general and the private rental sector in particular. Indeed, private rental had
been subject to massive disinvestment due to increasing tax burden, rent controls and other
restrictions for landlords. Two types of schemes have been used, a proportion of the investment
is either directly deductible from the income tax, or from the rental income (“accelerated
depreciation”), thus creating a deficit than can offset taxes on other income. Units have a
maximum purchase price limit and must be rented during a minimum period during which a rent
ceiling is applied; in most schemes, there is no income ceiling. These schemes proved to be
efficient to increase developers’ production, but many investors resell after the required rental
period, often to reinvest in a new rental unit.
87.     The Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) provides incentives for private sector
production of low income housing in USA (1986 Tax Reform Act). It consists in a "present
value" tax credit of 70 percent of the cost of new construction (9 percent annually over a 10-year
period) or 30 percent of the cost of acquisition of existing low income housing (4 percent
annually). There are two options for commitments, either 20 percent of units must be rented to
households with income less than 50 percent of the county median income, or 40 percent of the
units must be rented to households with income less than 60 percent of the county median
income. The maximum gross rent, including utilities, should not exceed 30 percent of the
maximum qualifying income and units should be maintained as low income for a 15 year period
(or tax credits are recaptured).
88.    In these three countries, various types of subsidies are also available for modernization,
with a recent emphasis on energy conservation works. France has several schemes when
modernized units are rented to low-income. It has also introduced a tax penalty for owners of
vacant units, it is either a specific tax (vacancy tax) in the larger urban areas, or a piggyback of
the property tax.
89.    Private Rental Subsidy Programs for Tenants (new, unfinished, vacant, and
decontrolled) In addition to investors’ incentive packages, the Program will support the
development of demand-side tenant subsidies aiming at filling the gap between the rent required
by the investor and the payment affordable to the tenant, estimated at 25 percent of income.
Technical Assistance (TA) for designing the scale of the subsidy, the collection and monitoring
of information on beneficiary households (income, family size, etc.), and the delivery of the
subsidy (to the tenant, the manager or the landlord) will be provided to support the
implementation of the Program.
90.     Targeting and subsidy size. Targeted beneficiaries are lower-income households, in the
range of LE 900 to LE 2,500. The rent level and its subsequent increase will be set by the
Government. Assuming that the initial rent agreed upon taking into account the subsidies granted
to the investors is LE350, and the rent affordable to the tenant is estimated at 25 percent of
his/her income as above, tenants with incomes below LE 1400 would be eligible to a subsidy.
The maximum subsidy amount would be allocated to households with a LE 900 monthly income,
reaching LE 125 (= 350 – 900*0.25).



                                                26
91.     Delivery mechanism and monitoring. These items are similar as in the case of public
housing tenants except that the stakeholders are different, tenants have higher incomes and
owners are private instead of public. As for the self-targeting option, it may exist too provided
that developers and investors offer different types of units.
92.     International Experience. A specific danger of tenant’s subsidies in the private sector is
their inflationary effect when rents are not kept under control. This risk does not exist when rents
that investors are allowed to charge are set by contract or by law during the period when
subsidies are granted to investors and tenants. In case of rent decontrol, the risk exists and limits
must be set to the rent charged or to the subsidy amount, or to both. When France introduced
demand-side subsidies at the same time as a new rental law (1948), rent increases were
regulated, and finally, a new rent control was established.
93.     Capacity Building for a Successful Rental Housing Sector. Egypt does not have deep
experience with social rental housing programs, and the SHF will require significant capacity
building and TA to establish a management support system for social rental housing that includes
capacity building for Governorates, tenant selection methods and tenant education programs, rent
collection/enforcement systems, and maintenance issues. In addition, the SHF needs support for
the design of employer rental housing.
94.    Public Rental Housing Program (Support to Governorates). The SHF will support
Governorates in implementing the government public rental housing program. Assistance will be
provided to the SHF to establish efficient and equitable targeting and allocation systems, as well
as maximize the links between housing programs and social and economic poverty alleviation,
and labor markets (increased housing mobility, improved location of social housing).
95.      Targeting and Allocation Rules. The public rental program put in place by the
Government will provide housing for households with incomes below LE 1,500.The term of the
contract will be seven years. Security of tenure is important for low-income households who
have no alternative on the formal housing market. However, unlimited right of occupancy should
indeed not be granted without ever checking eligibility. These contracts should roll-over if the
eligibility criteria are still fulfilled. Better-off tenants should not be evicted, but should be
required to pay a higher rent. A mix of incomes among tenants in one building or development is
desirable both from social and economic perspectives.
96.      In order to reduce the risk of misallocation, priority criteria could be added to the
eligibility criteria. A point system designed to allocate units to the neediest households (families
with children, widows, disabled and those living in the poorest living conditions) is a fairer and
more transparent solution than delivery on a first-come first-served basis or through a lottery.
Although previous attempts proved not to be enforceable because of lack of sound data, fraud
and administrative incompetence, this mechanism should be privileged.
97.     International experience. Targeting and allocation rules used to select future tenants in
social rental programs vary a lot between countries (and over time). However, they always are
among the following:
      No targeting;
      Income targeting;
      Self-targeting (size, cost of housing or land);
      Group targeting (young workers, handicapped, refugees, urgent need, etc.);

                                                 27
      Combination of criteria (system of points);
      Waiting lists (first arrived, first served); and
      Lottery.
98.     EU experience shows that, in countries where housing policy is decentralized at the local
level (Denmark, Ireland, Netherlands, UK, or Sweden), there are no or little eligibility rules other
than being a local resident. Priority is therefore the most important, whereas, in countries where
housing policy is centralized or standardized (Belgium, France, Germany and Italy), eligibility
rules are more important. Waiting lists are based on a system of points in Germany, Ireland,
Netherlands, and UK, and on a first-come first-served basis in Denmark, Finland, Sweden, and
Belgium (Flanders). In Italy and Luxemburg, available units are attributed by independent
allocation commissions.
99.     Exit Rules. Security of tenure is quite general (if no misbehavior or unpaid rents) and
results in an obligation to re-house the tenant if the building is destroyed (in France, no rent
increase is allowed in this case). In Germany, the city must re-house tenants at the end of the
contractual period. In Sweden, the tenant has the right to exchange his unit with another tenant in
the social or in the private sector. When tenant’s income exceeds limits, he/she has to pay a
higher rent (France and Germany). In France this is compulsory by law when the income gap is
more than 20 percent above the ceiling. The rent reaches market level in order to incite those
who can afford it to leave the social sector. In extreme cases, when income remains high during
several years, the tenant is required to leave.
100. Management of the Social Rental Housing Stock. In the few countries that remain
deeply involved in social rental housing (mainly in Central and Northern Europe), the most
widespread form of property management is by private entities. These entities have multiple
types of legal status—non- or limited profit ad-hoc organizations (France, Netherlands, and UK),
cooperatives (Denmark, Finland, Germany, and Italy) and, in some cases (Czech Republic,
Germany, and Switzerland), individuals and legal entities. Cooperatives are present in many
countries, but it is the associations and companies that manage the most sizeable housing
capacities. This is the case in the UK and in Ireland with the Housing Associations, and in the
Netherlands with the working cooperatives, which are associations or private foundations.
101. Local governments may be involved through PPP and higher level governments only
provide subsidies and guarantees. More and more often, tenants play a role in the management.
In the UK, where local governments remain the principal manager of social rental housing, the
publicly-owned social housing stock is managed by recently created organizations, the
“ALMOs” (Arm’s Length Management Organizations). ALMOs’ board is composed of tenants,
local authority members, and independent persons. This historic means of direct management by
public authorities only subsists in a minority of EU member States. Delegation to public
establishments remains on the contrary widespread in Finland, France, Germany, Poland, and
Sweden. The level of attachment is most often local, but it can be intermediate (department in
France or region in Italy) or national, in smaller countries (Luxemburg, Northern Ireland and
Portugal).
102. Private management is more likely to avoid or reduce the risks that led public rental
housing to failure in many countries including Egypt, generally due to the occasional
misallocation, poor rent collection and consequent lack of frequent maintenance. Companies
should be chosen with regards to their successful experiences in private rental management, was

                                                  28
has been preferably focused on low-middle income properties. Their terms of reference should
include; allocation rules, rent collection (non-payment issues) and maintenance guidelines,
relations with the SHF (reporting) and Governorates. Given the lack of past experience and the
limited utility of international cases, an early experimentation is absolutely necessary.
103. Guidelines for Employer Housing Program. Developing employer housing is important
to coordinate the development of housing and economic activities and reduce commuting time.
There are not many examples of employer housing in Egypt. Employers will build a few units as
a reward to their best executive but will not provide units for their lower income employees.
Some parastatal employer housing was built by state economic authorities such as the Suez
Canal, the railways and the petroleum sector. Low-cost housing estates were built by the
Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of Defense for their officers and staff. The creation of a new
Suez Canal, with the expected one million jobs, provides an opportunity to experiment employer
housing in Egypt.
104. International Experience. Due to the increasing flexibility requirements for labor in a
globalizing economy, increasingly liberalized housing markets, low returns and high capital
deployment, employer housing has considerably lost in relevance and has been marginalized. On
the positive side, since origination and collection is linked to the labor contract and enforcement
methods are strong (e.g. wage garnishment), legal issues are less relevant. Also, employers as
corporations usually are subject to fairer tax treatment than individuals.
105. As an alternative to the direct provision of units to employees, French private companies
contribute to a mutual Fund through the compulsory “One percent levy”, now limited to
0.45 percent of all salaries. In return a number of units are allocated to their workers in the social
rental housing programs. Comparable systems exist in Greece and Tunisia, but they are focused
on home-ownership.
C.     Egypt’s Mortgage Market
106. The mortgage sector will be of critical importance for the successful implementation of
the SHF one million houses program, since the mortgage-linked subsidy program will be the
major program in the SHF. The mortgage linked subsidy program is the most efficient of the
subsidy programs in terms of subsidy costs per beneficiary household, and can reach income
groups just below the 20th percentile if combined with the CBE stimulus funding. So far the CBE
has made available LE 20 billion for low-income mortgage lending by banks, enough for
approximately 200,000 mortgages of LE 100,000 (assuming an average unit price of 135,000,
down payment of 15 percent or LE 15,000, and an average subsidy of LE 19,000). The CBE
intends to expand the program further if needed. No trigger criteria have been set for the future
phasing out of the program. Irrespective, the mortgage sector is critical for the success of the
affordable mortgage program whether dependent on the stimulus funds or its own funding
sources. Its potential for growth is, therefore, a concern of the Program.
107. Development of the Mortgage Sector. Egypt’s mortgage market is young and still small.
However, over the past decade, the major building blocks for a developing mortgage market
were put in place. One of the main objectives of Egypt’s financial sector reform program in the
early 2000s was the creation of a vibrant mortgage market. A number of critical reforms were
initiated in the early period of 2001 to 2008 and the legal framework for a mortgage finance
system were put in place, including:


                                                 29
          Issuance of Real Estate Finance Law 148 of 2001, which set the rules for the types of
loan products banks and MFCs could offer to borrowers (including the tripartite mortgage
agreement), the rules of enforcement, and established the institutions that would regulate the
mortgage sector—the Mortgage Finance Authority (MFA), and the GSF.20 The functions of the
MFA were incorporated in EFSA in July 2009.
          Issuance of Law 143 of June 2006 which amended the stamp-duty law of 1980 and
eliminated stamp-duty on mortgage loans.
          Amendments of Law 88 of 2003 in June 2005 allowing the sharing of individual credit
information upon the individual signing a consent clause, the establishment of a private credit
bureau (Q3 of 2007- I-Score), and the sharing of credit information with non-bank financial
institutions. Credit information proved invaluable in the underwriting process and has lowered
credit risk for lenders.
          Clarification of Real Estate Finance Law 148 concerning the use of adjustable rate
mortgages in 2008, allowing the use of adjustable rate mortgages.
          Establishment of a mortgage liquidity facility—EMRC established in June 2006,
which provides mortgage lenders access to longer-term re-financing of their housing finance
loans (see Box 1).
          Enforcement of foreclosure provisions stipulated in the law showed that foreclosure
on delinquent mortgagees went through the courts in 2008 with a shortened property recovery
and eviction time, setting positive precedents and providing confidence to mortgage lenders.
          Enhancement of consumer protection and financial education minimum disclosure
requirements pertaining to loan information and establishing programs of consumer education
run by the EFSA.
          Streamlining of property registration through a nationwide mapping and titling
program. In addition the time to register a mortgage and the fees charged have been significantly
reduced. Fees for title registration were lowered in August 2007 to a maximum of LE 2,000 21 as
a significant incentive for owners to register their property.
          MFA, working closely with the Ministry of Justice issued three circulars that were
widely distributed to all Real Estate Publicity Department (REPD) offices; (i) January 2007: lists
the procedures governing the authentication of mortgage contracts, the registration of a mortgage
as an encumbrance on the land, the requirement of lender approval as a precondition for
registration of subsequent transactions on mortgaged properties, and procedures associated with
foreclosure; (ii) March 2007: instructs REPD offices to facilitate block registration of NUCA
landholdings (a prerequisite to the subsequent registration of Takhssiss contracts); and (iii)
Clarifies the tripartite contract.
          NUCA and MFA signed a protocol in September 2006 to stimulate property
registration in the new urban communities. The protocol provides for the transformation of the
Takhssiss form of land allocation (a conditional transfer of ownership) into a legal instrument
acceptable to lenders. This transaction is made possible through NUCA’s authorization of

20
   GSF was formed partly to channel subsidies to eligible lower-income groups. The law required the GSF to provide temporary
social safety for borrowers who experience adverse life events, such as a loss of employment that might lead to payment defaults.
It would guarantee up to three monthly mortgage payments on behalf of borrowers in times of demonstrated social hardship. The
guarantee fee was set at one percent of the loan amount. This provision was removed as part of the amendments to Real Estate
Law 148 in 2014.
21
   The fee has dropped successively from 12 percent in the early 1990s to 6 percent, 4.5 percent, 3 percent, and then to a flat fee.

                                                                30
landholders to mortgage their contract (in effect converting it to ownership), provided that they
paid NUCA the full land price owed. This latter provision remained a hurdle in low income
housing mortgage provision.
        Following this agreement, in 2013, a Law on Real Estate Transactions registration
in New Cities was passed, it allows: (i) NUCA authorities to issue a certificate for a property or
the unit, which is financed via mortgage finance; (ii) the chairmen of the authority’s
administrative apparatuses to sign tripartite mortgage finance contracts to be ratified by the
Minister of Investment; and (iii) part registration of large projects. These measures will make
mortgage lending in NUCA territories possible and easier.
        A related decree (No.10 of 2014) was issued by the Minister of Housing and Urban
Development on February 3, 2014, on new procedures and institutions for registration of
Mortgaged NUCA properties.
                              Box 1: The Egyptian Mortgage Refinance Company (EMRC)
      EMRC is a joint stock, wholesale (second tier), specialized liquidity facility operating on commercial
principles with a profit making goal. It is majority privately owned by the users of its financial services, mainly
participating mortgage lenders (PMLs)—active banks and real estate lending companies. Many public and private
lenders joined the capitalization of the EMRC. The CBE was the strategic investor with an approximate 20
percent ownership share, the GSF had a 2 percent ownership share, and 19 banks and 6 mortgage companies held
the remaining shares.
      The EMRC does not take deposits nor does it lend directly to households. It helps to set up prudential
lending standards for mortgage lending while enhancing competition in the mortgage market by creating a longer-
term funding source accessible to both depository and non-depository institutions. Primary lenders use EMRC
refinancing to improve the efficiency of their portfolio and risk-management activities, which helps lower
financial spreads in the market to the benefit of borrowers. EMRC’s core business is the refinancing or purchase
with recourse of longer-term residential mortgage loans originated by primary lenders for which it would raise
term funding by issuing bonds and notes in the capital markets. The initial on-lending funds were provided by the
World Bank.
     EMRC’s narrow mandate was intended to strengthen the credit quality of its bonds and keep its cost of
funds relatively close to rates on government bonds. EMRC began its refinancing operation in August 2008. Its
outstanding refinancing portfolio reached LE525 million at the end of 2013 up from LE 277 at the end of 2010
and a cumulative portfolio size of LE 710 million. Participating lenders are mostly made up of MFCs who do not
have access to deposit funding. The total mortgage market size was LE 4,800 million at the end of 2013, split 50-
50 between banks and MFCs. However, the global financial crisis and the macro-economic volatility following
the 2011 revolution created an unfavorable climate for EMRC to go to the capital market. At the same time,
mortgage lending stagnated since 2012.
      Recently, EMRC created two new products which were approved by its board, the assignment of rights for
two big banks in good standing, and the portfolio acquisition of installment sales by developers through mortgage
companies. This latter business line is limited to 25 percent of EMRC’s portfolio. The refinancing is based on
pre-signed checks and the registered collateral, and the portfolio has to be registered with EFSA. The assignment
of rights for the two banks will allow refinancing of a mortgage portfolio rather than individual loans. The
mortgage loan documentation is still not standardized across institutions, and it is therefore time-consuming for
EMRC to prepare each refinancing transaction. Standardization of documentation across the industry and
automation will be a high priority when growth in the mortgage sector takes off.

*
 There are a number of international examples of liquidity facilities, including the Federal Home Loan Banks in the US, CagamasBerhad in
Malaysia, Caisse de Refinancement de l’Habitat in France, the Jordan Mortgage Refinance Company, and the Swiss Pfandbriefe In stitute.
These institutions have similar missions but somewhat different structures, powers and privileges.




                                                                   31
108. For new residential construction to grow as required by the SHF, the lack of capacity at
the Egyptian Survey Authority (ESA) in providing cadastral information will need to be
addressed.
109. These legal building blocks spurred the growth of the mortgage sector in Egypt, both in
terms of outstanding loan amounts and in its geographical distribution. The sector reached
LE 4750 million in outstanding loans by the end of 2012 with banks having 50 percent and
MFCs 50 percent of the total outstanding loans.
110. Since 2012 the mortgage market has stalled below LE 5,000. Reasons for the stagnation
in mortgage lending have been three-fold: (i) the global financial crisis and the deteriorating
macro-economic situation in Egypt after the Egyptian revolution increased interest rates and
decreased demand for mortgages, and limited supply; (ii) stagnation in the construction of
affordable houses because of the retraction of land contracts after the revolution and a flight by
developers to a higher income market segment that could afford to buy a house with develop
installment financing; and (iii) restrictive provisions in Real Estate Finance Law 148 for loan-to-
value and payment-to-income ratios that made it hard for the low-income households to qualify
for a loan.
111. The first constraint has been addressed by the stimulus program for the housing sector
implemented by the CBE, at least temporarily. The restrictions in Real Estate Finance Law 148
have recently been removed through the legal approval of amendments to it. The lack of private
sector supply of low-income units is still a major concern and has temporarily been solved by
government contracting out the construction of housing units. This latter concern is not core to
mortgage sector development.
112. Amendments to this law were sought as early as 2010, but the revolution delayed passing
of the amendments until April 2014. Amendments included the provision that the decision to
establish Payment-to-Income limits and Loan-to-Value provisions for mortgage lending should
be made by the regulator – EFSA- rather than have statutory limits included in this law.
Moreover, the board of GSF was given the authority to propose the rules and conditions of low-
income subsidized housing and establishing the criteria for low-income housing projects. EFSA
immediately drafted Executive Regulations that set the maximum annual income level of
beneficiaries of the subsidy program to LE 27,000 for individuals and LE 40,000 for households
and the maximum Payment–to-Income ratio at 40 percent as recommended by GSF Board.
113. Amendments also stipulated that GSF did not have to enforce the credit guarantee
program mandated for MFCs under the Law. The guarantee protects the lender against non-
payment by the borrower for a period of three months at a one percent fee of the loan amount. It
was, however, perceived by MFCs as expensive relative to potential benefits, as unfair because
commercial banks are not force to buy this guarantee and as an ineffective tax because it did not
appear to respond to a product in demand by either the lenders or the borrowers. In addition,
lenders had misgivings about the level of capital held by GSF to pay out claims particularly in
case of a systemic reason for default. GSF has, since the amendments were passed, removed the
guarantee provision, and has stimulated private insurers to develop mortgage insurance for the
low-income lending program. It has agreements on rates with several insurers that have entered
into this market.
114. EFSA has developed other regulations that will be helpful for the growth of the mortgage
sector and housing market, these include regulations: (i) on the structure of Real Estate

                                                32
Investment Entities; (ii) on the issuance of bonds allowing for shelf-registration; (iii) on bond
issuance by government entities for infrastructure financing; and(iv) on the new regulations for
private pension funds.
115. The current legal and regulatory system for the mortgage sector appears therefore to pose
no major constraints to its growth. On the financial side, the main constraint is the uncertain
macro-economic situation of the country and related high cost of funding. Banks are liquid and
when the macro-economy stabilizes, the liquidity facility can play a role in the risk management
of financial institutions. The regulatory infrastructure exists for new mortgage insurance
companies to write mortgage insurance contracts.
116. Mortgage Sector and the CBE Stimulus. In May 2014, the CBE implemented a stimulus
program focused on the mortgage sector on the request of the Ministry. It made 4.5 percent funds
available to banks for on-lending at seven percent to the low-income group as defined by GSF.
MFCs are excluded from the program (they are not regulated by CBE) but may receive CBE
funds through their affiliated banks with a maximum of 20 percent of the total allocation to the
bank. While this places the MFCs at a disadvantage to the banks in the expansion of their
mortgage portfolios, it will not necessarily negatively affect the implementation of the SHF
program. The banks, with their large branch systems and greater liquidity will be in better
position to roll out a large-scale decentralized mortgage program for low-income households.
SHF/GSF administers the program with the banks.
117. When the CBE program was announced it immediately resulted in a flood of mortgage
cum subsidy applications at the GSF (155,000 applications were received). This shows the
sensitivity of the demand for mortgages/housing to interest rate changes. The Program has
therefore two main concerns:
        Will the CBE program be extended to allow the growth of the low-income mortgage
portfolio of banks to reach the required number for the Affordable Mortgage Program (AMP) for
the next few years? Or if it is phased out when interest rates come down how will that process be
coordinated and what criteria for the phasing out will be set?
        When CBE stimulus funding remains limited to the current level of LE 20 billion
(200,000 low-income mortgages) will banks be able and interested to fund the growing
requirements for loans from their own funds? What role will the EMRC be able to play or capital
markets more generally? And will the AMP be able to increase subsidy levels in such a way that
low-income households will be able to benefit from the program?
118. Much depends on the movement of interest rates in the economy. The current trend of
decreasing interest rates is positive. If mortgage interest rates come down to their “natural” level
of, for example, 12 percent, the AMP can increase the subsidy levels modestly to still reach the
low-income household target.
D.     Location of New Housing Units
119. The one million housing units to be built as part of the SHF over the next six years are
planned to be distributed across all Governorates according to demand. A tentative distribution
plan has been prepared based on population (see Table 3), and NUCA and the Governorates will
identify specific parcels of land for the developments. It is anticipated that all new housing



                                                33
developments22 will be built on publically owned, undeveloped land that is allocated, auctioned,
or disposed of through a PPP arrangement with the selected public or private developer.
120. The Social Housing Law 33 of 2014 that established the SHF also sets guidelines for the
location of land parcels for the SHF programs. Specifically, it requires that selected land is
designated for social housing use in the prevailing master plan, it is served by utilities and basic
services such as schools and education, and is connected to the transport network. Governorates
submit a list of land parcels to the SHF for review. A committee comprised of technical staff
from the SHF, the General Organization for Physical Planning, and from the Governorates will
conduct site visits to all proposed areas and will evaluate that the site meets with the established
criteria. The committee then sends their recommended list for decision to a higher committee
comprised of representatives from all ministries.
Table 3: Preliminary Distribution of Low-Income Housing Development under SHF by Governorate

             Governorate                    Unit Allocation         Percent of        2013 Population            Percent of
                                                                      total                                        total
Cairo                                                   139,400           13.9                  8,911,178                10.7
Alexandria                                               48,400              4.8                4,616,625                 5.5
Port Said                                                14,300              1.4                  640,603                 0.8
Suez                                                      7,200              0.7                  591,824                 0.7
Damietta                                                 13,100              1.3                1,271,196                 1.5
Qaliubiya                                                51,400              5.1                4,537,560                 5.4
Dakahlia                                                 63,600              6.4                5,692,113                 6.8
Sharkia                                                  63,700              6.4                6,174,048                 7.4
Kafr El-Sheikh                                           34,600              3.5                3,019,191                 3.6
Gharbiya                                                 49,400              4.9                4,546,650                 5.5
Monofia                                                  40,800              4.1                3,757,152                 4.5
Beheira                                                  56,500              5.6                5,494,904                 6.6
Ismailia                                                 22,700              2.3                1,113,836                 1.3
Giza                                                     77,300              7.7                7,205,122                 8.7
BeniSuef                                                 44,000              4.4                2,689,399                 3.2
Fayoum                                                   29,800              3.0                2,979,029                 3.6
Minya                                                    51,400              5.1                4,865,896                 5.8
Assiut                                                   47,100              4.7                4,011,564                 4.8
Sohag                                                    48,700              4.9                4,345,836                 5.2
Qena                                                     39,400              3.9                3,427,691                 4.1
Aswan                                                    14,600              1.5                1,355,420                 1.6
Luxor                                                    14,300              1.4                  489,533                 0.6
Red Sea                                                  12,800              1.3                  328,839                 0.4
New Valley                                                3,900              0.4                  214,419                 0.3
Matrouh                                                   4,300              0.4                  408,634                 0.5
North Sinai                                               2,600              0.3                  409,401                 0.5
South Sinai                                               4,700              0.5                  160,894                 0.2
Total                                                1,000,000                                83,258,557

22
     Existing units (e.g., formerly vacant units) are also eligible under the AMP and private rental programs.

                                                                   34
121. In total 266 marakez (or villages) may benefit from SHF housing ranging from 9 to
116,520 units with an average allocation of 4,500 units. In this scenario, the largest governorate
beneficiaries are Badr City (116,520 units) and 15 Mayo (50,760) in the Cairo Governorate.
122. By way of an example of evaluating the quality of the sites selected for development, an
analysis was conducted to compare the number of units preliminarily planned for construction
with the existing number of jobs and current population. This analysis was done at the marakez
level. As a proxy for access to job opportunities, the ratio of new units to the number of existing
jobs (employment density) was calculated.23 A low ratio (i.e. small number of units being built in
a village with a high number of jobs) indicates that families occupying the new units would have
a greater chance of accessing employment near to their home. A high ratio, or null for the
villages that have no formal jobs, indicates that it would be difficult or impossible to access
employment within the village. Based on this blunt filter, over half of the planned units could be
characterized as having a good location in terms of access to employment opportunities (see
Figure 3). Obviously, the presence of a job within the boundary of the village does not
necessarily mean that the new housing occupant will be able to get a job, but it is a positive
indicator of economic activity and opportunity.
123. On the other hand, about 31 percent of the planned units will be located in villages with
either no formal jobs (according to the Egypt Labor Market Panel Survey—ELMPS) or with a
number of jobs that is less than the number of planned units. It is possible that some of these
villages neighbor more economically dynamic villages in which the new housing occupants
could seek employment, but depending on the distance between villages, it could still represent a
significant transportation burden.
124. Another blunt filter was used to measure access to community services – future
population (once units are occupied) compared to existing population. A low ratio (i.e., small
number of new population compared to the existing) indicates that the new families can be
relatively easily absorbed into the existing community and make use of community services such
as schools, health centers, retail shops, recreation, etc. A high ratio indicates that the new
housing development will have a significant impact on the existing village, especially in terms of
demand for services. Based on this analysis, it could be concluded that more than half of the new
units (56 percent) can be easily absorbed into their respective villages (Figure 4). However, a
large portion of the planned units represent a significant increase in the village population. An
example is Badr City where the new development represents a 24 fold increase in population.




23
  Egypt Labor Market Panel Survey (2012) was used to estimate the number of jobs.

                                                            35
125. The distribution of preliminarily planned housing construction vs existing jobs for each
village was plotted by region (Figures 5). With the scatterplot, a positive trend would be a higher
number of units in villages with a higher number of jobs. By this measure, Upper Egypt fairs the
best and Greater Cairo the worst. Figures 6–9 provide this same set of data in map format.




                                                36
Figure 5: Scatterplot of Preliminarily Planned Housing Construction vs. Existing Number of Jobs per Village




126. Based on this analysis, there is a clear need to develop a set of differentiated methods to
judge the adequacy of proposed land parcels for the location of social housing developments.
Such methods need to take into account employment opportunities, current and future, not just in
the villages where housing units are planned but in adjacent villages and districts. Similarly, the
analysis of the impact of new housing developments on existing community services needs to be
refined. The location of new social housing may be appropriate from the perspective of
employment opportunities but not from the perspective of access to services. Such projects may
require additional funding to support new community infrastructure such as schools, health
clinics, and public safety. Also, significant coordination with the private sector on the planning
and location of new housing is necessary. The SHF needs support to develop such methods and
procedures and improve the geocoded data bases to do the necessary analyses. It needs capacity
to monitor the implementation of its locational guidelines.




                                                    37
Figure 6: Map of Preliminary Distribution of Housing Units and Existing Jobs – Lower Egypt




Figure 7: Map of Preliminary Distribution of Housing Units and Existing Jobs –Greater Cairo




                                            38
Figure 8: Map of Preliminary Distribution of Housing Units and Existing Jobs        Figure 9: Map of Preliminary Distribution of Housing Units and Existing Jobs –
                               –Middle Egypt                                                                         Upper Egypt




                                                                               39
IV.    INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
A.     Overview of Existing Housing Entities
127. The main government organization concerned with housing in Egypt is the Ministry, and
most entities involved with the housing sector are associated with it. The Ministry is large,
complex, and multi-faceted, overseeing a number of executive and planning/research
organizations that operate semi-independently, a summary of the Existing Housing Entities
Affiliated with the Ministry, prior to the establishment of the SHF are shown below in Table 4.
These organizations report directly to the Minister and are not under the central management
structure of the Ministry. Moreover, the structure and lines of authority in the Ministry
periodically change. As part of this assessment, it was not possible to obtain an up-to-date
organizational chart of the Ministry. In the following profiles, staffing levels have been noted for
those departments and associated agencies when made available.
128. Management of the Ministry. The Ministry is steered by the Minister, who enjoys
considerable direct powers over all administrations and associated agencies. For direct support
he has the Minister’s Office (maktab al-wazir), which is composed of three central authorities
(al-idarat al-markazia), including: (i) the minister’s office affairs (shu’unmaktab al-wazir); (ii)
legal and parliamentary affairs; and (iii) planning and monitoring. There is a Vice-Minister
(wakilawillil-wazir) directly under the Minister.
129. Below the Minister are two central bodies called general cabinets (diwanaam), one for
housing (diwanaamliliskan) and one for development (diwanaamliltaamir). These general
cabinets provide administrative and monitoring functions.
130. The Housing Cabinet is composed of three sectors (qitaa), including: (i) the Housing and
Utilities Sector (composed of a number of units mainly concerned with housing information,
monitoring, regulations and building permits, housing studies, building materials statistics, and
utilities information); (ii) the Construction and External Affairs Sector; and (iii) the
Administrative Development and Diwan Aam Affairs Sector. The housing cabinet has 455 staff.
Top management (mudiraam and above) account for 53 (including two in the Housing
Directorates of each governorate) and other professional specialists total 203.
131. The development cabinet oversees the Central Agency for Development and its executive
units. It has two sectors (qitaa)—the Company and Authorities and Building Materials Affairs
Sector and the Financial and Administrative Development Affairs Sector.
132. Associated Authorities and Agencies. Under the Minister are a number of agencies and
authorities that operate semi-independently and which constitute the executive and planning
arms of the Ministry. A short profile of the most important of these agencies is provided below
and categorized based on their primary mandate as either: (i) policy, research, and monitoring;
(ii) household support to access housing; or (iii) housing construction. The first two categories
fall within the scope of the Program.
133.   Policy, Research, and Monitoring includes:
         General Organization for Physical Planning (GOPP). GOPP is the main physical
planning body in Egypt. It prepares land use, regional, and strategic plans for new development
in the desert as well as for existing cities and towns. It contains a National Urban Observatory
(NUO) with the mandate to provide all relevant data and urban indicators to decision and policy
makers responsible for preparing and formulating national urban development policies. It also

                                                40
drafts planning legislation and serves as the planning arm for NUCA. It is not an executive
agency. Its functions have been partly decentralized into seven planning regions (Greater Cairo,
Alexandria, Canal Zone and Sinai, North Upper Egypt, South Upper Egypt, and the Red Sea).
GOPP has 455 staff, including the seven regional centers. Top management (mudiraam and
above) account for 79, first degree specialists total 74, second degree specialists total 75, and
third degree specialists total 116.
        Housing and Building Research Center (HBRC). The HBRC carries out research on
building technologies and building materials development. It also has training programs and
sponsors conferences and seminars. It has links to universities and other research organizations
in Egypt and abroad. HBRC has 601 staff, of which 186 are research professionals (most of
whom are also university professors), 67 are support professionals, and 43 are technicians.
134.   Household Support to Access Housing (demand-side programs) includes:
        Guarantee and Subsidy Fund. The GSF, a demand-side mortgage subsidy program,
was established by Presidential Decree in 2003. GSF initiated a more efficient mortgage-linked
subsidy in 2010. The GSF has 55 staff members. With the amendments of the Real Estate
Finance Law 148 in July 2014, the GSF moved from the Ministry of Investment to the Ministry.
135.   Housing Construction (supply-side programs) includes:
          New Urban Communities Authority. NUCA is an economic authority with its own
budget that manages the development of all new towns in Egypt (currently 22). It has
extraordinary powers over lands designated for new towns as embodied in Law 59 of 1979. It
builds housing and provides infrastructure and also manages land within the new towns. NUCA
has 18,942 staff, including those in the 22 new town agencies. Top management (mudiraam and
above) account for 203 and professional specialists total 4,893.
          Central Agency for Development (al gihaz al-markazilil-taamir). The Central
Agency for Development has a long history of executing important infrastructure projects, either
directly or through its regional affiliates. There are nine regional arms: Greater Cairo, Middle
North Coast, West North Coast, the New Valley, the Red Sea, North and Middle Sinai, South
Sinai, Canal Zone, and Fatamid Cairo. The Agency also constructs housing, usually associated
with its major infrastructure projects. It has 5,337 staff, including the nine regional agencies. Top
management (mudiraam and above) account for 385 and professional specialists total 884.
          Housing Directorates. Each of the 27 Governorates has a Housing Directorate to
execute social housing projects and other infrastructure. They perform a building control
function and also issue building permits, other licenses, and fines. Administratively they have a
unique dual nature, coming under the Governor (and the Ministry of Local Development)
administratively, but with financial and personnel control through the Ministry. This dual line of
reporting is the source of frequent confusion.
             Housing Companies. There are five housing companies that have land concessions
and manage specific urban areas. They also build housing estates. These are Shams, Nasr, Masr
al-Gedida, al-Maadi, and al-Maamoura Companies.
          General Authority for Construction and Housing Cooperatives (GACH). Housing
cooperatives in Egypt are governed under Law 14 of 1981. Formerly this authority was an
important builder of low and middle income housing for cooperative members, operating much
like other government housing providers, with access to state land and soft loans from the



                                                 41
government. Its production has diminished greatly in the last 10 years. It is said to have 300
employees in total.

Table 4: Summary of Existing Housing Entities Affiliated with the Ministry (pre-SHF)

Existing Entity Name                  Summary of Functions                                            # of Staff
Policy, Research, and Monitoring
Housing Cabinet                   Housing information, monitoring, regulations and building              455
                                  permits, housing studies, building materials statistics, and
                                  utilities information
GOPP                              Physical planning; NUO collects data and urban indicators              455
HBRC                              Research on building technologies and building materials               601
                                  development; training and conferences
Household Support to Access Housing (demand-side programs)
GSF                               Mortgage-linked subsidies for low-income households                    55
Housing Construction (supply-side programs)
NUCA                                Builds housing, provides infrastructure, and manages land           4,893
                                    within the new towns
Central Agency for Development      Executes large-scale infrastructure projects, including housing     5,337
                                    related to the projects
Housing Directorates                Develops social housing and infrastructure projects in the           NA
                                    Governorates
Housing Companies                   Implement land concessions, manage specific urban, and build         NA
                                    housing estates
General Authority for Construction  Builder of low and middle income housing for cooperative             300
and Housing Cooperatives            members

B.       Structure and Institutional Arrangements of the SHF
136. The organization structure and institutional arrangements for the SHF were developed
with input from international housing experts.
137. Governance. The SHF is governed by a Board of Directors whose primary role is to
develop a general policy that guarantees the achievement of the Fund’s objectives. Other roles
include:
        Developing social housing policies and supervise the implementation of the Social
         Housing Program and its various components;
        Ensuring that the competent authorities are involved in discussing and approving the
         estimated draft budget for the Fund, prior to initiating the process, and approving the
         closing accounts as per applicable rules;
        Accepting donations, grants, and assistance, and obtaining loans from local and external
         entities;
        Approving the internal regulations, and regulating decrees related to the Fund’s financial
         and administrative affairs without being restricted by the Government’s rules and
         regulations;
        Approving the organizational structure of the Fund, and the policies related to hiring of
         employees, and identifying their rights, and terminating their services;
        Approving the cooperation and expertise exchange agreements with similar local,
         regional and international agencies and organizations to collaborate in the area of social


                                                       42
            housing and real estate and setting-up the rules for contracting with Egyptian and foreign
            advisors.
           Approving the annual Fund plan and reviewing the periodical reports submitted to report
            progress achieved and the financial status of the Fund.
           Reviewing all topics of interest that fall within the Fund scope, which are referred to the
            Fund by the Minister of Housing, Utilities and Urban Communities; and
           Developing the general policy for investing the Fund’s money.
138. The Board may form a committee formed of its members, and delegate to the committee
or to the President some of its competencies. The Chairman in turn, may delegate one of the
members to perform a specific task based on the recommendation of the Fund Executive
Manager.
139. The membership of the Board reflects the multi-sectoral nature of the social housing
sector. It consists of 15 members, including the Minister of Housing, Utilities and Urban
Development, who serves as its chair. Other members include the Minister of Finance, Sub-
Governor of CBE, Minister of Planning, Minister of Local Development, Minister of Social
Solidarity, Minister of International Cooperation, a counselor in the capacity of Vice-President
for the State Council, Deputy Minister of Defense, the Executive Director of the SHF, and five
members competent and experienced in areas related to the Fund’s activities in economics and
finance who are appointed by a Ministerial Decree. The Head of legal affairs of the SHF is also
on the Board, but does not have voting rights. The Board meets a least once a year, and the
agenda of Board meetings is drafted by the Executive Director and approved by the Chairman.24
140. Organizational Structure. In its first year of operation, the SHF will have approximately
50 staff under the leadership of an Executive Director (Figure 10). By the end of the Program, it
is anticipated that the total number of staff will reach 100. The Executive Director is appointed
by the Prime Minister based on a nomination made by the Minister. The appointment is for a
term of three years and can be renewed once. The Executive Director can be dismissed by the
Minister upon the approval of the Prime Minister.
141. The Executive Director represents the SHF in dealings with all other institutions and
ministries. His main tasks include:
           Developing the various aspects of the Social Housing Program, and submitting it to the
            authorities for approval;
           Developing the business plan and the Fund’s annual plan and supervising its
            implementation;
           Preparing the Fund’s annual budget and implementing it after getting it approved by the
            competent authority;
           Suggesting the policy and strategy for investing the Fund’s money and implementing it
            after being approved by the competent authority;
           Developing the internal regulations for the Fund, and identify the competencies of the
            approved organizational structure;
           Managing the affairs and daily business of the Fund including the communication and
            awareness policy to introduce the Fund, and its objectives to the public, and to
            collaborate with all concerned entities;

24
     SHF’s Board plans to meet every three months during the initial phase of the program.

                                                                 43
        Preparing the periodical reports related to the Fund’s business, and evaluating its
         performance;
        Performing all the legal actions, including signing contracts required by the duties of the
         job, and representing the Fund in courts;
        Developing rules that regulate the delivery of the Fund services, and facilitating the Fund
         business. In this respect, he may hire the needed personnel, pay the amounts due for the
         required goods, services, and incentives from the total cost of these services, for which
         payment has to be bound by such rules; and
        Approving the formation of the necessary committees to facilitate the Fund’s business.
                             Figure 10: Organizational Structure of the SHF




C.       Consolidation of Entities
142. All units or departments in the Ministry with housing policy, planning, and programs as
part of their mandate will be deactivated, and all staff will either join the SHF or be reassigned to
related entities. The GSF will continue to be under the authority of the Ministry. In regard to the
social housing programs of NUCA and the Governorates, a contract with the SHF will set the
principles and objectives of such programs and define rules for monitoring and proper
implementation.



                                                  44
143. A human resource review is currently underway to identify the specific Ministry staff
members who will be brought to the SHF. It is anticipated that a significant number of staff will
be reassigned to NUCA to help support their scale-up of activities. No civil servants will lose
employment as part of this consolidation.
D.     Assessment of the SHF’s Organizational Structure and Institutional Arrangements
144. The World Bank provided technical advice to the Ministry for the design of the SHF
organizational structure and institutional arrangements. The schema described above integrates
international good practice, adapted to the realities of the Egyptian political, economic, and
social context.
145. A somewhat comparable entity is Mexico’s National Housing Commission, La Comisión
Nacional de Vivienda (CONAVI). This federal institution was established 2001 as part of their
Social Development Secretariat, Secretaría de Desarrollo Social (SEDESOL) to coordinate
housing policy at the national level. Per the Housing Law of June 2006, it was made autonomous
and placed above SEDESOL. The law provided a more comprehensive institutional setting for
the sector, and expanded CONAVI’s responsibilities to defining the housing policy, coordinating
government efforts in the sector as well as monitoring and evaluating the implementation the
NHP, among others. Starting in 2007, it also became responsible for resources for upfront
housing subsidy programs.
146. Although CONAVI assumed these roles incrementally over the past decade, there are
some lessons from their experience that could apply to the SHF. First, available and serviced
land is the most significant bottleneck to the provision of affordable housing. In Mexico, the
quality and degree of coordination between agencies in HUD has been a challenge. This can be
seen in the impasse between CONAVI and SEDESOL concerning which agency provides
housing assistance for the very poor and indigenous populations and which agency holds
decision-making power on land management and development for low-income housing. As such,
the SHF’s coordination function should also take into consideration entities with urban
development and land ownership roles.
147. Moreover, a World Bank review of housing policy in Mexico in 2009 found that
CONAVI’s effectiveness in coordinating and harmonizing housing policies and programs across
agencies has been limited. Institutional and financial imbalances exist between CONAVI, which
coordinates housing policy and has the lion’s share of the resources for up front subsidies, and
their Low-Income Housing Fund, Fondo Nacional de Habitaciones Populares (FONHAPO). The
role of FONHAPO, which was originally focused on assisting the very poor in accessing the
housing system, has been particularly unclear since CONAVI was granted autonomy from
SEDESOL in 2006. The lesson for the Government is that it is necessary to consolidate/eliminate
redundant housing entities in parallel with the introduction of the SHF in order to provide clarity
to the sector and enhance impact.
V.     PROGRAM EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK
A.     Evolution of Social Housing Expenditures in Egypt
148. Public sector entities in Egypt delivered 1.26 million public housing units during the
period 1982-2005 (36 percent of all formal housing units built during this period in urban areas)
at a total cost of LE 26 billion, excluding the cost of land and off-site infrastructure. The public
sector did provide the bulk of affordable housing units built during the 1982-2005 period with 82
percent of all low-cost and economic housing units.

                                                45
 149. Various public sector agencies in Egypt have made considerable investments in housing
 over the years. Table 5 shows housing investment flows from 1993/94 to 2013/14 by agency. As
 can be seen, the Governorates have consistently made the largest investments. Second in level of
 investments is the General Organization for Cooperatives, although since 2005 their investment
 portfolio has shrunk considerably. Third in volume of investments is NUCA. Other public sector
 agencies have made modest housing investments. Note that while the large majority of these
 investments have gone for social housing (low-cost and economic units, between 85 percent and
 95 percent of total units produced), the remainder have gone into middle, upper, and luxury
 housing.

 Table 5: Historical Investments in Housing by Public Sector Agencies
                                                         Public Sector Investments
                                          Joint                           Housing
Fiscal                     Housing                                                                  Taamir
         Governorates                    Projects        Coops            Finance         HDB                    NUCA          Total
Year                      Companies                                                                 Agencies
                                         Agency                            Fund
 1993           398,025      146,043                      292,319           20,516         62,459     26,000       89,449     1,034,811
 1994           456,829      142,953                      225,148           35,450        112,095     55,922      109,931     1,138,328
 1995           395,793      111,110                     1,309,169          30,799        125,981      5,287       20,521     2,183,160
 1996           366,568       99,233                      967,567           18,033         96,623                 298,927     1,846,951
 1997           579,243       83,606                     1,174,925          36,758         61,396               1,068,266     3,004,194
 1998           407,521      119,913                      261,421           27,229        141,061               1,156,442     2,113,587
 1999           348,481       64,307        4,174         203,065           14,293        124,191     47,344      516,122     1,321,977
 2000           268,637       63,144                ‫ــ‬     43,496           12,361        109,180     41,505      277,644       815,967
 2001           355,745       97,699        3,661         466,046            7,110         69,549     17,579      267,112     1,284,501
 2002           274,141       33,595        2,640         590,580            6,311         38,051      4,700       21,914       971,932
 2003           389,968       69,343        7,432         254,533            3,468          3,830      4,639       23,108       756,321
 2004           291,355       97,922       10,408         200,739                    ‫ــ‬    16,790        321       59,449       676,984
 2005           337,769      119,877        3,671         321,869            7804          19,968       6150       71,574       888,682
 2006           549,831      112,422        7,995          73,612            8125          61,833       1021      258,897     1,073,736
 2007           961,261      192,442       24,668         148,655            6225          66,135       3578      880,470     2,283,434
 2008         1,624,144      350,824       84,470          43,711            9421          58,149      12461      844,209     3,027,389
 2009         3,426,596      552,615       42,185         236,470           18013          99,171      21728      727,191     5,123,969
 2010         3,348,724      311,251        1,128          53,256           13012         134,845    1450442      618,575     5,931,233
 2011         2,298,606      276,712                ‫ــ‬     25,172            6708          79,349     350754      227,462     3,264,763
 2012         1,023,298      264,237        2,021                    ‫ــ‬              ‫ــ‬   193,139      58641      211,500     1,752,836
 2013           608,310      245,314        1,203        1,200,673                   ‫ــ‬    83,301      10960       19,100     2,168,861

Total    18,710,845     3,554,562      195,656       8,092,426        281,636         1,757,096 2,119,032      7,767,863    42,663,616



 150. The sources of funding vary considerably by year and by agency with an average of
 LE 2 billion (US$ 280 million) and a median of LE 1.8 billion (US$ 250 million). Up until 2005
 sources were mainly from the National Investment Bank in the form of soft loans (low interest
 rates) to the agencies, which were repaid from beneficiary contributions and, as was often the
 case, shortfalls were topped up from the central budget of the Ministry of Finance. At the local
 level, public housing programs in Governorates are, with few exceptions, part of the central

                                                               46
government domain. The insufficient transfers for affordable housing relative to needs and
demand prompted Governorates to use local off-budget instruments to supplement their social
housing programs, particularly through the Local Services and Development Fund (LSDF). After
2005 almost all housing investments were channeled through the NHP. The nominal subsidy
element per beneficiary was directly allocated from the central government budget. Other
investment costs (mainly serviced land) came from the housing agencies themselves.
151. The central government also provides extensive subsidies to make housing affordable to
beneficiaries including land price write-down to developers and supply of long-term financing at
below-market interest rates. The result is a significant fiscal burden and an inability to meet
actual needs. Priority for these highly subsidized units is usually given to newly married couples
and families that lost their shelter in slum clearance programs or as a result of their building’s
collapse.
152. Cost of Low-Income Housing. Construction costs increased significantly over the last
decade, mainly due to a rapid rise in the price of building material such as steel reinforcement
bars and cement. According to the Housing and Utilities Sector, the current average cost of 75m2
for-sale low-income housing unit in Egypt is LE 150,000 (US$ 21,000) including land and
services. At 55 m2, rental units are estimated
                                                Table 6: Planned Versus Executed Public Sector-Built
to cost LE 120,000 (US$ 16,800).
                                                 Housing Units
B.     Historical Funding Predictability
                                                    Fiscal                            Percentage
153. The difference between planned and                          Planned   Executed
                                                    Year                              of the Plan
executed housing units can be used as a           1982–1987      238,750    197,647          82.8
measure of historical funding predictability,     1987–1992      600,000    386,879          64.5
if financing for the units is considered the      1992–1997      802,431    331,417          41.3
binding constraint to delivery. As shown in       1997–2002      229,708    287,957         125.4
Table 6, achievement of annual targets            2002–2003       50,000     21,788          43.6
varies widely year to year.                       2003–2004       50,000     14,945          29.9
                                                  2004–2005       50,000     17,440          34.9
C.     Projected Revenue of the SHF               2005–2006       50,000     14,136          28.3
                                                  2006–2007       50,000     16,567          33.1
154. In terms of sustainability, the SHF is       2007–2008       50,000     25,774          51.5
being capitalized by the donation of the          2008–2009       50,000     33,904          67.8
proceeds of sale of 50,000 units from the         2009–2010       50,000     53,561         107.1
United Arab Emirates and the sales proceeds       2010–2011       50,000     70,293         140.6
of    115,000      units    currently    under    2011–2012       50,000     78,529         157.1
construction in the Governorates. Funding         2012–2013       50,000     30,573          61.1
for the construction of the units by the          2013–2014       50,000     19,329          38.7
Housing Directorates in the Governorates
                                                 Total    2,470,889 1,600,739          64.8
came from the State budget as part of the
stimulus package. It is estimated that the sale
of these 165,000 units will provide the SHF with US$ 3.2 billion (LE 23.1 billion) in FY 14/15.
In addition to this endowment, Law 33 of 2014 provides the SHF with other financial resources,
including:
     a.    Proceeds generated from rental, sale or lease of buildings established by the Fund;
     b.    Budget surplus from NUCA.
     c.    State budget allocations for specific projects.

                                                47
        d.      Amounts allocated for the Fund's purposes in agreements held with the State.
        e.      Revenues generated from penalties collected in accordance with provisions of the
                law, and Construction Law 119 of 2008, and its executive regulations.
        f.      Donations, grants, endowments, and amounts received from estates accepted by the
                Board of Directors.
        g.      Loans approved by its Board of Directors.25
        h.      Revenue generated from investing the Fund’s money.
        i.      One percent of the revenues generated from the auction of properties owned by the
                State, and public entities, and public sector companies.
        j.      25 percent of the revenues generated from the sale of lands owned by local entities.
155. These revenues represent a mix of earmarked funds (items b, e, i and j), annual budget
allocations (c and d), irregular windfalls (f), debt (g), and self-generated funds (a and h). An
assessment of the scale and predictability of the first two types—earmarked funds and annual
budget allocations—was conducted for the past five years. Actual State budget allocation for
social housing programs was used as a proxy for the amount that would have been channeled to
the SHF had it existed in those years (Table 7).

Table 7: Historical Scale of SHF Funding Sources                                                                 (US$ millions)

                                                         FY           FY           FY         FY 12/13      FY 13/14        Average
Source of Funding
                                                        05/06        06/07        08/09
NUCA budget surplus*                                    101.6        110.9        139.8           5.2        202.8            112.1

State budget allocations for the Fund                                                            137.0       137.0            137.0
projects**
One percent of the revenues generated                   1.6         3.0           2.6                          9.9***           4.3
from the auctions of sale of properties
owned by the State, and public entities,
and public sector companies
25 percent of the revenues generated
from the sale of lands owned by the local
units
* Consists of current surplus for years FY05/06–FY 08/09 and sum of other provisions and retained earnings for years FY12/13–FY 13/14.
**State allocations to the Ministry used as proxy. FY10–14 is LE 1.25 billion per year for the NHP.
*** Revenue for NUCA auctions Jan–Sep 2014.

Table 8: Projected Revenue of the SHF                                                                            (US$ millions)

          Source of Funding                          FY 14/15 FY 15/16               FY 16/17         FY 17/18     FY 18/19       FY 19/20
Returns generated by the Fund (sales)                       -  1,118.9                1,118.9          1,118.9      1,118.9        1,118.9
Returns generated by the Fund (rental                       -      3.8                    3.8              3.8          3.8            3.8
NUCA budget surplus                                         -     75.0                   75.0            100.0        100.0          100.0
State budget allocations                                250.0    139.9                  139.9            139.9        139.9          139.9
Other amounts allocated by the State                  2,573.4        -                      -                -            -              -
Revenues generated from penalties                           -        -                      -                -            -              -
Donations, grants, and endowments                     1,118.9        -                      -                -            -              -
Loans                                                       -     68.1                   96.6            101.6        117.4          116.4

25
  The SHF is the sole recipient of foreign loans and grants for housing, housing finance and urban planning, and is responsible
for setting the rules of use of such funds in agreement with the lender/donor.

                                                                      48
Investment revenue                                    -            1.2            1.2         1.1         1.0            0.8
One percent of auctions of State                    5.0            5.0            5.0         5.0         5.0            5.0
properties
25 percent of auctions of Governorate                 -       1,118.9         1,118.9     1,118.9     1,118.9        1,118.9
land
                                               3,947.3        1,411.8         1,440.3     1,470.2     1,485.9        1,484.7
Total

156. Based on this analysis, without external debt or revenues from operations, the SHF would
have a budget of about US$ 253.4 million per year on average. It is necessary to keep in mind
that this sum must cover all demand- and supply-side activities. Based on the average cost of an
economic unit (LE 150,000), this implies that current budget levels would facilitate the
development of about 12,000 units per year.
157. This high-level review of past funding also shows that these sources of funding
experience some fluctuation. Land sales are particularly unstable because real estate markets are
highly cyclical. The demand for land, and the price of parcels, fluctuates violently, even in urban
areas experiencing strong, long-term growth.26
158. To project SHF revenues in the medium-term, conservative estimates of “earmarked”
revenues have been used. Specifically, a NUCA surplus of US$ 100 million, State budget
allocation of US$ 140 million, and US$ five million from state land auctions. It is assumed that
revenue for land auctions in the Governorates will be negligible (Table 8).
SHF Expenditures
159. In the short-term, the majority of resources in the SHF will be used for the construction
of housing, both rental and ownership. For ownership units, the SHF is reimbursed upon sale of
the unit to the beneficiary. However, a goal of the SHF is to gradually shift this balance in favor
of household support (demand-side programs) as the Government moves away from being the
primary producer of low-income housing and towards being an enabler of the whole housing
market Program expenditures are driven by the mix of housing type and source of production. To
forecast the sustainability of the Fund, a conservative base scenario of housing supply was
developed (Table 9) as well as a target number of demand-side subsidies per year (Table 10).

Table 9: Low-Income Housing Supply Assumptions                                                             (Units)
                                FY           FY        FY         FY        FY                  FY
                                                                                                          Total      Percent
                              14/15        15/16     16/17      17/18     18/19               19/20
                                                Low-Income Ownership
Governorates                 50,000      50,000     50,000    50,000     50,000             50,000      300,000        38
NUCA                              -      50,000     50,000    50,000     50,000             50,000      250,000        31
Private Sector               50,000       5,000     15,000    40,000     60,000             80,000      250,000        31
Sub-total                   100,000     105,000    115,000 140,000      160,000            180,000      800,000
                                              Self-construction Program
Governorates                       -          -          -    20,000     25,000             30,000       75,000       100
                                                  Low-income Rental
Governorates                       -     15,000     15,000    15,000     15,000             15,000       75,000        60
Private Sector
(employer, vacant,                 -            -         5,000    10,000        15,000     20,000       50,000        40
etc)

26
  Peterson (2009), “Unlocking Land Values to Finance Urban Infrastructure”.

                                                              49
Sub-total                           -    15,000     20,000   25,000    30,000                       35,000       125,000
                                              Total Low-Income Housing
Governorates                50,000       65,000     65,000   85,000    90,000                       95,000       450,000        45
NUCA                                -    50,000        50,000         50,000           50,000       50,000       250,000        25
Private Sector              50,000        5,000        20,000         50,000           75,000     100,000        300,000        30
Total                      100,000      120,000       135,000        185,000       215,000        245,000      1,000,000

Table 10: Cumulative No. of Household Beneficiaries under Inclusive Housing Finance Program                             (2016-2020)
                                             FY 14/15          FY 15/16        FY 16/17         FY 17/18     FY 18/19      FY 19/20

Affordable Mortgage Program                              -         50,000       125,000          300,000      500,000       725,000

Rental Programs                                          -           5,400        26,500          47,500       75,000       102,400

Total                                                    -         55,400       151,500          347,500      575,000       827,400

160. Table 11 presents the projected expenditures for the SHF. Assumptions for these
expenditures are provided in Annex 2.
Table 11: Projected SHF Expenditures                                                                                  (US$ millions)

             Expenses                   FY 14/15       FY 15/16         FY 16/17          FY 17/18         FY 18/19       FY 19/20
Ownership
Construction costs                                -     1,049.0              1,049.0        1,049.0         1,049.0         1,049.0
Self-construction program                         -              -                 -            139.9         174.8           209.8
Upfront subsidies (new                            -          199.3            332.2             398.6         465.0           531.5
construction)
Upfront subsidies (existing units)                -              -                 -                -             -                  -
Sub-total                                         -     1,248.3              1,381.1        1,587.4         1,688.8         1,790.2
Rental
Construction costs                                -          251.7            251.7             251.7         251.7           251.7
Rental subsidy (public)                           -            0.8               1.7              1.7           2.5             2.5
Rental subsidy (private)                          -              -               0.8              1.7           2.5             3.4
Sub-total                                         -          252.6            254.3             255.1         256.8           257.6
Policy, Programming, M&E
Overhead (salaries, offices, etc)                 -            2.0               3.0              3.0           4.0             4.0
Studies, Plans, and M&E                           -            2.0               2.0              2.0           2.0             2.0
Housing Data and Systems                          -            3.0               3.0              2.0           2.0             2.0
Sub-total                                         -            7.0               8.0              7.0           8.0             8.0
Total Expenses                                    -     1,507.8              1,643.4        1,849.5         1,953.6         2,055.8


D.       Sustainability of the SHF
161. In the scenario described above and supported by the Program, net income declines year
on year starting in FY15/16, but overall the SHF’s cash balance is quite buoyant due to its high
level of initial capitalization. An analysis was conducted to test the sensitivity of the SHF cash
balance in FY19/20 to a series of input variables including the: (i) number of public rental units;

                                                              50
(ii) size of the public rental subsidy; (iii) size of the upfront mortgage-linked subsidy; and (iv)
number of upfront mortgage-linked subsidies provided. Each variable was tested independently.
All four variables have negative slopes, meaning that as each increases, the FY19/20 SHF cash
balance decreases. The SHF is sustainable in the medium run, through maintaining a positive
cash balance due to its high capitalization. Similar to all subsidies funds, the SHF’s financial
sustainability is dependent on its capacity to contain its expenditures through the different
subsidies programs, which are managed by it. The base case scenario is shown in Table 12.
Table 12: Sustainability of the SHF in Base Case Scenario                                                    (US$ millions)

                            FY 14/15    FY 15/16           FY 16/17           FY 17/18         FY 18/19         FY 19/20
Net Income                    3,947.3     (96.1)            (203.1)            (379.4)          (467.7)          (571.1)
Cash Balance                  3,947.3    3,851.3            3,648.1            3,268.8          2,801.1          2,230.0


162. The sustainability of the SHF is highly sensitive to the number of public rental units.
Early plans for the SHF anticipated that 200,000 units would be produced as public rental. This
would have a deleterious impact on the SHF. The Program’s final target of 102,400 rental units
produced by the public and private sector is feasible. The public rental program will be
eliminated in the medium term. In regard to the demand-side rental subsidy, the SHF is relatively
insensitive to increases in the monthly rental subsidy. In fact, fully subsidized rents would have
an impact of only four percent on the cash balance of the SHF in FY 19/20.
163. The sustainability of the SHF is more sensitive to the size of the upfront mortgage-linked
subsidy than the number provided. Holding the number of upfront subsidies fixed at 725,000, its
cash balance would be depleted in FY 19/20 if the upfront subsidy reached LE 33,262. This
might occur when the CBE program is phased out and interest rates would increase by about
three percent. That scenario assumes, however, that the same income group and number of
households will be served and the same standard of housing unit will be provided. A more likely
scenario will be that the parameters of the program will be adjusted and fewer subsidies will be
issued. Under the CBE’s current interest rate conditions, the cash balance in FY 19/20 reaches
zero when the cumulative number of upfront subsidies exceeds 1.36 million units which is highly
unlikely.
E.        Program Expenditures
164. The Program supported by the Program-for-Results Financing (PforR) operation only
includes the policy, programming, and demand-side subsidy activities of the SHF. As such,
within the scope of the Program, expenditures will include salaries, operating expenses, goods,
and other overhead expenses related to policy, M&E, as well as the costs of the demand-side
programs. Table 13 provides a breakdown of the anticipated expenses during the life of the
operation. It is a subset of the expenditures shown in Table 10 (above). Total Program
expenditures are expected to be approximately US$ 2 billion (FY 15/16 – FY 19/20).

Table 13: Program Expenditures                                                                              (US$ millions)

                                             FY 15/16           FY 16/17         FY 17/18        FY 18/19       FY 19/20
Overhead (salaries, offices, etc)                    2.0                3.0              3.0          4.0            4.0
Studies, Plans, and Capacity Building                2.0                2.0              2.0          2.0            2.0
Housing Data and Systems                             3.0                3.0              2.0          2.0            2.0
Upfront subsidies                                  199.3              332.2          398.6          465.0          531.5


                                                           51
Rental subsidies                              0.8          2.5          3.4          5.0        5.9
Total Expenses                              207.1        342.7        409.0        478.1      545.3


VI.      PROGRAM RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND M&E
A.       Results Framework and Results Chain
165. The official mission of the SHF is to design housing laws and regulations, design social
housing programs, provide oversight for their implementation in consultation with relevant
housing entities, and to manage financial resources for social housing. A short-term, tangible
goal of the SHF is to fulfill the Government’s 2013 commitment to deliver one million homes for
low-income households. The longer-term aspiration of the Government, however, is to use the
SHF as a mechanism to transform the housing sector. The World Bank has been working with
the Ministry to define the roadmap within the Bank-supported Program that will help the
Government achieve this long-term goal.
166. To that end, the Program includes the five Results Areas described below. For each
Results Area, the key obstacles or challenges that it addresses as well as the “results chain” or
roadmap for working towards the ultimate outcomes are provided. Elements of the results chain
that are included in the operation design as Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), Program
actions (Program Action Plan), or Program results (Results Framework) are indicated with color
coding.
167. Results Area 1: Strengthening Governance and Institutional Set-up of the Housing
Sector. The social housing sector in Egypt has suffered from poor governance, fragmented
entities and programs that are weakly coordinated. SHF will consolidate critical expertise,
functions, entities, and programs related to low-income housing in one entity, as well as design
new ones with the objective of ensuring effective coordination, synergies, and sound governance.
With the goal of establishing an accountable, competent and responsive bureaucracy, the SHF
has appointed a competent and experienced Executive Director who is appointing a strong
leadership team and assembling core staff from the Ministry, in addition to experts in social
housing policies and program development. Corporate governance procedures for the
functioning of the SHF Board and Audit Committee will be established. As the primary channel
of funding for housing in the country, it is critical to ensure efficient use of public expenditures.
168. The Program includes a DLI to establish an internal audit function (DLI 1). The internal
audit function will include the assessment of risks associated with improper benefit payments,
use of analytical procedures, information system audit and assurance standards, and data mining
tools, spot checks and field visits to validate continued relevance of internal controls, including
the quality of the complaints mechanism, and follow-up on the timely implementation of audit
recommendations. The internal audit unit will also play an important role to foster enforcement
of the penalties for fraudulent practices established by law. The results chain for Results Area 1
is provided in Figure 11.
169. Results Area 2: Enhancing Transparency and Accountability of Social Housing
Programs. Management of information systems (MIS) is critical for the sustainability and
effectiveness of housing programs whether implemented through the public or the private sector.
The ability to efficiently collect accurate data on housing demand and production is a key input
for improving policy design, and the decision-making. Moreover, housing finance subsidy

                                                    52
programs need to be monitored regularly and adapted to changing social and economic
conditions. The establishment of a robust Research and M&E unit within the SHF is a
fundamental building block. Public dissemination of housing indicators, housing expenditures,
and program selection criteria is essential for promoting transparency and accountability. The
establishment of a robust integrated grievance redress mechanism will help address the local
level complaints and concerns in an efficient manner that ensures that beneficiaries have a voice
and are responded to in a timely manner.
170. In addition to the internal audit function described under Results Area 1, the Program
includes three additional DLIs focused on enhancing transparency and accountability in the SHF.
The first is the establishment of a housing M&E system that compiles a comprehensive set of
housing sector indicators, collected on at least an annual basis from Governorates, housing
agencies, ministries, and other relevant non-governmental organizations (DLI 2). This data is
used for planning and is disseminated to the public. The second is the establishment of a
functioning accountability and transparency mechanism, including, at a minimum: (i) a national
public awareness campaign targeted at potential Program beneficiaries; (ii) standard processing
times for subsidy applications; (iii) established procedures for rejected applicants to receive
explanation of program requirements not complied with; (iv) monitoring of rejected applications;
(v) establishment of a robust and integrated grievance redress mechanism; (vi) public
dissemination of consolidated data on number and location of beneficiaries, the SHF subsidy
expenditures, and pipeline housing developments; and (vii) publication of the program audited
financial statements (DLI 3).
171. Finally, the Program includes a DLI that simultaneously addresses leakage issues and the
significant housing vacancy problem. The SHF must establish a mechanism for monitoring the
occupancy of housing units for which subsidy is provided as part of the Program (DLI 4). This
system will include clear rules stipulating the limitations on the resale and occupancy of units,
procedures for communicating these rules to Program beneficiaries, a post-occupancy survey on
a representative sample of units, and procedures for dealing with non-complying beneficiaries.
The results chain for Results Area 2 is provided in Figure 12.




                                               53
         Figure 11: Results Chain for Results Area 1– Strengthening Governance and Institutional Set-up of the
         Housing Sector




 Source: World Bank (2014).

172. Results Area 3: Improving Access to Affordable Housing. The SHF will focus on
designing and subsidizing housing programs for underserved households —youth, low-income,
households in lagging regions—offering them a wider choice of tenure and house-types,
including rental options. The AMP has been successful in providing access to the formal housing
market with a financial package consisting of savings, subsidy, and mortgage, but it needs to be
scaled-up to meet the current and future demand of this income segment. However, a very large
segment of poor households cannot afford the monthly payment or qualify for a mortgage loan or
do not qualify due to informal incomes. These households require subsidized rental housing,
subsidies or guarantees to access mortgage loans or alternative forms of credit for housing in
order to acquire a new or existing house.
173. Despite the new Rental Law of 1996, there are multiple obstacles to the expansion of the
rental housing market in Egypt—a large proportion of the housing stock is frozen under the old
rent control, unfavorable tax laws (i.e. treatment of rental income), and cumbersome eviction
procedures.27 A byproduct of the dysfunctional rental market is the high number of vacant units.
The SHF will address these inefficiencies as mentioned above, in order to attract private rental
investors and address the chronic vacancy issue. Moreover, the Ministry is formulating a
strategic approach to incorporate vacant and unfinished housing units into the housing market. In
addition to creating new housing for low-income households, the Ministry will provide financial
incentives to owners of vacant or unfinished units in both formal and informal neighborhoods to
improve these units and bring them to the market.



27
     Units that are currently vacant or built after 1996, are not impacted by rental control.

                                                                    54
174. The Program design includes two DLIs focused on incentivizing the delivery of demand-
side subsidies to low-income households (DLIs 5 and 6). The targets set for ownership subsidies
represent a significant scaling-up of the AMP. To achieve the rental subsidy targets, the SHF will
need to develop and launch the public and private rental subsidy programs. It is important to note
that DLI 4, the mechanism for monitoring and enforcing housing occupancy by targeted
beneficiaries will help to ensure that new programs do not add to the current stock of vacant
units and that elite capture or leakage is minimized. The results chains for Results Area 3 are
provided in Figures 13 to 15.
Figure 12: Results Chain for Results Area 2 – Enhancing Transparency and Accountability of Social
Housing Programs




Source: World Bank (2014).

 Figure 13: Results Chain for Results Area 3 – Improving Access to Affordable Housing (Homeownership)




                                                   55
Source: World Bank (2014).

    Figure 14: Results Chain for Results Area 3 –Improving Access to Affordable Housing (Rental)




Source: World Bank (2014).




                                                56
              Figure 15: Results Chain for Results Area 3 – Improving Access to Affordable Housing
                                      Utilizing Vacant and Unfinished Units




Source: World Bank (2014).

175. Results Area 4: Promoting Well Located Social Housing. Equitable access to services,
connectivity and amenities is essential to foster well-functioning urban areas and to ensure long
term sustainability of the housing sector, notably through lower vacancy rates. The Program will
support the design and financing of demand-side social housing programs to increase
affordability and access to housing. It is anticipated that most new housing developments will be
built on publically owned, undeveloped land allocated, auctioned, or disposed of through PPP
arrangements. To reduce the risk of increasing sprawl and spatial inequality, the Program will
incorporate eligibility criteria to ensure that units have access to basic services and infrastructure
and will include a DLI (DLI 7) to promote better linkages between housing and employment.
176. Specifically, Program eligibility criteria mandate that sites should be: (i) designated for
social housing by urban planning authorities28; (ii) connected to basic utilities; (iii) connected to
the transport network; and (iv) accessible to basic services, such as schools and health clinics.
DLI 7 will incentivize that units acquired with demand-side subsidies supported under the
Program are located near employment opportunities. This will be measured as the percentage of
Program units located within a 60 minute travel time from an employment center. 29 Given current
data limitations, DLI 7 will measure the expected travel time between the site/unit and the closest
village with at least the mean number of jobs for the Governorate in which it is located. For
Greater Cairo the expected travel time between the unit and the closest homogeneous sector (as
defined by GOPP) will be used. It is important to note that DLI 7 will be calculated using a GIS
system and under standard assumptions and it will not measure the actual commute time for each
Program beneficiary, but only the expected (or “theoretical”) time to an employment center as a
proxy for “good” location. During Program implementation, GOPP will receive TA to develop
more robust accessibility models. These models will serve not only to measure the match

28
  Master plans are developed by the GOPP within the Ministry, and approved at the Prime Ministerial level.
29
  The 60 minute benchmark was selected upon the basis of existing travel data, taking into account that most of the Program
beneficiaries are expected to use public transportation.

                                                            57
between housing and employment more accurately, but also to guide housing policy towards the
design of policies and programs that promote well-functioning urban areas, increase urban
sustainability and reduce physical exclusion of the lower income segments. Finally, the results
framework includes a list of more granulated indicators (for example units located within 45 or
30 minutes) in order to provide the Program with sufficient information to fine-tune the
guidelines and better understand the land and city dynamics. The results chain for Results Area 4
is provided in Figure 16.
177. Combined, these measures are expected to promote not only better siting of social
housing in relation to jobs and services under the Program, but also more efficient use of
serviced land and more compact urban growth. In addition, these locational criteria will assure
that the beneficiaries of the AMP program receive valuable assets which will contribute to long-
term wealth redistribution.
     Figure 16: Results Chain for Results Area 4 – Promoting Well Located Social Housing




Source: World Bank (2014).

178. Results Area 5: Promoting Private Sector Participation in Low-Income Housing.
Egypt cannot address its housing deficit without the strong participation of the private sector,
including banks, mortgage companies, construction companies, and developers, in the low-
income housing market. To rebuild the momentum that was developing in this nascent market
segment prior to the Revolution, the SHF must define itself as a credible and effective partner
and ensure a level playing field for all private sector entities. Achieving this will require a multi-
pronged approach, including public dissemination of PPP guidelines for its programs, a targeted
program to help small-scale contractors in Upper Egypt—currently building housing units based
on a fixed profit margin—transform into development companies. It is also important to design
and implement ‘Inclusionary Housing’ requirements into public land auctions. Continuing the
consultations with private sector entities would be critical. This will need to be accompanied by
refinements to the CBE low interest rate program to attract more private banks and developers to
the low-income market segment. The Program includes a DLI focused on the outcome of this set

                                                   58
of actions—an increase in the number of demand-side subsidies supporting the purchase or rental
of housing units developed by the private sector (DLI 8). The results chain for Results Area 5 is
provided in Figure 17.
Figure 17: Results Chain for Results Area 5 – Promoting Private Sector Participation in Low-Income Housing




  Source: World Bank (2014).

B.       Disbursement-Linked Indicators
179. The Program DLIs represent key milestones in the achievement of Program outcomes.
Indicators that help to address multiple Results Areas were given priority. In order to keep the
number of DLIs to a manageable number, some indicators were consolidated into one DLI. Some
of the DLIs are related. For example, a demand-side subsidy provided to a household to help
purchase a housing unit produced by the private sector and located within a 60 minute travel time
to an employment center would support the achievement of three DLIs—DLIs 5, 7, and 8.

Table 14: Summary of Disbursement-Linked Indicators

     Disbursement-Linked                                                                                    Amount
                                                              Definition
          Indicator                                                                                       (US$ millions)

Results Area 1: Strengthening Governance and Institutional Set-up of the Housing Sector                        25

                                 The internal audit function should be established in the SHF,
DLI 1: Establishment and         reporting to the Board through an Audit Committee. The internal
operation of an internal audit   audit function should cover, at a minimum: (i) assessment of the
function within SHF providing    risks associated with improper benefit payments; (ii) use of
                                 analytical procedures, information system audit and assurance                 25
assurance service for the
ownership and rental programs    standards, and data mining tools; (iii) undertaking of spot checks
affiliated with SHF              and field visits to validate continued relevance of internal controls,
                                 including the quality of the complaints mechanism; and (iv)
                                 procedures for following up on the timely implementation of audit


                                                             59
                                   recommendations have been established.




Results Area 2: Enhancing Transparency and Accountability of Social Housing Programs                        125

                                   A functioning M&E system is defined as, at a minimum: (i) a fully
DLI 2: Establishment and
                                   staffed M&E unit; (ii) an agreed set of comprehensive housing
functioning of a housing
                                   sector indicators, including social housing programs, that are
monitoring and evaluation
                                   collected on at least an annual basis from Governorates, housing
system and an M&E unit within
                                   agencies, ministries, and other relevant non-Governmental                25
the SHF, and the preparation of
                                   organizations; (iii) public dissemination of a minimum set of
the Multi-Year Plan and Annual
                                   housing data on an annual basis. Multi-Year Plan and Annual
Targets informed by the M&E
                                   Targets approved by the SHF must explicitly refer to and reflect
system
                                   this data.

                                   A functioning accountability and transparency mechanism
                                   includes, at a minimum: (i) a national public awareness campaign
                                   targeted at potential Program beneficiaries; (ii) standard
DLI 3: The establishment and       processing times for subsidy applications; (iii) established
functioning of an accountability   procedures for rejected applicants to receive explanation of
and transparency mechanism         program requirements not complied with; (iv) monitoring of               50
within SHF for implementing        rejected applications; (v) establishment of a grievance redress
the Program                        mechanism; (vi) public dissemination of consolidated data on
                                   number and location of beneficiaries, the SHF subsidy
                                   expenditures, and pipeline housing developments; and (vi)
                                   publication of the program audited financial statements.

                                   The SHF must establish a mechanism for monitoring the
                                   occupancy of housing units for which subsidy is provided as part
DLI 4: The establishment by
                                   of the Program. This system must include, at a minimum: (i) rules
SHF of a functioning mechanism
                                   stipulating the limitations on the resale and occupancy of units; (ii)
to monitor occupancy and
                                   procedures for communicating these rules to Program
vacancy of housing units by
                                   beneficiaries; (iii) operational manual for conducting a post-
households receiving demand–
                                   occupancy survey on a representative sample of units; and (iv)
side housing subsidy and                                                                                    50
                                   procedures for dealing with non-complying beneficiaries. In Years
percentage of ownership housing
                                   2-5, DLI measures the percentage of total housing in the Program
units occupied by low-income
                                   portfolio that is incompliance with occupancy rules at least one
households after at least 1 year
                                   year after the subsidy is provided to the beneficiary. The SHF
of receiving subsidies under the
                                   conducts post-occupancy survey of AMP subsidy recipients based
AMP
                                   on approved mechanism to monitor occupancy of housing post-
                                   subsidy.

Results Area 3: Improving Access to Affordable Housing                                                      275

DLI 5: Number of households
                                   DLI measures new AMP subsidies provided to targeted
receiving demand-side
                                   beneficiaries to purchase housing units produced by the public and
homeownership subsidies for
                                   private sectors Report on demand-side homeownership subsidies            225
new housing units in each Fiscal
                                   is to be produced by the SHF (or related entity) on a quarterly
Year during Program
                                   basis.
implementation under the AMP

DLI 6: Number of new
                                   DLI measures number of new rental subsidies provided to
households participating in
                                   Program beneficiaries to rent housing units produced by public
rental subsidy programs in each                                                                             50
                                   and private sectors. Report on rental subsidies to be produced by
Fiscal Year during Program
                                   the SHF (or related entity) on a quarterly basis.
implementation

Results Area 4: Promoting Well Located Social Housing                                                       25



                                                               60
                                  DLI measures new units added to the Program during the year.
                                  Location analysis will measure in the GIS system used for
DLI 7: Percentage of demand-      physical planning (GOPP) expected travel time between the unit
side subsidies provided under     and the closest village with at least the mean number of jobs for
the Program supporting the        the Governorate in which it is located. For the Greater Cairo area
purchase or rental of housing     the expected travel time between the unit and the closest              25
units located within a commute    homogeneous sector (as defined by GOPP) will be used. The
of 60 minutes or less to an       M&E unit of the SHF will compile the information on the location
employment center                 of units and the GOPP will conduct the location analysis as
                                  described for homeownership and rental units. The indicator will
                                  be reported through the quarterly monitoring reports.

Results Area 5: Promoting Private Sector Participation in Low-Income                                     50

DLI 8: Number of demand-side
subsidies provided under the      DLI measures the percentage of total Program beneficiaries who
Program supporting the purchase   receive a subsidy to own or rent a unit that was produced by a
or rental of housing units        private developer. Private sector is defined as a company or           50
developed by private sector       organization that is majority owned (at least 51 percent) by private
entities in each Fiscal Year      individuals or is listed on the stock exchange.
during Program implementation.

TOTAL                                                                                                    500



C.       Program Results Framework
180. In addition to the DLIs, there are multiple results and performance indicators that will be
monitored by the Program.




                                                             61
                                                                                 Table 15: Program Results Framework and Monitoring
     Program Development Objective (PDO): The objective of the Program is to improve the affordability of formal housing for low-income households in the Arab Republic of Egypt and to strengthen
     the Social Housing Fund's capacity to design policies and coordinate programs in the social housing sector.
                                                                                                                 Cumulative Target Values                                              Responsible




                                                                  Core
                                                                               Unit of                                                                               Data Source/




                                                                         DLI
PDO Level Results Indicators                                                             Baseline                                                      Frequency                         for Data
                                                                               Measure                2016      2017      2018      2019      2020                   Methodology
                                                                                                                                                                                        Collection
Number of targeted households accessing ownership and rental
                                                                             Number           0       55,400   151,500   347,500   575,000   827,400
housing units with support from the Program (number), of which                                                                                          Annual            SHF               SHF
female-headed households (percent)
                                                                              Percent        24         24       24        24        24        24
Percentage of Program beneficiaries in bottom 20 percent of the
                                                                              Percent         0         50       50        50        50        50       Annual            SHF               SHF
income distribution
Percentage of income spent on housing costs by Program
                                                                              Percent       N/A.        30       30        30        30        30       Annual            SHF               SHF
beneficiaries
Establishment and functioning of a housing monitoring and
evaluation system and an M&E unit within SHF, and the
                                                                                Y/N          No        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
preparation of the Multi-Year Plan and Annual Targets informed by
the M&E system
       Intermediate Results Area 1: Strengthening Governance and Institutional Set-up of the Housing Sector
Completed executive by-laws, organizational structure, financing
                                                                                Y/N          No        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
model, fiduciary arrangements, operating systems for the SHF
SHF fully staffed as per organizational plan                                    Y/N          No         No      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
Establishment and operation of an internal audit function within
SHF providing assurance service for the ownership and rental                    Y/N          No         No      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
programs affiliated with the SHF
Adequate staffing of social officers as per organizational plan                 Y/N          No         No      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
Number of capacity building and training workshops conducted for
                                                                             Number           0         10       17        21        24        27       Annual            SHF               SHF
the hired social workers at the Central and Governorate level.
       Intermediate Results Area 2: Enhancing Transparency and Accountability of Social Housing Programs
Establishment by SHF of a functioning mechanism to monitor
occupancy and vacancy of housing units by households receiving                  Y/N          No        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes         -       Annual            SHF               SHF
demand–side housing subsidy
Percentage of rental housing units occupied by targeted
                                                                              Percent         0          -        -        75        75        75       Annual            SHF               SHF
beneficiaries at least 1 year after lease
Percentage of ownership housing units occupied by low-income
households after at least 1 year of receiving subsidies under the             Percent         0          -       65        75        85        85       Annual            SHF               SHF
AMP
Unified social programs and beneficiary databases                               Y/N          No         No      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
Establishment and functioning of an accountability and
transparency mechanism within SHF for implementing the                          Y/N          No        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
Program.
Average time required to resolve complaints in AMP (days)                    Number          60         50       40        30        20        20       Annual            SHF               SHF
Percentage of resolved complaints received by SHF and
                                                                              Percent         0         75       90        90        90        90       Annual            SHF               SHF
Governorate housing offices
Annual published reports on complaints and how issues were
                                                                                Y/N          No         No      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes       Annual            SHF               SHF
resolved, including resolution rates


                                                                                                         62
       Intermediate Results Area 3: Improving Access to Affordable Housing
Number of households receiving demand-side homeownership
subsidies for new housing units during Program implementation                  Number        0              50,000     125,000    300,000        500,000    725,000    Annual   SHF   SHF
under the AMP
Number of new households participating in rental subsidy programs
                                                                               Number        0               5,400      26,500     47,500        75,000     102,400    Annual   SHF   SHF
during Program implementation
Number of previously vacant units occupied 1 year after inclusion
                                                                               Number        0                    0     5,000      10,000        20,000     30,000     Annual   SHF   SHF
into the Program
       Intermediate Results Area 4: Promoting Well Located Social Housing
Percentage of demand-side subsidies provided supporting the
purchase or rental of housing units located within a commute of 60             Percent       0                 50         50         50            50         50       Annual   SHF   SHF
minutes or less to an employment center
Percent of demand-side subsidies supporting the purchase or rental
of housing units within a 45 minute travel time to an employment               Percent       0                 30         30         30            30         50       Annual   SHF   SHF
center
Percent of demand-side subsidies supporting the purchase or rental
of housing units within a 30 minute travel time to an employment               Percent      0.                 15         15         15            15         15       Annual   SHF   SHF
center
Percentage of land made available for SHF developments that
                                                                               Percent       0                 80        100         100           100        100      Annual   SHF   SHF
complies with location and service criteria stated in Law
       Intermediate Results Area 5: Promoting Private Sector Participation in Low-Income Housing
Number of demand-side subsidies provided supporting the purchase
or rental of housing units developed by private sector entities during        Number       0                5,000      25,000     75,000        150,000    250,000    Annual    SHF   SHF
Program implementation30
Percent of demand-side subsidies supporting the purchase or rental
                                                                              Percent      0                  6         14          29            37         43       Annual    SHF   SHF
of housing units developed by the private sector
PPP guidelines publically disseminated                                         Y/N         0                 Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes       Annual    SHF   SHF




         30
              Private sector entities are those that are owned at least 51 percent by private individuals or are listed on the stock exchange

                                                                                                                  63
D.        Assessment of Housing M&E Capacity in Egypt
181. The SHF is expected to play an important role in monitoring and evaluating social
housing in the country with the objective of using this data to improve housing policy and
programs. Given the SHF is a new entity, an assessment of how and to what extent monitoring,
evaluation, and research functions are currently carried out by the Ministry and its many
affiliates was conducted.
182. Despite a significant commitment to social housing, as evidenced by the scale of
investment in social housing production over the past decades, studies of the physical, economic,
and social impacts of Government housing initiatives have been very limited. Moreover, no
evaluation of the effectiveness of beneficiary targeting has been conducted. A general conclusion
is that the focus of existing M&E activities in the Ministry and the Governorates has been on the
production of units (i.e., number of units started, under construction, completed, and handed over
by agency) and the financial flows during this development process. 31 The following describes
how the tracking of this process is carried out.
183. The Housing and Utilities Sector of the Ministry’s central Diwan Aamlil-Iskan is the
main agency involved with tracking the implementation of social housing programs. It is also
responsible for tracking private sector housing activities by gathering statistics on building
permits issued. The Housing and Utilities Sector sends forms to a number of government
agencies to be filled out and returned. These are sent out every quarter. In addition, a set of
annual summary forms for the FY (both “initial” and “final”) are distributed. The agencies that
receive these forms are as follows:
         27 Housing Directorates in each governorate (seven forms, of which two track social
          housing production achievements and five track permits of new construction and
          vacancies in housing built by the formal private sector).
         NUCA (seven forms).
         Joint Projects Agency (two forms).
         Central Agency for Development/Taamir (two forms).
         HDB (two forms).
         General Authority for Cooperative Housing (two forms).
         Maamoura Housing Company (two forms).
         Shams Housing Company (two forms).
         Nasr Housing Company (two forms).
         Maadi Housing Company (two forms).
         Misr al-Gedida Company (two forms).
         Housing Finance Fund (two forms).
184. The heaviest data demand for housing data rests upon the Housing Directorates of each of
the Governorates. Data from these Housing Directorates include information on building and
occupancy permits issued (for example; number of permits, number of units, estimated
investment amount, and fines). These appear to be the only sources of information on private
sector housing activities in the country.32 Although the forms request building permit data broken
31
   Tracking the installment payments on housing loans made by beneficiaries after unit delivery is the responsibility of designated
public banks; the Ministry does not participate in this.
32
   NUCA is said to track housing projects built by private developers in the new towns.

                                                               64
down by city, city district, and rural district within each governorate, such detailed information is
not included in the tables produced by the Housing and Utilities Sector.
185. Most agencies respond relatively promptly to these data requests from the Housing and
Utilities Sector. The exception is NUCA, which is generally slow to respond and has not
submitted data since 2011. This could be related to resource control. NUCA has a separate
budget from the Ministry and independent sources of income. By contrast, the Housing
Directorates in the Governorates rely upon the Ministry for the majority of their resources.
186. The Housing and Utilities Sector receives the data from the agencies, performs a quality
control function (including requesting clarification or additional information), and then compiles
the data into several standard tables in Excel, including:
     Number of units implemented;
     Number of units implemented by category;
     Comparison of units planned and executed;
     Number of vacant units;
     Value of housing investments; and
     Value of associated housing loans.
187. These data tables are made available to senior management in the Ministry and other
ministries, but are not available to other government entities without permission. The tables are
not available to the public, although some summaries have been presented in press conferences.
188. The data gathering and processing exercise is done in hard copy (forms are frequently
sent by fax.) Maps of housing project locations and plans of housing estate layouts or housing
units are not currently included in the M&E process.
189. Among agencies affiliated with the Ministry, NUCA is said to carry out ad hoc research
on housing demand based on analysis of housing applications. This information is used to plan
for future social housing projects in the new towns. It also has an Information Center that is said
to generate statistics on housing, utilities connections, and vacancies. However, NUCA does not
typically release this information.
190. GOPP established the NUO in 1990 with the key mandate to provide all relevant data and
urban indicators to decision and policy makers responsible for preparing and formulating
national urban development policies. From 2005 to 2008, the Canadian International
Development Agency (CIDA) provided support to the NUO to monitor housing conditions.
191. There is a small unit loosely associated with the Minister’s Office in the Ministry called
the Central Agency for Development and Housing (al-gehaz al-markazilil-taamirwa al-iskan)
that was set up in the 1980s and still has a certain monitoring function. It is said to collect data
from NUCA among other sources.
192. The Affordable Housing Program has a modern and sophisticated loan automation
system that tracks household level information (location, gender, and income), loan and subsidy
level information (size, down payment, interest rate, tenure, product, type and amount of
subsidy) and lender information (type of institution, escrow amount) over time. It also measures
a limited number of indicators on the efficiency of the system such as the number of staff relative
to the number of loans processed, turnaround time of applications, etc. This system can generate
regular monitoring reports to keep track of product and household trends.



                                                 65
193. The HDB and the Ministry are in the process of developing a house price index (HPI) for
urban areas. Egypt presently lacks any form of HPI to inform policy makers and housing market
participants regarding trends in housing values/prices. A timely and accurate HPI will improve
the transparency and efficiency of the housing finance system, and will support the design and
implementation of housing subsidies. It was decided that the HPI will be established in the
Information Center of NUCA. The GOPP will contribute data on urban indictors, including
housing stock data needed for statistical weighting of HPIs. A local property developer, Madinet
Nasr Housing & Development, has also agreed to provide data, and Coldwell-Banker Egypt has
tentatively agreed to contribute as well.
194. CAPMAS conducts a national census every 10 years (next is 2016), and includes the
collection of useful data on households and buildings at the district level. For example, the
census includes information on the following at the district level;
     Number of residential units (unit type, occupancy, under construction);
     Number of buildings (use, ownership, utility connection); and
     Household size.
E.     SHF M&E Systems and Capacity
195. As a fundamental input to policy making and program design, providing the M&E of the
housing sector is one of the key functions of the SHF. Leveraging existing data collection
processes in the Ministry entities, the SHF will need to significantly ramp-up its M&E capacity
to successfully assume this function. A strong M&E system within the SHF and in specific
housing programs will also be necessary to ensure the credibility of Program DLIs.
196. A Central Department for M&E will be established within the SHF and report directly to
the Executive Director. In the short-term, the unit will take over the responsibility for tracking
the implementation of social housing programs from the Housing and Utilities Sector. This
process will be enhanced to include additional data requests and analysis based on policy making
and program design needs. An in-depth review of housing data availability will be necessary to
avoid duplication of effort. Moreover, past donor-funded studies and TA programs will be
reviewed for their relevance to the M&E function in the SHF.
197. The SHF’s M&E unit will primarily rely on reporting from housing program entities like
the GSF, NUCA, and the Housing Directorates in the governorate for data on social housing
units and beneficiaries. Mechanisms to automate or achieve other efficiencies in that collection
process will be explored. Other sources of housing data will include census data from CAPMAS,
private sector developers and financial institutions, and market analysis companies. The M&E
unit will have a data curation, analysis, and dissemination role. This is well aligned with
international best practice, including the US Department of HUD (see Box 2).
F.     Use of M&E in SHF Resource Allocation Decisions
198. As described earlier, the SHF is required in its Executive Bylaws to create multi-year
plans and annual targets for social housing programs. Data collected from the Governorates and
other sources, such as demand surveys, will be a key input into the planning process by helping
to define the allocation of types of units and programs (public rental programs, private rental
programs, affordable ownership housing), geographical location of units, initial allocation of
units among housing entities, and indicators for performance reporting.



                                               66
                                  Box 2: The U.S. Housing Information System
       National housing information systems are typically composed of data collected through a national housing
survey and data collected from multiple private sources. In the USA, for example, the Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) serves as the main compiler of housing statistics, issuing a quarterly compendium of
housing data and an annual report.
        HUD's Office of Policy Development and Research (PD&R) is responsible for maintaining current
information on housing needs, market conditions, and existing programs, as well as conducting research on priority
housing and community development issues. PD&R also maintains extensive data on the characteristics of
subsidized housing units and tenants, which is collected from local HUD offices. The role of PD&R is to provide
reliable and objective data and analysis to help inform policy decisions. The main information sources for HUD’s
quarterly and annual publications come from six public and private sources.
Housing Stock
        American Housing Survey (AHS). The National Census Bureau conducts the survey for HUD. The AHS
collects data on the Nation's housing, including apartments, single-family homes, mobile homes, vacant housing
units, household characteristics, income, housing and neighborhood quality, housing costs, equipment and fuels, size
of housing unit, and recent movers. National data are collected biannually, and data for each of 47 selected
Metropolitan Areas are collected about every six years. The national sample covers an average 55,000 housing units.
Each metropolitan area sample covers 4,100 or more housing units. The AHS returns to the same housing units year
after year to gather data; therefore, this survey is ideal for analyzing the flow of households through housing.
Housing Production
       National Association of Home Builders (NAHB). NAHB is a trade association for companies involved in
the construction or renovation of housing. The association surveys its members and collects city and county level
building permit data to prepare reports on new housing starts, new housing characteristics, and new housing prices.
Additionally, NAHB conducts a month survey of home builders to produce an index of their confidence in the
business outlook.
Used Housing Market
       National Association of Realtors (NAR). The NAR is an association of real estate brokers and agents. NAR
conducts monthly national surveys of its members to collect current data on existing home sales, as well as profiles
of home buyers and sellers. The NAR is the main source for housing price data.
Rental Market
        Survey of Market Absorption (SOMA). Each month, the National Census Bureau (on behalf of HUD)
selects a sample of residential buildings containing five or more units for the SOMA. The initial 3-month interview
collects information on amenities, rent or sales price levels, number of units, type of building, and the number of
units taken off the market (absorbed). Field representatives conduct subsequent interviews, if necessary, at 6, 9, and
12 months after completion.
Housing Finance
        Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA). MBA is the national association representing the real estate finance
industry. The association surveys members and provides weekly data regarding average mortgage commitment rates
by mortgage product and volume measures of mortgage applications.
        Federal Housing Finance Board (FHFB). The FHFB regulates the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks that were
created in 1932 to improve the supply of funds to local lenders that, in turn, finance loans for home mortgages. The
Board is an independent regulatory agency of the executive branch of the U.S. Government. Each month, the FHFB
conducts a survey of rates and terms on conventional mortgage loans.


VII.     PROGRAM ECONOMIC EVALUATION
199. Improving Living Standards for the Poor. The accumulation of decent housing matters
both because of the difference it makes to living standards and because of its centrality to

                                                         67
economic development (shared prosperity). The consequences for living standards are
significant. In addition to directly providing shelter, decent housing improves health and
facilitates educational achievement.33 More subtly, a home and its environs affect identity and
self-respect. Egypt has made strides in improving access to basic services, one of the most
important components of living standards related to housing. The differences between the
regions of Egypt in access to water are minimal, however, access to sanitation across regions and
by income group shows that in metropolitan areas 28 percent of the poorest households have no
toilet facilities or share with other households.
200. The fact that a large and growing proportion of urban households lives in informal
housing and slum areas in peri-urban areas (estimated to house at least 66 percent of the Greater
Cairo’s population), which are growing at alarming rates of three to seven percent, makes a
program that focuses on expanding the formal housing system for the poorest households a high
priority for World Bank support from a poverty alleviation and inclusive growth perspective.
201. Housing and Gender in Egypt. Women are disproportionally affected by poor and
uncertain housing conditions since they are the care-givers to the children and elderly parents.
Access to services like shops and schools, and reliable access to water, sanitation and electricity
in the home affects the efficiency of performing household chores and other tasks for which
women are mostly responsible. Children need a safe house with electricity to read and do
homework. Poor location of housing relative to employment affects women disproportionally.
202. The World Bank 2012 Job Report for Egypt shows that labor force participation by
females is low and it decreased between 2006 and 2012 from 27 percent to 23 percent, in
particularly for younger women, despite dramatic improvements in educational achievements.
Women, also, suffer from an extremely high unemployment rate. This negative outcome appears
to be affected by constraints rather than preferences. One of the core constraints is that women
find it more difficult to commute long distances—fear of sexual harassment, domestic
responsibilities that require them to be closer to home - and indeed women’s commutes to work
are on average 25 percent shorter than those of men. This excludes women from high quality
private sector jobs (Table 16). The Job Report analysis concludes that “spatial mobility is a very
large constraint on women’s access to employment” in Egypt.
203. It is therefore critical to build new labor force housing closer to employment
opportunities, create greater options for housing mobility by increasing rental housing and access
to housing finance for existing units, and include well-located vacant stock into the housing
market.
204. Economic Justification. A major Table 16: Average Time to Work, Minutes One Way
economic rationale for investing public
funds in the housing sector is its proven Sector                     Men         Women
stimulus for economic growth. The Formal private                     41.5         30.5
economic multiplier according to Egypt’s Public                      36.3         23.8
input-output tables is 2.1. Based on that   Informal private         28.2         19.4
figure, the Program will increase GDP by    Farm                     19.0         19.5
                                            Overall                  31.5         23.1
0.6 percent in year one and close to two Source: ELMPS, (2010).
percent in subsequent years. Another
economic benefit for the provision of formal housing is that it will decrease the expansion of
informal housing on agricultural land and the related impact on agricultural output. The entire

33
     World Bank (March 2012).

                                                68
housing stimulus program of the SHF will positively contribute to generating job opportunities
for skilled and unskilled labor. Based on an elasticity of employment in the construction sector of
1.5, it is estimated that the total number of jobs generated through the SHF over a six year period
is 1.5 million job-years. This diverse job creation happens across different geographical areas,
and, therefore, the economic benefits can be felt in regions irrespective of the location of the
housing itself. Using the current stimulus programs to help the Government establish sustainable
public and private housing investment programs will make sure that the sector can continue to
play a powerful role as a generator of economic growth and employment in the future. Job
creation is the most important factor in poverty alleviation and shared.
World Bank Added Value
205. The Ministry is facing significant pressure to deliver on the political commitment to
providing one million social housing units over the next six years. The establishment of the SHF
presents an opportunity to not only facilitate the development of one million units, but also to
improve the housing sector management overall. The World Bank is working closely with the
Ministry on all aspects of establishing and implementing the SHF. The Bank’s input, drawing
upon international experience, is focused on improving Program design, performance, processes,
and capacity of the SHF. The Bank will assist in developing the fiduciary arrangements for the
SHF, so as to ensure efficient implementation of the executive regulation when adopted.




                                                69
        VIII. INPUTS TO THE PROGRAM ACTION PLAN
        206. Table 17 summarizes the main technical issues and recommended actions in the Inclusive Housing Finance Program. It draws from
        the Results Chains illustrated in the main text.
        Table 17: Summary of Technical Issues and Recommended Actions
                              Action Description                              DLI*   Covenant*      Due Date        Responsible Party      Completion Measurement**

Technical Design Measures

Multi-institutional governance structure established and functioning to
                                                                                                  June 30, 2015     SHF/the Ministry
facilitate coordination across Government entities (Advisory Committee)

                                                                                                                                        The SHF prepares an annual report
                                                                                                                                        describing M&E unit staffing, data
Establishment and functioning of a housing monitoring and evaluation system                       December 31,                          collection processes and procedures,
and an M&E unit within SHF, and the preparation of the Multi-Year Plan and                                                SHF
                                                                                                     2016                               indicators and their analysis, and
Annual Targets informed by the M&E system                                                                                               means of public dissemination of
                                                                                                                                        housing data.

                                                                                                                                        A report describing the mechanism
                                                                                                                                        as outlined in the definition of the
The establishment by SHF of a functioning mechanism to monitor occupancy                                                                DLI is submitted to the World Bank
and vacancy of housing units by households receiving demand –side housing                         June 30, 2016           SHF           along with documentation
subsidy under the Program                                                                                                               demonstrating that the mechanism
                                                                                                                                        has been endorsed by the SHF
                                                                                                                                        Board of Directors.

Full staffing of the SHF based on agreed organizational structure and staff
                                                                                                 January 31, 2016         SHF
skills

Integrate housing location criteria and requirement to collect physical
                                                                                                  June 30, 2017           SHF
coordinates into housing program guidelines

Monitoring and enforcement of location criteria for housing programs                              June 30, 2016           SHF

Establishment of unified beneficiary database                                                     June 30, 2016           SHF



                                                                                      70
IX.    TECHNICAL RISK RATING
207. The main risks identified through the Technical Assessment relate to the (a) participation
of private sector housing developers; (b) rental housing program design; (c) targeting of
subsidies; (d) financial sustainability of the SHF; and (e) land and property registration systems.
208. A significant technical risk to the achievement of the Program’s objective is limited
private sector participation in the low-income housing sector. The demand-side subsidy
programs are designed to stimulate the market while also providing beneficiaries with housing
choice. If all the affordable housing units for which the SHF beneficiaries could qualify are
developed by the public sector, either through public construction companies or private
contractors, the financial sustainability of the SHF would be negatively impacted and
beneficiaries’ housing choice significantly diminished. The Program will address this risk by
supporting the SHF to develop policies and PPP arrangements that facilitate private sector
engagement.
209. Demand-side subsidy programs are designed to stimulate the market while also providing
beneficiaries with housing choices. Although ownership demand side subsidies linked to credit
reduce the total amount of subsidy required for the target group, a major risk is that
inflation/interest rates will increase and effective cost of subsidies will be higher than
anticipated. For example, the impact of a one percentage point variation in interest rate on the
median subsidy (NPV of the total subsidy) is between LE 4,000 to LE 5,000. This risk is
particularly pronounced when the CBE stimulus program will be phased out. Another risk is
economic stagnation, when unemployment might increase even further and real incomes might
decrease
210. The quality of the rental program design could undermine the technical and financial
soundness of the SHF. The decision to create a supply-side public rental housing program with
insufficient rent levels and allocations for operations and maintenance could drain resources
from the Fund and compromise the quality of the housing units. To address this risk, a financial
model for the SHF has been prepared to enable policy makers to evaluate the impact of program
design on the Fund’s cash flow and reserves. In addition, new rental programs are being
launched on a small scale to enable early assessment and recalibration of program parameters.
211. Accurate and effective targeting of subsidies is a risk for both the rental housing and
homeownership demand-side programs. To address this risk, the operation will support the
strengthening of housing M&E systems, including unification with other household subsidy
programs, and incentivize accurate targeting through DLIs that incorporate post-occupancy
review of household profiles.
212. A well-functioning land and property registration system is fundamental for developing
an active mortgage finance system, attracting investments, and creating an enabling investment
climate. To include informal housing units in a demand-side rental program, and thereby
alleviate the housing and employment centre mismatch in metropolitan areas, would also require
enhancements to the land and property registration system. However, this is controlled by the
Ministry of Justice, and therefore outside the direct control of the Ministry. As part of
implementation support, the Bank will advise the SHF on these issues. Another land risk is
related to the possible resettlement of informal squatters on public land. The majority of low-
income housing will be built on public land either by public or private developers. There is a risk
that informal squatters could be removed from the land without compensation. This risk is low
given that public land that will be used for social housing is primarily in uninhabited desert
                                                71
areas. Moreover, the first two phases of housing development under the SHF (of about 100,000
units) has required no resettlement. This risk could increase, however, as the SHF seeks to find
better located land closer in to the urban core. Both of these risks will be monitored during
Program implementation.
X.     INPUTS TO THE IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN
213. During Program preparation, the Bank’s support has focused primarily on assisting the
Ministry establish the regulatory and organizational framework for the implementation of the
SHF based on lessons learned from international experience. Specifically, the Bank team has
provided input and guidance on the Executive Regulations for the SHF, as well as its
organizational structure, and projected staffing needs (number of staff and qualifications).
214. Key Bank support initiated during Program preparation will be sustained during Program
implementation, including support for institutional capacity building and the design and roll-out
of specific demand-side housing subsidy programs. The Bank’s input, drawing upon
international experience, is focused on improving Program design, performance, processes, and
capacity of the SHF. The Bank will assist in developing the fiduciary arrangements for the SHF,
so as to ensure efficient implementation of the executive regulation when adopted. Some of the
specific areas for which the Bank will provide technical support include:
A.     SHF Policy, Programming, Research and M&E
         Strengthening the fund’s capacity to update the existing housing strategy to reflect
the latest market developments and change in priorities. The Bank will advise the SHF on the
National Housing Strategy, reflecting recent developments and changes in priority areas,
focusing policy tools to improve the efficiency of the housing system in Egypt, including: (i)
address supply-side and legal constraints in the rental housing market, the mortgage market, and
the land market; (ii) addressing the vacant and unfinished housing problem; (iii) improving the
coordination of housing, infrastructure and employment policies, including by providing advice
on contractual arrangements with the relevant housing entities; and (iv) the design of PPP
arrangements and policies to increase private sector participation in the low-income housing
market.
         Preparing a coherent and transparent housing subsidy system. Technical support
will be provided to the SHF in order to establish efficient and equitable targeting and allocation
systems as well as to maximize the links between housing programs, social and economic
poverty alleviation, and labor markets (increased housing mobility, improved location of social
housing).
         Research and M&E. Technical support will be provided for establishing an on-site
audit function by the SHF and defining the format and content of information to be provided by
housing agencies on the implementation of the social housing programs, including information
on construction number, cost, and occupancy (including vacancy rates). Advice will be provided
on the design of a data collecting system, including format and content of data to be collected
from each housing agency, technical means, single identification tracking number for
beneficiaries and applicants, and contractual arrangement between the SHF and the housing
agencies.
B.     Affordable Homeownership
         Expanding low-income mortgage lending. The Program will support the SHF in
incorporating new banks and geographically dispersed bank branches into its subsidy approval
and allocation system for the AMP. The GSF needs enhanced IT systems to deal with the larger
                                               72
number of applicants and beneficiaries it must serve. Additional support will be provided to
support the expansion of mortgage lending in general and for down-market lending specifically.
Support will be provided for the standardization of administrative systems (origination,
servicing, and loan management) in general and for low-income mortgage lending specifically
across banks and MFCs, and the integration of these systems with the AMP administrative
requirements.
        Developing alternative housing finance guarantee programs. A large proportion of
the population is either self-employed or work in the informal sector and cannot produce proof of
income. Yet, such households may be able to repay a loan for housing and often already use
consumer credit to pay for their housing improvements. Special guarantee programs may induce
lenders to extend credit to informally employed households. The Bank will support the
development of such special mortgage insurance or guarantee programs.
         Developing alternative housing finance products. Another segment of the population
may qualify for a mortgage loan to buy an existing house or finish an unfinished unit, but cannot
obtain a registered title to the property and lack therefore the collateral needed for a mortgage
loan. Yet, the resale market is an important housing sub-market to unlock. It provides more
affordable and often better located housing units and provides the key to greater mobility in the
housing market that allows households to improve their housing quality over time. Also, in
smaller urban areas, households may acquire a small plot to build their house incrementally.
Such processes are facilitated if small loans or a line of credit is available to buy building
materials. The Program will help the SHF to develop housing finance products appropriate for
these different housing situations.
        Developing consumer education products. Mortgage lending is new in Egypt and
potential low- and middle-income home-buyers are unfamiliar with the mortgage product, rights
and obligations. Developer provided installment finance on the other hand is deceptively easy to
understand, while it is often not transparent at all and risky for the consumer. The Program will
support the SHF/GSF to develop consumer education materials focused on low-income
households.
C.     Rental Housing Sector
        Public Rental Housing Program (Support to Governorates) The SHF will support
Governorates in implementing the Government public rental housing program. Assistance will
be provided to the SHF in order to establish efficient and equitable targeting and allocation
systems, as well as maximize the links between housing programs and social and economic
poverty alleviation, and labor markets (increased housing mobility, improved location of social
housing).
        Guidelines for Employer Housing Program. Developing employer housing is
important to coordinate the development of housing and economic activities and reduce
commuting time. The World Bank will assist the SHF in designing guidelines for agreements
between employers or employer investor associations and the Government.




                                               73
                 ANNEX 1: EVOLUTION OF HOUSING POLICIES IN EGYPT AND THEIR IMPACT ON THE HOUSING MARKET
Housing Policy, date         Issuing & implementing         Policy Objectives                   Long term effects
applied                      entity

Rent Control laws, 1952-     Central government             Freezing housing rent increase      •   Private sector withdrawal from an unprofitable rental
1958- 1961- 1962                                            and reducing rent by 35 percent         housing market, resulting in the long-run in a deficit in
                                                            of 1944 value to ensure                 housing stock mainly for lower-income groups.
                                                            affordability (construction had     •   Reluctance of private owners to maintain existing
                                                            come to a halt in the 1940s and         housing stock as a result of insufficient rent revenues,
                                                            rents greatly increased)                deterioration of stock.

Provision of subsidized      Central Government. Public     Providing subsidized housing to     •   Encouraging rural/ urban migration
public housing projects      housing development            low-income groups in cities;        •   Unclear maintenance responsibility led to deterioration
since 1954                   companies assumed lead role    Lowering housing supply cost            of stock
                             from 1954 to 1961 then local   through using prototypical units    •   Inflexible cookie-cutter design not adapted to family size
                             authorities since 1962         without services/facilities             or evolving needs led to significant transformation of
                                                                                                    housing blocks, increased densification and poorer living
                                                                                                    conditions.

Nationalization of private   Central Government.            In line with government policy      •   Significant expansion of housing construction in Cairo
construction and housing     Companies affiliated with      to nationalize privately-owned          (new suburbs of Maadi and Medinet Nasr)
development companies        central government or Cairo    companies                           •   Increased inefficiencies in nationalized companies and
                             Governorate                                                            larger fiscal burden to the State budget.
(e.g. Maadi, Heliopolis)

Limiting annual investment Central Government               Lowering capital investment in      •   Major reduction in housing construction, coupled with
in housing to LE 30 million                                 housing and shifting towards            rapidly growing population in cities, resulted in the
in 1956; imposing ceiling for                               industrial development.                 emergence of informal settlements
annual contract work to any
private company at
LE30,000

Major reduction in public    Central Government             Focusing limited financial          •   Additional reduction in housing and infrastructure
investment in housing and                                   resources to rebuild the military       investment, further increasing informal development
infrastructure after 1967                                   forces after the 1967 war

New rent control laws in     Central Government             Further attempt to appeal to low-   •   Continued general private sector withdrawal from rental
1965, 69, 70reducing rent                                   income groups faced with                market; increase circumvention of restrictive rent control
for newly built units                                                                               through furnished flats; emergence of key money


                                                                            74
Housing Policy, date         Issuing & implementing       Policy Objectives                     Long term effects
applied                      entity

(furnished flats exempted)                                limited housing options                   (upfront lump-sum payment) to make up the difference
                                                                                                    between low rent and market rents.

Public housing supply in     Central government through   Focusing government resources         •   Increasing the gap between supply and demand of
existing (old) cities        MHUUD                        on new urban communities; poor            affordable housing in existing cities, and further
stopped                                                   people encouraged to settle there         encouraging informal development.

Encouraging private          Central Government           Encouraging private sector to         •   Move in the right direction but continued rent control
sector return to housing                                  return to the HUD sector;                 meant focus on housing supply for sale without
market by raising ceiling                                 allowing foreign-owned                    investment in rental, a burden on low/middle-income
of annual investment for                                  companies to bid without                  groups who could not afford market units.
contracting companies to                                  maximum ceiling; and allowing         •   Government set a ceiling of 33 percent of units in any
LE 100,000, then to LE                                    private sector to enter into              building for sale and the rest for rent, yet investors
500,000                                                   trading and production of some            circumvented rule. Phenomenon of vacant units started
                                                          building materials along with             as owners preferred to leave their units unoccupied rather
                                                          public sector.                            than renting under rent control regime.
                                                                                                •   Increased building material supply in the market (after
                                                                                                    scarcity)

New rent laws to             Central Government issued    Rents kept low (7 percent of          •   Directing private housing investment to upper income
encourage private sector     the law; local government    cost) also for new units built just       groups to avoid rent restrictions.
return to housing market     was mandated to monitor      before law, but above-                •   Universal key money phenomenon to overcome rent
(1977- 1981)                 implementation               middle/luxury units exempt from           control restriction resulting in major distortion in the
                                                          control. Newly built units can            housing market
                                                          rent at higher rates but rate is      •   Low and middle income groups without affordable
                                                          frozen after agreement is                 housing alternative except in informal settlements.
                                                          reached. Setting up                   •   Poor maintenance of housing stock estimated not to
                                                          condominium owner association             exceed 0.7 percent of asset value.
                                                          for O&M of apartment buildings

Establishing new cities      Central government through   Directing population growth to        •   Concentrating public investments in new cities with little
and communities around       Ministry of Housing and      the desert outside Nile valley and        left for housing supply in existing cities.
existing cities              Construction’s General       protecting agricultural land from     •   Unbalanced development in new cities with housing
                             Organization for New Urban   informal encroachment.                    construction without adequate infrastructure services in
                             Communities                                                            initial phases resulting in vacant units and deserted new
                                                          Incentives to expand economic             towns
                                                          activities and create new jobs in     •   Increased direct public involvement in implementation
                                                                                                    increased cost of housing and services in new cities and

                                                                          75
Housing Policy, date        Issuing & implementing       Policy Objectives                   Long term effects
applied                     entity

                                                         these new locations.                    increased fiscal burden to make them affordable.
                                                                                             •   New communities attracted industrial development and
                                                         Direct public supply of formal,         created jobs (especially after Cairo’s closure to new
                                                         affordable housing to low-              industry) but could not attract people to live there
                                                         income groups and new formed
                                                         families to settle in these new
                                                         cities

Reactivating Housing        Ministry of Housing and      Encouraging                         •   Construction of more than 275,000 units in the last two
Cooperatives through        Construction. Centrally      individual/cooperative                  decades by more than 1,900 cooperatives, although with
presidential decree         managed and monitored by     investment in low/middle                significant leakage to non-deserving groups.
                            General Organization for     income housing via subsidized       •   Providing subsidized loans exceeding LE 14.6 billion
                            Housing and Building         building materials, serviced land       between 1982 and 2004 to construct the housing units.
                            Cooperatives                 and below-market housing
                                                         finance

Law 4 of 1996 concerning    Central Government through   Encouraging private owners of       •   Allowing in the long-run large number of vacant units to
rent of vacant housing      the Ministry                 vacant units and investors to           rent on free market basis, thus providing a solution to a
units not subject to rent                                return to rental market on a free       large number of newly formed families and
control laws.                                            market basis without any                middle/upper-middle income groups. Slow start as
                                                         government restriction on rent          owners of vacant units are still wary of whether courts
                                                         levels or duration                      will enforce tenant eviction

New public housing          Central Government through   Offering affordable quality         •   Imposing heavy financial burden on State budget in the
schemes in new urban        the Ministry                 housing to new formed families          long run, which threatens the ability to sustain this
communities (Mubarak                                     with heavy subsidies to                 program (which could only offer about 70,000 units in 10
Youth Housing)                                           encourage settling in new cities        years).

Real Estate Finance Law                                  Establishing the legal and          •   Set the rules for the types of loan products banks and
148 of 2001                                              regulatory framework, and               MFCs could offer to borrowers (including the tripartite
                                                         allowing the formation of non-          mortgage agreement), the rules of enforcement, and
                                                         bank MFCs that would have a             established the institutions that would regulate the
                                                         greater interest in serving lower       mortgage sector – the MFA and the GSF. The functions
                                                         income households                       of the MFA were incorporated in EFSA in July 2009.
                                                                                             •   Along with other building blocks, spurred the growth of
                                                                                                 the mortgage sector in Egypt, both in terms of
                                                                                                 outstanding loan amounts and in its geographical
                                                                                                 distribution.

                                                                         76
Housing Policy, date    Issuing & implementing           Policy Objectives                   Long term effects
applied                 entity

Guarantee and Subsidy   Central Government through       Delivering subsidies to low-        •   The mortgage linked-subsidies launched in 2010 through
Fund established 2003   the Ministry of Investment       income households to expand             GSF have made subsidized formal ownership available
                                                         access to mortgage finance              for households with monthly incomes between LE
                                                         down-market and providing a             2,500–LE 1,500 (75th to <20th percentile of the income
                                                         guarantee to lenders to protect         distribution, i.e. the middle and low income groups).
                                                         them against short-term inability   •   During the political transition time, the overall economic
                                                         to pay by the borrowers                 uncertainty and increases in mortgage interest rates
                                                                                                 prevented the GSF program from going to scale.
                                                                                             •   The guarantee component of the GSF provided a three-
                                                                                                 month nonpayment insurance for which it charged a 1
                                                                                                 percent fee (on the loan amount) to lenders. The program
                                                                                                 was never capitalized separately and was considered as
                                                                                                 an additional cost by lenders without providing much
                                                                                                 credit risk protection.
                                                                                             •   In 2008 it was decided by the Ministry to create an
                                                                                                 integrated transparent household subsidy that would be
                                                                                                 scaled according to income and linked to a market-rate
                                                                                                 mortgage loan and would be adjusted according to a
                                                                                                 measure of house-prices and interest rates. An agreement
                                                                                                 was reached between the Ministry and the Ministry of
                                                                                                 Investment to make GSF the administrator of the new
                                                                                                 subsidy program.
National Housing        Central Government through       Delivering 500,000 low-income       •   The NHP represented a departure from past large scale
Program (2005)          the Ministry                     housing units over a 6 year             housing programs. Of specific note was the inclusion of
                                                         period                                  7 different housing programs under the umbrella of the
                                                                                                 NHP, including, among others, a sites and services
                                                                                                 program and private developers program.
                                                                                             •   As of 2013, the NHP had exceeded its 500,000 unit goal.
Egyptian Mortgage       Majority privately owned by      Providing mortgage lenders          •   EMRC began its refinancing operation in August 2008.
Refinance Company       the users of its financial       access to longer-term re-               Its outstanding refinancing portfolio reached LE525
established in 2006     services, mainly                 financing of their housing              million at the end of 2013 up from LE 277 at the end of
                        participating mortgage           finance loans                           2010 and a cumulative portfolio size of LE 710 million.
                        lenders—active banks and                                             •   Participating lenders are mostly made up of MFCs who
                        real estate lending                                                      do not have access to deposit funding. The total
                        companies. The CBE was                                                   mortgage market size was LE 4,800 million at the end of
                        the strategic investor with an                                           2013; split 50-50 between banks and MFCs.
                        approximate 20 percent                                               •   The global financial crisis and the macro-economic


                                                                         77
Housing Policy, date         Issuing & implementing       Policy Objectives                   Long term effects
applied                      entity

                             ownership share                                                      volatility following the 2011 revolution created an
                                                                                                  unfavorable climate for EMRC to go to the capital
                                                                                                  market. At the same time, mortgage lending stagnated
                                                                                                  since 2012.
Law 137 of 2006 –            Central Government                                               •   While the number of units under rent control has
amended Law 4 of 1996                                                                             decreased since 2006, it is still substantial and greatly
                                                                                                  constrains residential mobility, locks a large proportion
                                                                                                  of units out of the market, causes lack of stock
                                                                                                  maintenance, and distorts the overall housing market
                                                                                              •   The rental laws of 1996 and 2006 improved the climate
                                                                                                  for rental investment considerably. It facilitates eviction
                                                                                                  procedures without resorting to courts, and is
                                                                                                  overwhelmingly used for new rental contracts.
                                                                                              •   Nevertheless, rental investment is hindered by
                                                                                                  unfavorable tax laws (treatment of rental income),
                                                                                                  limitations of rental contract conditions and cumbersome
                                                                                                  eviction procedures.
Real Estate Transactions     Ministry of Justice          Improving real estate transaction   •   The law allows: (i) NUCA authorities to issue a
Registration in New                                       and property registration systems       certificate for the property or the unit that is financed via
Communities Law (2013)                                                                            mortgage finance; (ii) the chairmen of the authority’s
                                                                                                  administrative apparatuses to sign tripartite mortgage
                                                                                                  finance contracts to streamline the registration process;
                                                                                                  and (iii) part registration of large projects. These
                                                                                                  measures will make mortgage lending in NUCA
                                                                                                  territories, where most of the new units exist, possible
                                                                                                  and easier.
                                                                                              •   The related Decree 10 of 2014 was issued by the
                                                                                                  Ministry on February 3, 2014.
Social Housing Program -     Central Government through   Providing a million homes for       •   The program received LE 10 billion in initial funds from
Presidential Decree No. 19   the Ministry                 low-income households over a            the Government of the United Arab Emirates, sufficient
of 2013                                                   six year period                         to deliver 50,000-60,000 units.

Presidential Decree No.      Central Government           Stimulating the Egyptian            •   Allocated LE 29.7 billion for investments and social
105 of 2013                                               economy                                 programs that would stimulate the Egyptian economy,
                                                                                                  raise standards of living, and realize social justice, of
                                                                                                  which about 80 percent included construction and service
                                                                                                  delivery, including social housing production


                                                                         78
Housing Policy, date       Issuing & implementing       Policy Objectives                 Long term effects
applied                    entity

Central Bank of Egypt      Central Bank of Egypt        Stimulating the housing sector    •   Introduced a stimulus package for the housing sector by
Stimulus Package (2014)                                                                       offering below-market rate funds (an initial LE10 billion
                                                                                              later extended to LE 20 billion) to the banking sector to
                                                                                              be used for mortgage lending to low- and middle-income
                                                                                              households (up to a house-price of LE 300,000).
                                                                                          •   The low-income component of the stimulus (at seven
                                                                                              percent interest rates) targets the same income level as
                                                                                              the AMP. This stimulus will allow the AMP to extend
                                                                                              housing credit well into the low income segment or
                                                                                              below the 20th percentile.
                                                                                          •   Funds are made available through banks and their
                                                                                              affiliated mortgage companies and upfront subsidies for
                                                                                              qualifying low-income households are provided through
                                                                                              the AMP. The program has been able to respond well to
                                                                                              the growing demand (it received 155,000 applicants).
2014 amendment to the      Egyptian Financial           Allowing greater flexibility to   •   Allowed greater flexibility in setting limits to the
Real Estate Finance Law    Supervisory Authority        the housing finance sector            proportion of income to be allocated to mortgage
148 of 2001                                                                                   payments, and in establishing qualifying income levels
                                                                                              for mortgage-linked subsidies.
                                                                                          •   EFSA immediately increased the maximum allowable
                                                                                              payment-to-income ratio and, therefore, eligibility of
                                                                                              lower-income households to access mortgage finance
                                                                                              improved. This allowed the AMP to offer mortgage-
                                                                                              linked subsidies to lower income households.
                                                                                          •   During the political transition time, the overall economic
                                                                                              uncertainty and increases in mortgage interest rates
                                                                                              prevented the AMP from going to scale, but recent
                                                                                              economic and political developments have yielded some
                                                                                              positive results. With the recent amendments to Real
                                                                                              Estate Finance Law 148 and the stimulus package of the
                                                                                              CBE, the program is growing rapidly and has received
                                                                                              155,000 applicants since the stimulus was announced, of
                                                                                              which, it has already approved more than 50,000
                                                                                              applicants. It is able to reach households just below the
                                                                                              2nddecile of the urban income distribution or an income
                                                                                              group as low as LE 1,200 per month
Social Housing Law 33 of   Central Government through   Creating an implementing entity   •   Ratified by a Presidential Decree, created the SHF as a


                                                                        79
Housing Policy, date            Issuing & implementing           Policy Objectives                Long term effects
applied                         entity

2014                            the Ministry                     for the Social Housing Program       sustainable entity for the provision of low-income
                                                                                                      housing.
                                                                                                  •   The SHF is responsible for coordinating social housing
                                                                                                      policy, as well as, implementing and developing a
                                                                                                      sustainable and comprehensive set of support programs
                                                                                                      for the poor.
Law on the regularization       Expected to be passed by         Regularizing of informal         •   The Lawallows informal residential buildings, built
of informal areas was           State Council soon               residential buildings.               without a licence on private land, to be regularized upon
approved by the Cabinet                                                                               payment of a penalty.
in July 2014                                                                                      •   This law will incentivise the formalization and
                                                                                                      regularization of houses, by making it possible to extend
                                                                                                      services, utilities, and infrastructure to informal areas.
                                                                                                      This facilitates property registration and borrowing for
                                                                                                      improvements.
Source: Compiled by Madbouly (2005), and amended for the Technical Assessment (2014).




                                                                                 80
                                                  ANNEX 2: THE SHF’S CASH FLOW MODEL

SOCIAL HOUSING FUND
Assumptions

EGP/USD                                                7.15

Ownership Housing Production
 Construction cost per unit (EGP)                   150,000
 Construction cost per unit (USD)                    20,979
 Sales price per unit (EGP)                         160,000
 Sales price per unit (USD)                          22,378

Rental Housing Production
 Construction cost per unit (EGP)                   120,000
 Construction cost per unit (USD)                    16,783

Housing Subsidies
 Up-front mortgage subsidy (EGP)                     19,000
 Up-front mortgage subsidy (USD)                      2,657

 Public rental key money (EGP)                        1,800
 Public rental key money (USD)                          252
 Subsidized rental key money (EGP)                    1,000
 Subsidized rental key money (USD)                      140
 Monthly public rental subsidy (EGP)                    100
 Annual public rental subsidy (EGP)                   1,200
 Annual public rental subsidy (USD)                     168
 % of public rental receiving subsidy                   80%

 Monthly private rental subsidy (EGP)                   100
 Annual private rental subsidy (EGP)                  1,200
 Annual private rental subsidy (USD)                    168
 % of private rental receiving subsidy                  50%

 Self-construction (EGP)                             50,000
 Self-construction (USD)                              6,993

Capitalization
 UAE donated units                                   50,000
 Governorate units                                  115,000

 Interest on cash balance                             0.03%

Construction (affordable ownership)                 FY 14/15 FY 15/16   FY 16/17   FY 17/18 FY 18/19 FY 19/20        Total  %
 Governorates                                        25,000   50,000     50,000     50,000   50,000   50,000      275,000 35%
 NUCA                                                25,000   50,000     50,000     50,000   50,000   50,000      275,000 35%
 Private Sector                                         -     25,000     50,000     50,000   50,000   50,000      225,000 29%
 Sub-total                                           50,000 125,000     150,000    150,000 150,000 150,000        775,000

Construction (low-income self-construction)         FY 14/15 FY 15/16   FY 16/17   FY 17/18 FY 18/19 FY 19/20        Total   %
 Governorates                                           -        -          -       20,000   25,000   30,000       75,000 100%
 NUCA                                                                                                                 -     0%
 Private Sector                                                                                                       -     0%
 Sub-total                                              -         -         -       20,000    25,000    30,000     75,000

Construction (low-income rental)
 Governorates                                           -      10,000    20,000     20,000    25,000    25,000    100,000    67%
 NUCA                                                   -         -         -          -         -         -          -       0%
 Private Sector (employer, vacant, etc)                 -         -       5,000     10,000    15,000    20,000     50,000    33%
 Sub-total                                              -      10,000    25,000     30,000    40,000    45,000    150,000

Total Affordable Houisng Construction
 Governorates                                        25,000    60,000    70,000     90,000   100,000   105,000     450,000   45%
 NUCA                                                25,000    50,000    50,000     50,000    50,000    50,000     275,000   28%
 Private Sector                                         -      25,000    55,000     60,000    65,000    70,000     275,000   28%
 Total                                               50,000   135,000   175,000    200,000   215,000   225,000   1,000,000

Subsidies Allocated
 Up-front mortgage subsidies (new construction)      50,000   125,000   150,000    150,000   150,000   150,000    775,000 100%
 Up-front mortgage subsidies (existing unts)            -                                                             -     0%
 Cumulative public rental stock with subsidy            -       8,000    24,000     40,000    60,000    80,000     80,000
 Cumulative private rental stock with subsidy           -         -       2,500      7,500    15,000    25,000     25,000



                                                                                   81
SOCIAL HOUSING FUND
Rental Housing Analysis

Rental Housing Production
 Construction cost per unit (EGP)                     120,000
 Construction cost per unit (USD)                      16,783

Rental Revenue
 Monthly rent per unit (EGP)                              225
 Annual rent per unit (EGP)                             2,700
 Upfront tenant payment (EGP)                           1,800
 Lease term (years)                                         7
 Amortized upfront tenant payment (EGP)                   257
 Total Annual Rental Income                             2,957

Operations & Maintenance
 As % of construction cost                              2.00%
 Annual O&M per unit (EGP)                              2,400

Vacancy and Credit Loss
 As % of annual rent collection                          20%
 Annual vacancy and credit loss per unit (EGP)           540

Net Rental Income
 Annual net rental income (EGP)                         17.14
 Annual net rental income (USD)                          2.40
 Monthly net rental income (EGP)                         1.43
 Monthly net rental income (USD)                         0.20
 As % of Rental Revenue                                    1%

Affordability
 Maximum rent/income ratio                               25%
 Minimum monthly salary required                         900
   Implied income decile

 Monthly subsidy                                         100
 Houshold contribution                                   125
 Minimum monthly salary required                         500




                                                 82
SOCIAL HOUSING FUND
Projected Cash Flow (USD millions)

                                                     FY 14/15 FY 15/16 FY 16/17 FY 17/18 FY 18/19 FY 19/20
 Returns generated by the Fund (unit sales)               -    1,118.9 1,118.9 1,118.9 1,118.9 1,118.9
 Returns generated by the Fund (rental net income)        -        1.6      3.2      3.2      4.1      4.1
 NUCA budget surplus                                      -       75.0     75.0   100.0    100.0    100.0
 State budget allocations for the Fund projects         250.0    139.9   139.9    139.9    139.9    139.9
 Other amounts allocated by the State                 2,573.4      -        -        -       -        -
 Revenues generated from penalties                        -        -        -        -       -        -
 Donations, grants, and endowments                    1,118.9      -        -        -       -        -
 Loans                                                    -       88.5   106.0      97.9   102.8    104.8
 Investment revenue                                       -        1.1      1.1      1.0      0.9      0.7
 1% of auctions of State properties                       5.0      5.0      5.0      5.0      5.0      5.0
 25% of auctions of Governorate land                      -        -        -        -       -        -

 TOTAL REVENUE                                       3,947.3     1,430.0   1,449.1   1,465.9   1,471.5   1,473.2

 Ownership
 Construction costs                                      -       1,049.0   1,049.0   1,049.0   1,049.0   1,049.0
 Self-construction program                               -           -         -       139.9     174.8     209.8
 Up-front subsidies (new construction)                 132.9       332.2     398.6     398.6     398.6     398.6
 Up-front subsidies (existing units)                     -           -         -         -         -         -
 Sub-total                                             132.9     1,381.1   1,447.6   1,587.4   1,622.4   1,657.3

 Rental
 Construction costs                                        -      167.8     335.7     335.7     419.6     419.6
 Rental subsidy (public)                                   -        1.3       4.0       6.7      10.1      13.4
 Rental subsidy (private)                                  -        -         0.4       1.3       2.5       4.2
 Sub-total                                                 -      169.2     340.1     343.6     432.2     437.2

 Policy, Programming, M&E
 Overhead (salaries, offices, etc)                         0.5       2.0       3.0       3.0       4.0       4.0
 Studies, Plans, and Capacity Building                     0.3       2.0       2.0       2.0       2.0       2.0
 Housing Data and Systems                                  0.3       3.0       3.0       2.0       2.0       2.0
 Sub-total                                                 1.0       7.0       8.0       7.0       8.0       8.0

 TOTAL EXPENSES                                        133.9     1,557.3   1,795.7   1,938.0   2,062.5   2,102.5

NET INCOME                                           3,813.4     (127.3)   (346.6)   (472.2)   (591.0)   (629.3)

CASH BALANCE                                         3,813.4     3,686.2   3,339.6   2,867.4   2,276.4   1,647.1




                                                      83
