                                    96550



INCLUSIVE HOUSING FINANCE PROGRAM
1.   The assessment1 indicates that the fiduciary systems for the Program, with the
enhancements proposed in the Program Action Plan, will provide reasonable assurance that the
funds will be used as intended per the Bank’s PforR policy. Based on the expenditure program,
no contracts in excess of the PforR policy exclusion limits have been identified.
2.   As shown in Table 5.1, 98 percent of the Program expenditures relate to housing demand
subsidies (97 percent for ownership subsidies). Hence, the Fiduciary Assessment has focused
primarily on the systems supporting
execution of these expenditures.          Table 5.1: Program Expenditures
                                                  Expense Item                              US$ million   Percentage
Country          Systems,        Rules,
Procedures         and       Oversight SHF overhead                                     16.0    0.8
Mechanisms                                SHF studies, plans, and Capacity Building     10.0    0.5
3.    The expenditures to be incurred
under the PforR Program will form Housing data and systems                              12.0    0.6
part of the SHF budget. Even though Housing demand programs – ownership              1,926.6   97.2
the SHF is a new entity under
development, it will be subject to the Housing demand programs – rental                 17.6    0.9
Government of Egypt’s Public
                                          Total                                      1,982.2   100
Financial      Management        (PFM)
arrangements, which have been Source: World Bank estimates based on Ministry’s data (2014).
analysed through various analytical
pieces.2 Moreover, country system knowledge has been gathered through the Bank’s provision of
technical advisory services in areas of the Government financial controls, public procurement,
and external audit. A summary of applicable PFM systems, rules, procedures and oversight
mechanisms follows.
4.    Legal framework. The constitution provides the legal basis for the budget, for
appropriating and spending public funds, and for preparing and approving the final accounts of
the state budget. The 2014 constitution maintained these provisions and strengthened the
independence and transparency of the Central Audit Organization (CAO), the supreme audit
institution. A range of laws deal with specific aspects of financial management; in addition, there
are specific laws for entities such as economic authorities and special funds. Unifying the PFM
legal infrastructure under an integrated law would enable a more consistent and transparent
approach. The Bank has recently supported the Government in the review of the draft
amendment to the Public Procurement Law, the review of the new draft law of the CAO, and
will start working with the Ministry of Finance on budget legislation modernization and
harmonization task.
5.    Budget comprehensiveness. The state budget covers the activities of the central
Government, Governorates, and public service authorities. However, a number of special
accounts and funds function under separate provisions with limited transparency. They are


1
  This is the complete Fiduciary Systems Assessment.
2
  ADE. Report on Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA), October 2009.
International Monetary Fund (with World Bank contribution). A Roadmap to Advance the Public Financial Management Reform
Agenda, January 2012.
World Bank. Country Financial Accountability Assessment (CFAA), April 2008.
World Bank staff reports.
nominally in-budget, as their expenditures are reported within the budget with an equivalent
revenue amount, but leaving the remainder of revenues collected unreported.
6.    The Government has successfully decreased the aggregate balance of special funds to
LE 28 billion in September 2014 down from LE 37 billion in July 2011. This was mainly
achieved through measures such as: (i) asking budget entities during budget negotiation stage to
use the special funds under their controls to finance portions of their budget expenditures; (ii)
issuing a one-off legislation requiring the special funds to transfer 25 percent of their outstanding
balances as of June 30, 2012 to the central treasury; and (iii) the annual budget laws for the past
two years obliged special funds to transfer a percentage of their annual revenues (20 percent in
2012/2013; 10 percent in 2014/2015) to the central treasury. The Ministry of Finance is currently
deliberating on ways to increase the governance and transparency of special funds.
7.    Budget formulation. The annual budget calendar largely provides for an orderly and timely
budget formulation and appropriation process. The establishment of a Macro-Fiscal Unit at the
Ministry of Finance has contributed to better budget estimates, but a system of dual budgeting,
i.e. the recurrent expenditure chapter managed by the Ministry of Finance and the capital
investment chapter managed by Ministry of International Cooperation, persists, with the two
ministries collaborating on the overall envelope. In 2012, the Ministry of Finance mandated the
preparation of a pre-budget statement to include the general framework for fiscal policy, the
estimated aggregates in the draft budget, and the related economic and social priorities.
However, the pre-budget statement is not published.
8.    Public procurement. The Bank has been engaged with the Government on public
procurement reform for over two decades. Country Procurement Assessment Reviews (CPARs)
identified areas that require attention such as: (i) the need for improvement of procurement
practices at the sector and decentralized levels; (ii) although the procurement law and the
executive statutes provide important concepts for public procurement and are based on sound
principles, they are broad and not always sufficiently clear for consistent application; (iii) there is
no independent protest mechanism other than an appeal to the competent authority; and (iv) the
need to develop a capacity building strategy and implement it through a systematic training
program.
9.    The Government, through the Ministry of Administrative Development, implemented a
Government procurement portal (http://etenders.gov.eg), for mandatory publication of bidding
opportunities, bidding documents, bid
evaluations and results. While it is                  Figure 5.1: Worldwide Governance Indicators
considered that this tool will increase
transparency and efficiency, stakeholder
participation through greater access to
information      and     provide       equal
opportunities     to    all    in     public
procurement, enhancing the systems
capabilities,    such     as     “e-contract
management”, could bring about
significant additional benefits.
10. Governance indicators. Egypt lags
behind Regional neighbors in most
dimensions measured by the Worldwide
                                              Source: World Bank (2013).
Governance Indicators (Figure 5.1), including Government effectiveness and control of
corruption.
11. The Government has adopted an administrative reform initiative starting from August
2014, aiming to enhance transparency and integrity in public administration.
12. Budget execution controls. The ex-ante control system is implemented by Ministry of
Finance’s financial controllers and includes transaction-based compliance controls over
payments (in addition to the line ministries’ own due diligence), recording of transactions, and
production of accounts at unit level.
13. With technical support from the Bank, the Ministry of Finance recently finalized the
Manual of Procedures of the ex-ante Internal Financial Control. The manual has been published
and disclosed over the whole financial control network and budget entities (line ministries,
agencies, various public institutions). The manual has three objectives: (i) simplifying the control
procedures; (ii) standardizing and homogenizing the controls (each procedure is described with
one standardized page defining the main components of the control such as laws and regulations
to comply with, required documentation, budgetary requirements); and (iii) making the control
more predictable by the line ministries. The issuance of the manual will be accompanied by
training activities.
14. Financial inspection is centralized and is carried out by the Directorate for Financial
Inspection in the Accounts and Financial Directorates Department in the Ministry of Finance. Its
main activity is to carry out ex-post reviews of compliance by Accounting Units. Inspections can
cover all stages of the budget cycle and are normally initiated on the basis of complaints. No
risk-based approach is used for formulating the annual work program. A report is submitted to
the Head of the Accounts and Financial Directorates Department after each inspection. In
addition, an annual report presents all the cases of alleged misuse of funds.
15. There is currently no function in the Ministry of Finance or in the line ministries that
carries out independent internal audit. While the financial inspection in Egypt carries out ex-post
reviews, it does not perform systematic, risk-based audits of the functioning of the internal
control system.
16. Government Financial Management Information System (GFMIS). Accounting units
across the central Government use the GFMIS to record budget allocations and modifications,
and to execute the budget through general ledger transactions. However, the budget execution
process chain remains largely manual. A decision was made recently to postpone using the cash
management and commitments modules in accounting units. The modules for purchasing,
accounts receivables and accounts payables are available but not yet activated. The Government
would benefit from articulating a clear direction for the future rollout of the GFMIS and
reassessing the underlying business processes.
17. Cash management and controls. The Ministry of Finance exercises monitoring of the
actual cash transactions and balances of the accounting units included in the state budget through
the longstanding arrangements with the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE). The introduction of the
treasury single account (TSA) law and the closing of many special accounts and funds in
commercial banks further enhanced Ministry of Finance ability and reduced financing costs.
However, the TSA implementation was not completed. As stated earlier, many special accounts
and funds remain with separate payment and cash management processes. Ministry of Finance
still relies on manual cash planning arrangements focusing mainly on revenue forecasting.
18. Accounting and financial reporting. Accounting is cash-based for the state budget; hence,
no complete information on accounts receivable (e.g. advances) and accounts payable (including
expenditure arrears) is available. The published final accounts of 2012/2013 showed only an
economic classification of expenses, which is closely aligned to the international standard, and
broken down by administrative category (administrative body, Governorates and service
authorities). Conversely, the 2014/2015 budget presented a functional classification together with
the economic classification -- except for expenditures that are presented as single line item.
19. Monthly budget execution reports detailing expenditures and revenues are produced by
budget entities and submitted to the Ministry of Finance’s Final Accounts sector within a
maximum of ten days after each month-end. They include actual and budget amounts, but not
commitments. Annual final accounts are produced and audited within six months after fiscal
year-end.3The latest Final Accounts law of 2012/2013 was issued on November 28, 2013. No
discussion and analysis accompanies the annual accounts.
20. Budget transparency. The enacted budget, in-year budget reports, and year-end budget
reports are made public. The production of the citizen budget was discontinued in the last few
years, but is expected to be resumed soon. The 2014 Constitution requires making public the
annual audit reports by the CAO.
21. External audit. The CAO has a comprehensive scope of coverage and is known to issue its
report on the annual accounts on a timely basis.
22. The CAO authorities have recently showed willingness to reform, supported by the
provisions of the 2014 Constitution which, among others, introduces elements to strengthen its
independence and transparency. Its reports will need to be submitted to Parliament, the President
of the Republic, and for public opinion. The Bank is providing technical support to expose the
CAO to international good practices through this transitional phase.

Capacity and Performance of the Program Implementing Agencies
23. The fiduciary assessment is focused on the arrangements for development of the SHF, a
new entity that will implement the Government’s social housing program, including the Bank-
supported Inclusive Housing Finance Program.
24. The Social Housing Fund. The SHF is a legal entity under the tutelage of the Ministry,
created by the recent Social Housing Law. It has a dedicated budget, sources of revenues, bank
account, accounting and internal control system. The SHF may finance, manage and build social
housing units, and provide the services necessary for these units. These “supply side” activities
will not form part of the PforR expenditure program.
25. The SHF will be managed by an Executive Director and will have its own Finance
Department. The staffing process for senior SHF positions, and the assessment of the
administrative units within the Ministry that will be consolidated within the SHF has already
started.
26. The SHF Board, which is chaired by the Minister of Housing and includes representatives
of the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Planning, will approve the SHF budget as well as its

3
  Final accounts of each accounting unit are sent to the Ministry of Finance’s Final Accounts sector by end of July. The Central
Audit Organization (CAO) completes its audit by end of August. During the month of September, adjustments are discussed and
agreed between the accounting entities and the CAO. By the end of October, the Final Accounts sector consolidates the state final
accounts report to be presented to the legislative body, the CAO and the Ministry of Planning. The CAO prepares its annual audit
report by the end of November and presents it to the legislative body before the end of December of each year.
annual accounts. The Board can establish committees for specific areas such as auditing or
finance.
27. The SHF’s budget will be attached to the State budget. Unused budget resources will be
carried forward to the next fiscal year. The SHF’s banking accounts will be held at the Central
Bank.
28. The SHF will establish reporting mechanisms for each program it manages or oversees, in
addition to the SHF’s reporting on its own operating expenses. An analytical cost system will be
implemented. No financing across programs will be allowed, except by a decision of the Board
stating the amount and purpose of such cross financing. SHF accounts are subject to audit by the
CAO and oversight by the Ministry of Finance, which appoints a Financial Controller. The SHF
Board can also appoint independent auditors.
29. Sub-programs. The PforR-supported expenditure Program will consist of:
   Mortgage-linked ownership subsidies to targeted beneficiaries, i.e. the Affordable
      Mortgage Program.
   Rental subsidies to tenants and to investors who would commit themselves to rent out their
      units to targeted households.
   Related operating costs, such as beneficiary targeting and tracking; data collection,
      database management, and analysis; M&E.
30. The mortgage-linked ownership subsidy program has two components: (i) a mortgage loan
payment subsidy (buy down); and (ii) for the lowest income groups, a down payment subsidy as
well. The program is intended to enable first-time homebuyers who are low-income borrowers to
qualify for market interest rate mortgage loans. An eligible beneficiary can benefit from a buy
down subsidy or a combination of a buy down subsidy and an up-front (down payment) subsidy,
based on the level of household income. The program is executed in line with the Affordable
Mortgage Finance Procedure Manual.
31. For the buy-down subsidy, the AMP pays the mortgage lender the difference between the
monthly loan payments affordable to the borrower, and the monthly payments of a market loan.
The AMP payments to the lender decrease over a number of years as the borrower payment
increases according to the program rules. The total amount of subsidy received is determined by
the AMP according to the income of the borrower. The down payment subsidy is limited to the
lowest borrower income groups, is set according to AMP rules, and is in addition to the down
payment provided by the borrower.
32. The lenders employ their own underwriting criteria in determining the borrower’s loan
approval or declination. The AMP verifies beneficiaries’ compliance with the eligibility criteria.
To verify applicants’ information and eligibility, the AMP utilizes the services from a specialized
company that conducts background checks on applicants’ data and income. The AMP also
counts on the banks credit I-score reviews to verify applicants’ credit performance and
worthiness.
33. The amount of the buy down payment subsidy (on a present value basis), along with any
down payment subsidy provided to the borrower, is paid upfront to the lender though an escrow
account open for the length of the buy down period. Every month, simultaneously with receipt
by the lender of the borrower’s share of the loan payment, the scheduled subsidy escrow account
amount is applied to the total monthly principal and interest due. No escrow funds can be
disbursed by lenders without receipt of the borrowers’ share of the monthly payment.
34. Any unused subsidy funds that remain in the borrower payment escrow account must be
remitted to the AMP if the loan is paid off before those funds have been applied. Additionally,
the borrower is liable for a pro rata return of the mortgage down payment subsidy if the loan is
paid off before it is 5 years old.
35. To operate the AMP, the GSF/SHF enters into master program participation agreements
with lenders acceptable to the GSF/SHF. The master agreements are standard among all
mortgage lenders. The authorized lenders must: (i) be a licensed financial institution authorized
to provide mortgage loans to consumers; (ii) be in good standing with its regulatory authority,
CBE or EFSA; (iii) agree to GSF/SHF monitoring of its program performance; and (iv) agree to
GSF/SHF audits of subsidy program compliance (inspection of mortgage loan files, reports,
records, books, or accounts).
36. All lenders are required to report monthly the status of all the subsidy loans that the lender
is servicing. This includes new originations and existing subsidy loans segregated by current
loans, delinquent loans, loans in foreclosure or forced sale status, and any loans that have been
paid, retired or otherwise removed from the lenders future servicing reporting.
37. AMP related IT systems and procedures are in place and have been tested to handle a large
volume of applicants. The system is set up to generate monitoring reports that include
information on household level information (location, gender, income), loan and subsidy level
information (size, down payment, interest rate, tenure, product, type and amount of subsidy), and
lender information (type of institution, escrow amount).
38. The AMP receives funding from the State budget as well as self-generated revenue, largely
from interest on time deposits. Its final accounts for 2012/2013 showed significant savings in
“Chapter 4” expenditures (mortgage subsidies), mainly because of delay in completion of
housing units. The actual expenditure was only 8 percent of the budget. Significant
improvements are expected over the coming years to result from measures to improve supply of
housing solutions and an integrated social housing policy with well-coordinated programs.
39. GSF’s accounting system makes use of the Government’s chart of accounts and related
procedures, but not of the GFMIS. The accounting unit is overseen by a Financial Controller
from the Ministry of Finance responsible for ex-ante controls. GSF is subject to periodic audits
by CAO, but the Bank was informed that annual audit reports are not available.
40. Procurement. Given that the financing under the PforR Program will be limited to demand
side incentives and operating costs, there will be no major procurement involved. Therefore,
country-level procurement capacity limitations are not expected to significantly impact Program
implementation.
41. Fraud and corruption. The latest amendments of the mortgage finance law in July 2014
introduced stricter rules and penalties on fraud by beneficiaries. These include: (i) restricted use
of the subsidized unit to the beneficiary and his/her household; (ii) banned disposition of
purchased unit for seven years to discourage speculation; and (iii) imprisonment or financial
penalties (LE 50,000 to LE 100,000) for providing fraudulent data in applying to the mortgage
subsidy. The GSF receives complaints through its website as well as its Facebook page. Its
manual requires handling complaints within 48 hours of receipt. All fraud cases or information
that has driven to rejection based on GSF requirements, are required to be compiled in a "black
list" that must be checked when a new file is appraised.

Fiduciary Risk Assessment
42. Country system risks. While the Egypt’s public financial management (PFM) systems have
been deemed adequate for budget support operations, the stagnation in some areas of PFM
reform is a concern that influences fiduciary risk. The Bank is engaged in dialogue and technical
advice with the Government in the areas of financial controls, public procurement, and supreme
audit institution development. Furthermore, the Bank and the Ministry of Finance are starting to
collaborate towards the modernization of the budget legislation and revamping the PFM reform
strategy.
43. Program-specific risks. Considering that the institutional structure and systems of the
Program implementing entity (SHF), and some of the sub-programs, are still under development,
the fiduciary risk is substantial. The fiduciary risk also involves the risk of providing subsidies to
ineligible beneficiaries, either due to fraudulent application by beneficiaries, political
interference to influence targeting, or errors. To mitigate this risk, the Bank is providing
technical support to improve subsidy targeting systems and procedures in the SHF, with a view
to ensure that the funds reach the intended beneficiary households. Stricter penalties on
beneficiary fraud were introduced by the Government through recent amendments to the Real
Estate Finance Law.
44. The Bank is also playing an important role advising the development of institutional
governance and systems of the SHF. The positive experience with the operation of the AMP,
administered by the GSF, exemplifies the Government’s track record with development of
monitoring systems for similar programs. The systemic fiduciary risk mitigation issues will be
addressed through the Program Action Plan (see next section) and selectively through the DLIs
connected to the SHF capacity development and program effectiveness.

Fiduciary Elements of the Program Action Plan (PAP)
45. This section lists key technical and capacity development measures that aim to increase the
operational efficiency of the Program, ensure full transparency and proper accountability
mechanisms, and mitigate existing fiduciary risks.
46. Rules and regulations. The operational and financial management arrangements for the
rental subsidy sub-programs should be laid out in regulation and detailed in Procedures Manual,
consistent with GSF’s Manual when applicable. The Procedures Manual should also regulate the
budgeting, cash management, accounting, financial reporting and audit arrangements applicable
to the SHF. These arrangements should be consistent with the general PFM regulatory
framework.
47. Budget system integration. As a special fund, the SHF will benefit from specific flow-of-
fund and record keeping arrangements. However, its programs should be integrated with the
State budget, using the national budget classifications and chart of accounts.
48. Program MIS development and integration. For the new rental subsidy sub-programs,
beneficiary enrollment, monitoring, and payment databases should be integrated in the program’s
management information system (MIS). Building upon the GSF system, a unified social housing
beneficiary database with cross-checks to other pertinent databases should be developed. The
payment database should be linked to the program accounting system.
49. Internal audit. The internal audit function should be established in the SHF, reporting to
the Board through the Audit Committee, to contribute a systematic and disciplined approach to
evaluate and improve the effectiveness of governance, risk management and control processes of
the SHF. As opposed to the transaction-level reviews performed by financial controllers, the
internal audit function would focus on:
    Measuring the inherent and residual risks associated with improper benefit payments, and
      planning its audit work program accordingly.
    Using analytical procedures, information system audit and assurance standards, and data
      mining tools – for which due access to the MIS databases for audit purposes should be
      secured.
    Undertaking spot checks and field visits regularly to validate continued relevance of
      internal controls, including the quality of the complaints mechanism.
    Following up on the timely implementation of audit recommendations.
50. Financial reporting. The SHF and its sub-programs should be subject to periodic and
timely reporting on budget execution, using the GFMIS or an accounting system that can
seamlessly feed information into the GFMIS. Additional financial information should include the
geographical distribution of benefits and the correlation of benefits paid to income level of
beneficiaries. The financial reports should be publicly available through the SHF websites.
51. The Bank will work with the SHF to develop an Integrated Reporting pilot. This will
present a pioneer opportunity in the MNA Region to bring different elements (financial,
nonfinancial, governance, environment and social) together, under an incremental capacity
development approach that will lead to the issuance of reports around year three of
implementation.
52. External audit. Program financial statements would be audited by an independent audit
firm, with terms of reference that will also include verification of some of the DLIs. The results
from these audits should be made public as per the provisions of the financing agreement.
53. Complaints and grievances mechanisms. The SHF needs to develop the mechanisms for
handling complaints and grievances by June 30, 20164. Program beneficiaries or third-parties
should be able to lodge complaints through easy-to-access channels. Each complaint or
grievance should be recorded and addressed to the appropriate level for action, with feedback
given to the complainant on the action taken applying service standards. Special procedures
should be in place for the proper handling of complaints relating to allegations of fraud and
corruption.




4
    As specified in the Program Action Plan (Annex 8 of the PAD).
