                                                                                                 96577
            GEORGIA’S TRANSPORT AND LOGISTICS STRATEGY
              ACHIEVEMENTS TO DATE AND AREAS FOR IMPROVEMENTS

                                             January 2015


                         Mustapha Benmaamar, Oceane Keou, Daniel Saslavsky



I. Introduction
     1. The policy note describes the state of transport and logistics in Georgia, carries out a needs
        assessment and identifies the main areas for improvements .The purpose of this policy note
        is to develop a common understanding between the Government of Georgia (GoG) and its
        partners of the institutional and physical challenges which face the transport and logistics
        sector, and of a strategy for meeting these challenges in the medium-term. The policy note
        identifies the key strategic directions and actions which will enable the sector to grow and
        improve. This policy note will help the Bank and the development partners to engage with
        the GoG in dialogue on the critical bottlenecks and to provide the Government with advice
        based on the Bank’s international experience. The strategic directions outlined in this policy
        note require institutional reforms. This is inevitably a long term process but one which will
        gradually improve Georgia’s Logistics Performance Index (LPI) ranking and its trade and
        competiveness.

II. Where Georgia stands: Achievements to date
     2. Along with major country reforms to improve the business climate and governance,
        Georgia has successfully implemented a series of fundamental reforms and
        interventions in the transportation and logistics sector over the last 10 years. The
        country has radically improved its value proposition as a transit country, modernizing its
        transport infrastructure, improving border clearance procedures, and liberalizing the
        provision of services in many key sectors that ensure better international connectivity with
        global markets. The main achievements in this field can be summarized as follows:

     3. Creation of customs clearance zones. Whereas many years ago transit through Georgia
        was a lengthy and expensive activity, border clearance procedures have been fundamentally
        streamlined, reducing border clearance times to a bare minimum. Border infrastructure was
        also substantially rehabilitated, along with the creation of customs clearance zones.

     4. Implementation of an integrated border management system has reduced the number
        of intervening agencies at the border (for clearance) with a single point of contact between
        drivers and government authorities. And a profound reform has also improved the
        governance environment in which border management transactions occur.

     5. Regulations governing the road freight services industry in Georgia were gradually
        revamped to converge towards the spirit of the EU acquis. Liberal cross-border permit
        regimes (usually bound by ‘truck quotas’) were negotiated with Turkey and Armenia.

                                                                                                         1
    6. Road infrastructure has significantly improved, facilitating trade and increasing
       Georgia’s value proposition as a transit country. The GoG is committed to completing the
       East-West Highway project by 2020 and bring it to European expressway standards, with
       noticeable effects in transit times to and from its seaports in the Black Sea.

    7. Georgian Railways underwent a substantial restructuring of its business model. The
       freight business unit operates at a profit and is entirely commercial-based. As a whole,
       Georgia Railways (GR) is in charge of much of the investment to maintain or replace the rail
       infrastructure. The country has adhered or plans to adhere to a number of corridor initiatives
       involving railway transport (i.e. Kars-Tbilisi-Baku, Silk Wind, and Viking Train).

    8. The port sector is opened for private sector participation. The Georgian port system
       comprises two medium-size bulk, general cargo and container ports, Poti and Batumi, plus
       two dedicated oil terminals at Supsa and Kulevi. The two largest seaports of Poti and Batumi
       are managed by two globally reputed operators. The 2012 traffic in Poti was around 7.5
       million tons, including 300,000 TEUs1. Poti port operator is undertaking investments to
       expand its off-dock container storage capacity and started works to reconvert a berth to
       allow Panamax-type vessels with a draft of 12 meters. Batumi is predominantly a liquid bulk
       terminal. Depending on the year, crude oil and oil products can represent up to 80-90% of
       the total turnover. The port of Batumi offers a 12 m. draft and Batumi International
       Container Terminal (BICT) handled around 75,000 TEU in 2012. Both Poti and Batumi port
       are directly linked to the Georgian railway network.

    9. The commercial air transport sector was also fully liberalized and passenger traffic has
       grown at healthy rates. Tbilisi, Kutaisi and Batumi airports are modernized. Tbilisi and
       Batumi airports are managed under concession by reputed global operators using a BOT
       scheme.

    10. Establishment of a Georgia Logistic Association (GLA) and a Supply Chain Council2
        (SCC) chapter to help close operational gaps in the supply chain management
        industry. Georgia has taken promising steps including, (i) the establishment of a Supply
        Chain Council (SCC)3 chapter process (ii) the initiation and institutionalization of the Supply
        Chain Operations Reference (SCOR) model4 which is being promoted5 by the Georgian
        Logistics Association (GLA)6 and (iii) a first annual Supply Chain Benchmarking Survey was
        carried out in 2014 to have an overview of companies’ current strengths and weaknesses in
        the implementation of business processes and performance management.

1
   TEU stands for Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit, a standard unit measure for containerized cargo. In 2013, total container
throughput in Georgia was 405,000 TEU of which Poti handled 82%. The present capacity of Poti seaport is 600,000 TEU.
2 Supply Chain Council merged with APICS and the official name of this organization today is APICS Supply Chain Council
3 The Supply Chain Council (SCC) is a global, non-profit organization whose framework, improvement methodology, training,

certification and benchmarking tools help member organizations make dramatic, rapid, and sustainable improvements in
supply chain performance.
4 The SCOR® model, published and maintained by the Supply Chain Council (SCC), is the world standard for supply chain

management, a model that provides a unique framework for defining and linking performance metrics, processes, best
practices, and people into a unified structure.
5 Pilot SCOR trainings were provided in 2013 and 2014 to provide Georgian companies and transport and logistics providers an
opportunity to be introduced to leading supply chain management practices.
6 The Georgian Logistics Association is a non-profit organization focusing on logistics and transportation sector, created to

support companies and individuals from the private sector involved in the business of logistics, transportation and supply chain
management.

                                                                                                                              2
III. Main challenges and areas for improvement
   Despite these achievements, many challenges remain and key areas for improvements are highlighted
   and grouped under three main themes:

           A.      Infrastructure and logistics services;
           B.      Supply chain management; and
           C.      Corridor development and cross-border management.

   A.      Infrastructure and logistics services
        11. As a regional transport-transit hub, Georgia offers significant opportunities through
            its renovated and expanded transportation infrastructure, which includes an growing
            national highway system, newly expanded railway routes, three (Tbilisi, Kutaisi, Batumi)
            newly renovated international airports and seaports/terminals. The division of freight
            between roads and rail is not optimal and rail could carry more freight than it does. At
            present road transport within the Caucasus Transit Corridor (CTC) moves about twice the
            number of transit containers as railways. Road transport service prices are competitive due to
            the significant presence of Turkish truck companies that need to secure backhaul cargo.
            Establishing the right pricing for the use of road and rail infrastructure will be important to
            ensure that the CTC remains competitive vis-à-vis alternative corridors, and attracts more
            transit traffic.




        12. The East-West Highway carries over 60 percent of the total foreign trade and is seen
            as a central piece in the Government's strategy of transforming Georgia into a
            transport and logistics hub. The government is committed to completing the East West

                                                                                                         3
         Highway Corridor project by 2020. The Government has in recent years accorded high
         priority to completing the upgrading of the East West Highway (392 km) to international
         motorway standards (2x2 lanes). The Government has deliberately opted to financing this
         important project using its own budget and a significant support of the International
         Financing Institutions (IFIs).The World Bank has financed four road improvement projects
         along the East-West Highway to complement the Government's initial investment from
         Tbilisi, and assistance is also being provided by other IFIs. Approximately 130 kilometers of
         the East-West highway corridor have already been upgraded and works are on-going to
         complete an additional 177 km by 2016.

    13. A clear financing strategy to complete the East-West Highway is needed. The
        remaining road sections (85 km) of the East-West Highway corridor between Zemo-Osiauri
        and Argveta are located along a very difficult terrain and land slide prone areas which will
        require high level of expertise and innovation. The sections are likely to include 20 tunnels
        (9500 m) and 43 bridges (4460 m) which requires a total investment of around USD1.0
        billion. A Value for Money Analysis and development of an optimal financing strategy for
        each of the sections between Zemo-Osiauri and Argveta is part of an on-going feasibility
        study. The findings will be presented and discussed at a donors’ conference by spring 2015.

    14. Over the medium to long-term, it will be important to develop a sustainable
        financing mechanism to maintain the East-West Highway Corridor. For the East-
        West Highway, which is critical for trade, there is a need to explore the option of bringing in
        private sector participation for operation and maintenance once the corridor is completed in
        2020, which could be financed by tolling. This could create a fiscal space for maintenance of
        secondary and local roads, which are in poor condition, and are critical if Georgia is to reap
        the full benefits of the East-West Highway.

    15. Georgian Railways (GR)7 is expected to continue the restructuring process and at the
        same time modernize its asset base, systems and procedures and gain market shares.
        From a corridor perspective, railways also represent a viable choice for access to and from
        Black Sea ports, connecting Georgian maritime gateways with neighboring countries and
        Central Asia. GR is expected to continue the restructuring process and at the same time
        modernize its asset base, systems and procedures, and staff skills to achieve four main
        objectives: (i) sustainability of the current performance by replacing life-expired and
        technologically obsolete assets and systems; (ii) enhanced profitability through introduction
        of new technology, computerization, and improved systems; (iii) safety and environment
        enhancement and (iv) put significant efforts to gain market shares and compete with roads.
        Crude oil continues to be the most important commodity in terms of volume and efforts
        should be made to attract local commodities and develop freight services.

    16. The most frequent impediment voiced by logistics agents seems to be the availability
        and inadequate quality of the railway rolling stock. Whereas some of the closed wagons
        are seemingly in good condition, much of the platform cars are in obsolete state. Moreover,
        many of the locomotives in GR’s fleet have past their service life. This contributes to lower
        the speeds in certain sections of the corridor, especially where terrain features require more
        tractive effort and put a strain on other systems (e.g. braking) that lead to suboptimal

7 GR has 1300 km of mainline track length including 293 km of double track. The main line and yards are fully electrified using
3,300 volts DC. More than 95% of branch lines are also electrified and the rest is operated using diesel traction. There are 22
Passenger stations, 114 freight stations, 1422 bridges and 32 tunnels.

                                                                                                                                  4
         operational practices. Efforts to rehabilitate rolling stock should be supported. Moreover,
         capacity bottlenecks in the rail network West of Tbilisi should not be neglected. Allegedly,
         this is being addressed partially or entirely by Georgian Railways itself.

    17. Georgian Railways (GR) can improve transparency and efficiency by separating
        operations from infrastructure services. The freight business unit operates at a profit and
        is entirely commercial-based. However, there is a lack of intermodal platforms (i.e. container
        terminals) and GR still operates in a monopolistic situation. Under the current institutional
        setting, however, operations are not separated from the ownership of the infrastructure. This
        will remain unchanged until 2022, based on the EU-DCFTA market and infrastructure
        access provisions for rail transport. This will require significant regulatory and business
        reform.

    18. Port of Poti limitations. The Port of Poti has a limited draft of 8.5 m (9.4 m. in the access
        channel) which allows only for feeder vessels to call at the port. It is one of the most
        expensive ports to use in the Black sea. Reportedly, the port is often congested. Shipping
        lines report an average of 3-day waiting time for vessels, which may occasionally increase up
        to 7 days in case of bad weather. This has led some operators to divert their vessels to
        Batumi and other ports to implement a congestion surcharge8. The port of Poti is negatively
        impacted by (i) restricted draft and necessity to carry out maintenance dredging works and
        (ii) limited storage capacity within the port bonded area; and (iii) direct proximity of the city
        of Poti. In addition, there are hinterland constraints and no on-dock container terminal in
        the port which limits the development of container supply chain along the Corridor.

    19. The TRACECA international transport corridor requires numerous transshipments,
        ferry ports9 and high capital intensity to be competitive. The development of the
        Anaklia deep sea port project should take into consideration a wider regional context. The
        major benefit of the project would allow Georgia to offer a port facility comparable to the
        port of Constantza (Romania) in term of navigation depth, thus improving de facto the
        capacity of the TRACECA corridor. Currently, Constantza is the only port in the Black sea
        to offer 19 meters depth which correspond to the “maximum” draft authorized by Turkey
        for the crossing of the Bosporus straight10. The major potential difficulty of the project is its
        capacity to attract sufficient traffic to make it viable both in economic and financial terms.
        Whilst, both Poti and Batumi ports have operational limitations, their capacity is at par with
        current and foreseeable traffic for the coming years.

    20. Air cargo volumes are still modest and warehousing infrastructure will remain
        underutilized for the foreseeable future. Georgia has implemented a fully liberal air
        transport policy. Passenger traffic almost tripled in the last 6 years, and seat capacity has
        expanded more than twofold. Nonetheless, air cargo volumes are still modest. While
        warehousing infrastructure will remain underutilized for the foreseeable future, apron
        capacity might constrain operations in the future. The new apron –completely rehabilitated

8 Source: European Union Draft LOGMOS Master Plan – Annex 3 Part I - Maritime Sector Overview - October 2013
9 Turkmenbashi and Baku on the Caspian / Poti, Batumi, Varna Constantza and Odessa on the Black Sea
10 L.O.A./DRAFT: There is no definite L.O.A. [Length Over All] and/or draft restriction determined by Administration, however, The

vessels that are 150-200m.in length and/or whose draft is between 10-15m.,shall submit SP-1 reports to Traffic Control Center,
at least 24 hours before to their entry to the Turkish straits, the vessels that are 200-300 m. in length and/or have more than 15
m. draft, shall submit SP-1 reports at least 48 hours prior to their entry into the Turkish straits.


                                                                                                                                5
        together with the passenger terminal–has limited wide body space and the old apron adjacent
        to the cargo terminals cannot handle wide bodies, due to pavement specifications.

     21. Only a segment of the cross border road freight market is subject to regulations.
         Regulations governing the cross-border road freight services industry in Georgia have
         gradually converged to the spirit of the EU acquis in regards to professional competence,
         good repute and financial standing. Nonetheless, only a segment of the market is subject to
         such regulations (those applying for multiple permits). An industry modernization program
         that can position the industry to reap the benefits of transit would also entail targeted
         interventions addressing sustainability issues, capacity building (for operators and the
         regulator) and regulatory reforms.

     22. Energy-efficient transport services would strengthen Georgia’s position as a regional
         trade hub and open up growth opportunities. The Government of Georgia should
         thus foster the development of efficient and clean freight transport and logistics
         services. Georgia faces a rapid rise in transport demand, resulting in an increase in fuel
         imports and air pollution. Petroleum fuel imports increased about ten-fold during 1999-
         2008, impacting the total import bill for petroleum and hydrocarbon fuels, which
         represented 16 percent of the total import bill in 2010. And the transport sector accounts for
         about 40 percent of Georgia’s CO2 emissions, which is expected to grow if no action is
         taken.

B.      Supply chain management
Whereas the country presents one of the most liberal and friendliest environments for doing
business in the World, the supply chain management industry is still in its infancy, not leveraging the
full potential of a transit country. A few points were identified to address this challenge:

     23. There is a need to enhance supply chain skillsets within Georgian companies by
         conducting a gap analysis of foundational and functional skillset requirements, and
         identify potential training solutions to address these gaps. There is also a need to conduct
         further SCOR pilot trainings to broaden the participant base to assess skill development
         requirements and seek the opportunity to develop a comprehensive SCOR training and
         certification program in Georgia, with SCOR-P certified trainer(s) and associated facilities.

     24. Government support is required to develop a growing demand for freight forward
         and warehousing services. The Government of Georgia should support the current
         demand for complex logistics service providers. The main players on the Georgian
         transportation market are the freight forwarding companies. But the service portfolio of the
         freight forwarders is currently very limited (their core business being cargo import and
         export logistics). The Georgian logistics companies are not able to meet these market
         requirements due to the lack of know-how and experience. The warehousing business in
         Georgia is underdeveloped. Most of the existing warehouses are characterized by poor
         infrastructure conditions, outdated equipment, low levels of service and extremely high
         storage prices.

     25. There is a need to develop intermodal facility/international logistics center (ILC).
         Georgia’s exports and imports that are considered Logistics Center-suitable (i.e.
         containerisable) amounted to 2.1Mt (2007). The Tbilisi region’s catchment area represents

                                                                                                         6
          half of the national demand. Tbilisi is not only a promising location for the logistics
          domestic market, but also as a regional hub and an important TRACECA node. Therefore,
          the development of the proposed International Logistics Center in Tbilisi, or the Logistics
          City Tbilisi11, merits full consideration. The Logistics City Tbilisi is located right next to the
          Tbilisi International Airport and about 15km in the south-east of Tbilisi City Centre12. The
          main objective of the ILC is to provide integrated logistics services, develop a logistics hub
          to cover the industrial center and catchment area of Tbilisi, and create a major railway hub
          for container block train operations between Turkey/Black Sea and the Caspian Sea/Central
          Asia, including the important link to Armenia. The development of ILC in Tbilisi around the
          airport is currently facing land acquisition issues and another alternative site is proposed in
          the West part of the city.

     26. Joint-ventures with other logistics service providers in different countries should be
         encouraged. These might represent a bigger challenge for smaller traders and
         manufacturers, considering the needed investments. Supporting the development of third
         party supply chain management providers and logistics platforms may be desirable in
         Georgia. Initiatives undertaken by international donors and local stakeholders to further
         develop the country’s human resources (undergraduate and graduate curricula in logistics)
         should be sustained in time. Currently, local universities and private industry groups are
         active in this field and in need of support.

     27. Capacity building to develop the forwarding and brokerage business should be
         supported. Access to profession regulations for freight forwarding was eliminated in
         Georgia. Together with a phased transition to a system where the self-assessment principle
         in filing customs declarations is restored, capacity building to develop the forwarding and
         brokerage business should be supported.

     28. Private-public dialogue should be encouraged to devise a new regulatory framework
         for freight forwarding services. Although many models exist (i.e. self-regulation), a quality-
         driven standard should prevail (as for instance, in most countries that require professional
         competence, financial standing and good repute qualification criteria for market entry) to
         eliminate fly-by-night intermediaries.




11 Tbilisi Logistics Center (41 million euros) will cover 63 hectares and include (i) Logistics Services: transport, handling and
storage facilities for logistics providers and Operators (ii) Container Terminal: combined transshipment module rail-road,
container service center with container depot and empty container storage, container packing, container repair and cleaning
and (iii) Logistics-Intensive Industries and Trade: manufacturing and commercial enterprises with high-level or specialized needs
for logistics services.
12 Located in the eastern outskirts of Tbilisi metropolitan area, the ILC will have adequate access to the existing railway line and

to the major road network, including the road links to the Georgian Black Sea ports of Poti and Batumi, Turkey, Azerbaijan and
Armenia.

                                                                                                                                  7
C.       Corridor development and cross border management
Georgia has made improvements in transport and logistics sector. However, all these transport and
logistics gains are quite often lost due to delays and high cost incurred by the movements of goods
at border crossings. For instance, international road transport traffic into and through Georgia faces
several restrictions:

     29. Current inland transit control practices could open up space for malfeasance. The
         time allotted to transit for transport means (trucks) is too long, compared to
         international practices. Unlike in the EU countries, where transit control has moved from
         the border to inland preventive actions and real-time monitoring, there is little if any mobile
         enforcement capacity to prevent and mitigate transit fraud inland. This is, as in many
         countries, a task entrusted to Customs, and not left to regular police forces. Penalties
         associated to transit fraud provide the right framework to deter fraudsters.

     30. The lack of a transit guarantee system raises concerns and hinders the level of
         enforcement of transit control. Electronic applications of the TIR (transit system) that
         facilitate transit control are not operational and need to be restored. Furthermore, a
         mandatory transit guarantee system in Georgia will need to be reinstated when the country
         accedes to the EU's Common Transit system (known as the New Customs Transit System
         or NCTS for Europe) within 4 years of the Association Agreement comes into force.

     31. The self-assessment principle of a trader filing their own customs declaration has
         been lost. Instead, Revenue Service officials enter manually most of Customs declarations in
         Georgia. This does not adjust to international best practices, and weakens customs controls.
         Besides, the fee for customs "clearance of goods" should be re-assessed to only reflect the
         recovery costs of service delivery, as stipulated in the context of the Georgia-EU Association
         Agreement and DCFTA, and WTO's Trade Facilitation Agreement. Furthermore,
         supporting documents could be further eliminated and replaced by electronic messaging, as
         is the case of the airway bill for air cargo.

     32. A revision of the entire control policy by Customs would bring many benefits. This
         includes the overall use of intelligence and trade information to detect non-compliant
         operators, technical means like the pending activation of the Manifest module in ASYCUDA
         WORLD, use of post-clearance checks and the use of risk management. In particular, the
         latter needs urgent improvements, as detection rates hover around 1-3 percent, well below a
         10-25 percent desirable target range.

     33. Supply chain security is not sufficiently incorporated in the overall border
         management vision in the country. Currently, gold list membership requirements do not
         entail any security auditing; nonetheless they are given facilitation benefits. Providing
         expedited treatment to trusted operators is a recognized practice. However, trusted operators
         might unknowingly attract unlawful activity and take advantage of the expedited treatment
         granted to them.

     34. The process for consolidated cargo clearance is not aligned with the development of
         logistics services in Georgia. Trucks cannot be released until all importers have filed a
         declaration and goods cleared. A new customs clearance zone (CCZ "Tbilisi 2") has been
         recently inaugurated to specifically handle consolidated shipments. Nonetheless, also

                                                                                                           8
       procedures should be compatible with modern requirements for logistics services. In other
       environments like the EU, Customs only interacts with the consolidator (that can perform all
       clearance operations on behalf of consignees or shippers), reducing drastically the number of
       intervening parties.

   35. There is a need to develop joint border operations with Turkey (which entail
       infrastructure and procedural improvements) which are expected to relieve some of the
       congestion common in the access road leading to the border area of Sarpi BCP. In the
       meantime, cross-border cooperation can be also developed, including queue management
       schemes, to alleviate the congestion usually seen in the roads leading to the primary control
       area.

   36. The current road usage fee introduces a significant bias against transit air cargo
       development in Tbilisi Airport. The road usage fee (GEL 200/vehicle) is charged
       irrespective of the type of vehicle used, payload and the distance traveled, which puts transit
       air cargo from Tbilisi Airport (much closer to the border) at a disadvantage. It also
       introduces perverse incentives for compliant operators that use less pollutant trucks.

   37. Road transit traffic of heavy-lift and out-of-gauge through Georgia incur high fees for
       escort services, with no choice of escort service providers. Heavy lift and out of gauge
       transport represent a value added segment offered by logistics service providers in Georgia.
       However, Georgia needs to remain a cost-competitive option to attract this type of traffic,
       usually bound for oil producing regions in Central Asia and Azerbaijan.

From a corridor perspective, railways also represent a viable choice for access to and from Black
Sea ports, connecting Georgian maritime gateways with neighboring countries and Central Asia.
Nonetheless, some challenges also emerge in this respect:

   38. The harmonization of rail tariffs across the corridor is probably the most pressing
       need from the commercial side of operations. Automation has improved and also GR’s
       booking system use. Nonetheless, variations in pricing and the lack of a ‘through’ rate
       negotiated with Azerbaijan Railways (ADDY) are a common source of discouragement to
       use the corridor in the eastbound direction, even up to Baku. Volatility in handling prices at
       Baku rail station is also a common source of complaints among logistics operators. In
       addition to harmonization, there is a need to consider apportionment of through tariffs is
       using clear formulas.

   39. The operations at Gardabani-Boyuk Kessik Border Crossing Point (BCP) seem to
       offer opportunities for improvement from the perspective of procedures and
       automation. Cross-border cooperation could also address informal practices at the border.
       Furthermore, more clarity will be needed in terms of the legal framework for the BCP in
       view of the future rail initiatives (i.e. Silk Wind). The operationalization of the Poti-Baku
       block train services by means of a bilateral agreement with Azerbaijan call for further efforts
       in cross-border cooperation that will enhance the value proposition of the entire corridor.




                                                                                                        9
     40. Development of Block Train between Poti-Tbilisi and Baku13. The proposed railway
         transport should improve the existing connection between the Poti sea port (a future Black
         Sea hub) and Baku sea port (a future Caspian Sea hub at Alyat) via TRACECA Central Axis.
         The proposed project should help to facilitate trade by improving transit procedures, but
         also increase the cruising speed of trains thereby reducing the transit time between the Black
         Sea and Caspian Sea regions and diverting a significant part of traffic from heavily-driven
         roads to rail. It is expected that in mid- and long-term perspectives this project can also help
         TRACECA landlocked countries in Central Asia and Caucasus to indirectly benefit from the
         intensified trade and transit on Central TRACECA Axis.

     41. More clarity is required to the multiple –and potentially competing– initiatives that
         the country has adhered or plans to adhere to related to corridor initiatives involving
         railway transport (Kars-Tbilisi-Baku, Silk Wind, Viking Train, etc.) and other transport
         infrastructure (e.g. existing and planned port and road infrastructure). While improving
         conditions and flexibility in corridor operations is a desired outcome, it is not clear that all
         initiatives will contribute equally to the development of the Georgian logistics industry and
         Georgia as a transit country. A scenario planning methodology could help to translate the
         unlimited number of potential events and occurrences (geopolitical, demographical, related
         to performance and development of infrastructure and logistics services, etc.) that can affect
         Georgia’s position as a transit country into a finite set of outcome types.

     42. The current bilateral permit system with Azerbaijan is restrictive and often
         insufficient for export, import and most importantly transit operations. This opens
         room for informal practices and discretionary behavior at the border, especially once the
         negotiated permits have been used in full by Georgian operators. Whenever informal
         payments arise these may constitute a setback for the competitiveness of the corridor.
         Facilitation payments do not facilitate trade but rather make it more expensive.

     43. Transit to Central Asia is even longer, due to delays and constraints when crossing
         the Azerbaijan border, but most importantly to cross the Caspian Sea towards Central
         Asia. Priority given to liquid transportation by CASPAR (the Azeri company with dominant
         position in cross-Caspian shipping services) hinders reliability in logistics services. Moreover,
         users of Baku port and CASPAR shipping services complain about usual volatility in rates
         with no apparent justifiable reason. Containers hauled by road up to Baku port face the same
         problems as those carried by rail when trying to cross the Caspian Sea on its way to Central
         Asia. Transport volumes to Central Asia are likely to increase substantially as Turkmenistan
         and Kazakhstan are enhancing the connectivity to Caspian Sea ports (by rail and road)
         increasing cargo with origin/destination EU through the Southern Caucasus.

     44. Consider the creation of a Caucasus Transit Corridor Management Group
         (CTCMG).The competitiveness of the CTC will rely on fast, reliable and integrated
         transportation along domestic transit routes but also at across borders. For such an
         important and challenging effort to succeed there may be a merit to consider the creation of
         a CTC Corridor Management Group (CTC-CMG).The primary goal of the CTC-CMG is to
         facilitate the provision of transport services along the corridor, with clearly defined

13It appears that GR has already started this project in collaboration with Azerbaijan. However the train is not operated on a
regular basis.



                                                                                                                                 10
        performance targets. The CTC-CMG would have coordinating and management functions
        and an oversight capacity from stakeholder countries along the corridor with a strong
        representation from the private sector. The CMG could operate under a high level authority
        (i.e. a Council of Ministers responsible for transportation in the member countries). As a
        first step, officials from Georgia, Azerbaijan and Armenia could make up the first members
        of the CTC-CMG, with potential for bringing in members from other Central Asian nations.

IV. Where Georgia could be and how it would be there
     45. Georgia’s logistics and transport infrastructure competitiveness will improve by
         implementing not only the identified priority actions within Georgia but also along
         the CTC, particularly actions to improve cross border management. The Graph below
         indicates that Georgia infrastructure deficits are still a major component of the lower
         performance of its LPI. When breaking down the Georgia’s infrastructure index in the 2014
         Enabling Trade Index (ETI), the availability and quality of transport infrastructure is ranked
         much higher (56th out of 138 countries) than transport services (99th), with a particularly low
         ranking for ease and affordability of shipments and logistics. The Government is committed
         to developing the transport infrastructure (i.e. Complete the East-West Highway by 2020).
         This puts a particular onus on improving logistics and transport services within Georgia but
         also cross-borders along the CTC. Improving the CTC competiveness will enable Georgia to
         fulfill its aspiration to become a regional transport and logistics hub and reach the LPIs of
         the neighboring Turkey (regional leader) and of Poland.

                                     Georgia’s Logistic Performance Index
          4.5
            4
          3.5
            3
          2.5
            2
          1.5                                                                                Turkey 2012
            1
          0.5                                                                                Poland 2012
            0
                                                                                             Azerbaijan 2012
                                                                                             Georgia 2012




     46. A matrix of recommendations to improve transport and logistics, the on-going
         activities and suggested priority actions to fill the remaining gaps is presented in
         Annex 1. It is recommended that this matrix be discussed in a stakeholder’s workshop to
         agree on the priority actions, assign implementation responsibilities to each stakeholder,
         including the private sector. And, agree on a time line, and on a mechanism to assess
         implementation progress and evaluation of results.




                                                                                                      11
                                                    Annex 1: Detailed assessment of gaps
                                                                                    ONGOING WORK IN
                                                                                                                              REMAINING
                     GAPS & RECOMMENDATIONS                                           TRANSPORT AND
                                                                                                                             GAPS/ACTIONS
                                                                                        LOGISTICS
                                                             BORDER MANAGEMENT
TRANSIT                                                                          T&C Global Practice is            Further upgrading needed of
 Align time allotted to transit for transport means (currently: 1 day/100km)     providing technical assistance     ASYCUDA World has been flagged
  with international practices                                                    to GRS to upgrade ICT              by GRS.
 Enhance mobile enforcement capacity to prevent and mitigate transit fraud       systems to ASYCUDA World          Activation of TIR-EPD and SafeTIR
  inland.                                                                         ver.2.2. including Transit and    Consider mentioned changes to
 Revise penalties associated to transit fraud to provide the right framework     Transit/TIR functions              transit times, mobile capacity,
  to deter fraudsters                                                            UNECE-TIR transit EDI              penalties
 Align transit guarantee system with international practices (currently no       cross-border Customs              Revise transit fee
  mandatory guarantee in place) and EU’s NCTS (EU Transit System) in              information
  view of Georgia’s AA-DCFTA commitments.
 Reinstate interface between ASYCUDA WORLD system and TIR
  electronic applications (EPD and SAFeTIR)
 Revise transit fee structure of GEL 200
RISK MANAGEMENT                                                                  T&C Global Practice is            Consider other elements for a
 Improve risk management engine                                                  providing technical assistance     comprehensive control policy,
 Improve feedback mechanism between central unit and field officers              to GRS in risk management          including but not limited to risk
 Overhaul control policy to complement risk management                                                              management

CLEARANCE                                                                        Diagnostic work on Post-Audit     Re-instate self-assessment principle
 Re-introduce self-assessment principle                                          by USAID. Follow up work          Revise Yellow channel control
 Post-audit strengthening (Blue Channel)                                         TBC                                effectiveness and process
 Revise fee structure of cargo clearance services provided at CCZs              GoG is redrafting its Customs     Strengthening Post-Audit
 Provide training for brokers and forwarders and foster electronic filling       Code                              Define regulatory model for freight
 Work on regulation of brokerage and forwarding sectors to avoid                                                    forwarding industry and possibly
  governance issues and increase quality in service delivery                                                         capacity training program
                                                                                                                    Revise fee structure of clearance
                                                                                                                     services in the context of AA-
                                                                                                                     DCFTA




                                                                                                                                                            12
BORDER CROSSING INFRASTRUCTURE                                                    Protocol was signed with            Possible traffic management scheme
 Continue cooperation efforts with Turkey for joint border operations and         Turkey for joint BCP                 to avoid congestion until joint BCP
  explore traffic management schemes for Sarpi BCP.                                operations                           enters into operations
                                                                                  Working group has been
                                                                                   established composed of
                                                                                   Heads and/or Deputy Heads of
                                                                                   IT, Customs and International
                                                                                   Departments and other
                                                                                   technical experts of both sides.
INSTITUTIONAL                                                                     T&C GP providing TA to              Re-balance revenue generation and
 Enhance institutional capacity and strategic planning of Georgian Revenue        GRS including KPI framework          facilitation objectives with protection
  Service to re-balance revenue generation objectives.                                                                  of general public and state
                                             INFRASTRUCTURE AND LOGISTICS SERVICES
ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE AND LOGISTICS SERVICES                                        WB and IFI support to the           GoG to pursue the Value for Money
 Complete remaining sections of the East-West Highway Corridor (already           development of East-West             Analysis and help structure the
  under way).                                                                      Highway Corridor                     financing of the next E-W Highway
 Explore different financing mechanisms and future private sector                                                      Corridor.
  participation for operation and maintenance after completion of the E-W         Value for Money Analysis is
  Highway (e.g. tolling).                                                          being carried out to advise on
 Improve secondary and local roads network to help reap full benefits of          financing strategy to complete      Consider recommendations from the
  investments in the East-West Highway.                                            E-W Corridor                         GFTL project in the interest of
 Explore role of North-South road links to enhance Georgia’s transit role.                                             promoting efficient and clean freight
 Devise a strategy for the road freight services sector that would address,     .                                      transport services
  including market access issues, access to profession regulations                TA – WBG support to create
 Generally improve energy efficiency in freight transport services and            the basis for Georgia’s Green
  logistics by supporting the development of innovative initiatives in the         Growth in the freight transport
  private sector and investing in efficient and clean transport infrastructure     and logistics sector (Green
                                                                                   Freight Transport and
                                                                                   Logistics Project/GFTL
                                                                                   project)
RAILWAY TRANSPORT                                                                 GR published planned                Support GR to separate operations
 Support Georgian Railways’ efforts to separate operations from the               investment in rolling stock          from ownership of infrastructure as
  ownership of the infrastructure by 2022.                                        Georgian Railway                     per AA-DCFTA
 Upgrade and expand rolling stock                                                 Modernization Project (Tbilisi-     Solve remaining capacity issues and
 Solve track capacity bottlenecks West of Tbilisi (e.g. Poti–Samtredia and        Batumi) funded by GR                 rolling stock
  Zestaponi– Khashuri) within ongoing rail network modernization efforts.
 Increase efficiency of rail operation by improving services and intermodal
  infrastructure.


                                                                                                                                                                  13
MARITIME TRANSPORT                                                                   GoG commissioned feasibility
 Concentrate efforts to upgrade existing port infrastructure.                        study of deep sea Port

AIR CARGO                                                                            Not known
 Concentrate efforts to promote Tbilisi International Airport as sole cargo
  gateway.
 Assess apron space needs for cargo operations, and feasibility of
  enlargement/upgrading of the new and old apron.
 Assess charges for essential services and infrastructure use (e.g. cargo
  security) in relation to its recovery cost.
LOGISTICS CENTERS: The Tbilisi region’s catchment area represents                    TRACECA Feasibility study       Address the legal issue related to the
half of the national demand for containerisable goods. Tbilisi is not only a        Feasibility Study TLC Property    proposed site for the development of
promising location for the logistics domestic market, but also as a regional        Management LLC and                the Tbilisi Logistics Center
hub and an important TRACECA node. Therefore, the development of the                TransCare GmbH
proposed International Logistics Center in Tbilisi, or the Logistics City Tbilisi
should be considered.
                                                         SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
 Support training and skills upgrading in the logistic and supply chain             USAID support program with       WBG support to Georgian Technical
  management sector, directly or indirectly, with other international donors.         Georgian Logistics                University to create curricula on
 Continue support of advocacy groups and efforts to build a supply chain             Association                       Logistics
  management curricula with local universities and/or partnerships with              WBG support to Georgian          WBG support Georgian Logistics
  foreign technical institutions                                                      Technical University to           Association to create curricula for
                                                                                      develop new curricula on          vocational trainings for logistics and
                                                                                      Logistics (capacity building      supply chain industry
                                                                                      activity of the GFTL project)    Need to enhance supply chain
                                                                                                                        skillsets within Georgian companies
                                                                                                                        (developing official training
                                                                                                                        programs and advanced curricula in
                                                                                                                        technical universities)

                                                                                                                       Need to implement best practices and
                                                                                                                        support local logistics companies to
                                                                                                                        establish partnerships with
                                                                                                                        international companies

INFRASTRUCTURE                                                                       Cooperation through              Support the development of third
 Support the current demand for complex logistics service providers.                 TRACECA                           party supply chain management
                                                                                                                        providers and logistics platforms


                                                                                                                                                                 14
 Develop intermodal logistics platforms based on the results from the              Ongoing discussions about the
  LOGMOS project                                                                     planned ILC project near
 Improve and facilitate coordination between the relevant stakeholders to           Tbilisi
  ensure greater impact.                                                            WBG support to identify
                                                                                     priorities/investments
                                                                                     regarding the development of
                                                                                     green and efficient logistics
                                                                                     services
                                                           CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT
 Strengthen cooperation and institutional framework with Azerbaijan to             Cooperation through              Need for bilateral corridor working
  address governance issues at BCPs                                                  TRACECA                           group with Azerbaijan
 Offer a transparent single negotiated rail tariff (GR/ADDY) for Poti-Baku         Poti-Baku block train agreed     Creation of CTC-Corridor
  services                                                                           with Azerbaijan since July        Management Group
 Deepen cooperation with CASPAR to address charges transparency and                 2014
  schedule reliability for ferry services.
 Allow competition in the escort services fee for out of gauge transit cargo,
  or set fee on a recovery cost basis (plus margin).
 Promote pilots of joint-ventures between shippers, forwarders and
  (alternative) companies providing shipping services in the Caspian.
 Promote establishment of logistics centers with dry port functionality
  operating on commercial basis.
 Boost strategic planning at the corridor level; consider using scenario
  planning methodologies.
 Assess existing rail border crossing agreements vis-à-vis current practices,
  and implications of new service initiatives (e.g. Silk Wind).
 Incorporate future railway initiatives in the context of corridor planning and
  its impact on other logistics and transport infrastructure assets in the
  country.




                                                                                                                                                             15
