                            96601




               The World Bank
               www.worldbank.org/ps




Economic Monitoring
Report to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee
May 27, 2015
               The World Bank
               www.worldbank.org/ps




Economic Monitoring
Report to the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee
May 27, 2015
                                                                                         Table of Contents
                                                                                         Executive Summary..........................................................................................................................5
                                                                                         I.	 Recent Developments.................................................................................................................7
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                         II.	 The Staggering Cost of Violence and Blockade on Gaza’s Economy and Living Standards...14
                                                                                         III.	References................................................................................................................................42



                                                                                         List of Tables
                                                                                         Table 1: . Smmary Status of Support pledged at Cairo Conference on Palestine
                                                                                                    “Reconstructing Gaza” Cairo, October 12, 2014.......................................................32
                                                                                         Table 2:.       Support to Gaza Classification...................................................................................33
                                                                                         Table 3:.       Disbursement Status by Donor of Support to Gaza pledged at Cairo Conference
                                                                                                         on Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”...........................................................................35




                                                                            2   P a ge
List of Figures
Figure 1: . Recent trends in growth and unemployment in the Palestinian territories...................8
Figure 2: . Despite a decline in recent years, PA expenditures as a share of GDP increased in
            2014............................................................................................................................11
Figure 3: . Aggregate real GDP growth in Gaza and comparator countries (1994-2013 for
            comparators & 1994-2014 for Gaza)..........................................................................15
Figure 4: . While real per capita income (GNI) increased modestly in the West Bank between
            1994 and 2014 it was reduced by one third in Gaza..................................................16
Figure 5: . The structure of Gaza’s economy changed significantly since Oslo with a large
            growth in public administration and defense, significant growth in trade activities,
            at the expense of industry and agriculture..................................................................17
Figure 6:. Manufacturing Sector cumulative growth since 1994 for Gaza and other
           comparators................................................................................................................17
Figure 7: . Following a strong decline in the early years of the Oslo era, unemployment in
            Gaza has increased and reached a record high of 45 percent in the second quarter
            of 2014........................................................................................................................18
Figure 8: . Unemployment rate in Gaza seems to be higher than that in any country in the
            world...........................................................................................................................19
Figure 9: . Gaza’s export’s virtually disappeared after the blockade was imposed in 2007
            (exports measured in number of truckloads)..............................................................20
Figure 10: .Gazan companies cite access to electricity as a major obstacle.................................22
Figure 11: .The 2014 conflict caused a 15 percent drop in Gaza’s real GDP ..............................23
Figure 12: .Estimations show that without conflicts and blockade Gaza’s economy and public
            finances would look starkly different.........................................................................24
Figure 13: .Classification of Disbursements of Support to Gaza..................................................27
Figure 14: .Actual Disbursement by Sector (in million)...............................................................27
Figure 15: .Classification of Disbursements of Support to Gaza..................................................28
Figure 16: .Expected Flow of Support to Gaza.............................................................................29
Figure 17: .Actual Disbursement by Sector (in million) ..............................................................29
Figure 18: .Disbursements by implementing agency (in million)................................................30
Figure 19: .Disbursements through UNRWA (in million) ...........................................................30
Figure 20:. Future Allocations by Sector......................................................................................30




                                                                                                                                                 3   Page
                                                                                         Acronyms
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                         AHLC       Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                                                         CoLA       Cost of Living Allowance
                                                                                         DNA        Damage and Needs Assessment
                                                                                         GDP        Gross Domestic Product
                                                                                         GFS        Government Finance Statistics
                                                                                         GoI        Government of Israel
                                                                                         IEC        Israel Electric Corporation
                                                                                         MoF        Ministry of Finance
                                                                                         MoH        Ministry of Health
                                                                                         MoSA       Ministry of Social Affairs
                                                                                         NCTP       National Cash Transfer Program
                                                                                         NIS        New Israeli Shekels
                                                                                         PA         Palestinian Authority
                                                                                         PCBS       Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics
                                                                                         PMA        Palestine Monetary Authority
                                                                                         Q          Quarter of the Year
                                                                                         SME        Small and Medium Enterprises
                                                                                         USD		      United States Dollar
                                                                                         VAT        Value Added Tax
                                                                                         WB&G       West Bank and Gaza




                                                                            4   P a ge
Executive Summary
This report covers two distinct subjects. Chapter I of the report, as has been the norm with
the World Bank AHLC reports, focuses on the assessment of recent macroeconomic and fiscal
developments and government policies in West Bank and Gaza. Chapter II presents an analysis
of Gaza’s stark economic decline over the past 20 years and its human impact. It also presents
a mix of policies that should ensure sustainable development of the Gaza strip and put an end
to human suffering therein. The report also contains an annex which provides an overview
of progress in meeting the pledges made for Gaza’s reconstruction at the October 2014 Cairo
Conference. Although the connection between the chapters of this report may not be obvious as
they treat a diverse set of issues facing the Palestinian economy and public finances, together they
provide insights into key policy and institutional development actions and reforms, which need
to be taken by the Palestinian Authority, the Government of Israel, and the donor community to
reverse the recent and worrisome slowdown in economic growth, to enable effective and efficient
management of public finances in order to avoid a dangerous fiscal crisis and to support inclusive
economic growth and poverty reduction.

1.	 Palestinian Economy and Public Finances
Despite surprisingly strong economic growth in the West Bank in 2014, the war in Gaza has had
a devastating impact on the Palestinian economy, resulting in overall negative growth. Strong
growth in private consumption, fueled by bank borrowing, and net exports were the drivers behind
a remarkably strong growth of five percent in the West Bank. On the other hand, the closure of
tunnels with Egypt and in particular the 2014 summer war shaved some USD460 million off
Gaza’s economy, leading to a 15 percent contraction of its GDP. Overall the Palestinian economy
contracted three percent in 2014 on a per capita basis.

Unemployment and poverty increased markedly. In Gaza, yearly average unemployment
increased by as much as 11 percentage points to reach 43 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014—
probably the highest in the world--and that in the West Bank dropped by 1 percentage point. In
Gaza, the poverty rate reached 39 percent and with poverty in the West Bank at 16 percent, the
aggregate poverty rate amounted to 25 percent.1

Remarkably, the fiscal deficit of the Palestinian Authority was reduced in 2014, but the increase
in expenditures is of concern. Thanks to strong revenue performance, with clearance revenue
growth of 20 percent, largely driven by the growth in fuel imports into Gaza from Israel and
growth in registered imports from third countries, the PA managed to reduce its fiscal deficit by
one percentage point of GDP. Nevertheless, the growth in government recurrent expenditures of
9 percent was large and unsustainable; growth in the government wage bill and net lending are of
particular concern.

Against the backdrop of a sluggish reconstruction process in Gaza, the instability of clearance
revenues, and high political uncertainty the economic outlook remains bleak. With the
reopening of businesses following last year’s war and the reconstruction process, Gaza’s real GDP
is expected to grow at 7 percent, while meager one percent growth is expected in the West Bank
due to the reduction in consumption activity as well as the liquidity and confidence effects of
Israel’s withholding of the clearance revenue during the first four months of 2015.
1	   World Bank estimates.




                                                                                                       5   Page
                                                                                         2.	 The Destruction of Gaza’s Economy, Human Consequences, and the Way Forward
                                                                                         Tremendously damaged by repeated armed conflicts, the blockade and internal divide, Gaza’s
                                                                                         economy has been reduced to a fraction of its estimated potential.2 Gaza’s economic performance
                                                                                         over this period has been roughly 250 percent worse than that of any relevant comparators,
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                         including that of the West Bank, whose growth performance has been close to average despite the
                                                                                         restrictions on movement and access imposed by the Government of Israel, which present binding
                                                                                         constraints to growth.3 Real per capita income is 31 percent lower in Gaza than it was 20 years ago
                                                                                         and the difference in per capita income with West Bank increased from 14 percent to 141 percent
                                                                                         over this period in favor of the West Bank. Its manufacturing sector—once significant—has shrunk
                                                                                         by as much as 60 percent in real terms. Gaza’s exports virtually disappeared since the imposition of
                                                                                         the 2007 blockade. There are no other variables that could explain these developments other than
                                                                                         war and the blockade. The impact of the blockade imposed in 2007 was particularly devastating,
                                                                                         with GDP losses caused by the blockade estimated at above 50 percent and large welfare losses.

                                                                                         The human costs of Gaza’s economic malaise are enormous. As mentioned above, if it were
                                                                                         compared to that of other economies, unemployment in Gaza would be the highest in the world.
                                                                                         Poverty in Gaza is also very high. This is despite the fact that nearly 80 percent of Gaza’s residents
                                                                                         receive some aid. These numbers, however, fail to portray the degree of suffering of Gaza’s
                                                                                         citizens due to poor electricity and water/sewerage availability, war-related psychological trauma,
                                                                                         limited movement, and other adverse effects of wars and the blockade.

                                                                                         To reduce the human hardship and increase the prospects for peace, Gaza’s economy has to be
                                                                                         rebuilt. This, above all requires a unified Palestinian government in both West Bank and Gaza
                                                                                         which can be a partner to multilateral and bilateral donors and substantial donor support to rebuild
                                                                                         Gaza’s infrastructure and homes, and it requires the lifting of the blockade on the movement of
                                                                                         goods and people to allow Gaza’s tradable sectors to recover.

                                                                                         Finally, it is noteworthy that good progress has been made so far to fulfill donor pledges for
                                                                                         Gaza reconstruction, but it has to continue and—most importantly—solutions have to be found
                                                                                         to enable faster inflow of construction materials into Gaza. By mid-April, almost USD1 billion
                                                                                         of the USD3.5 billion pledged for Gaza reconstruction and recovery at the October 2014 Cairo
                                                                                         conference have been allocated by donors. The reconstruction and recovery process will require
                                                                                         that all donors fulfill their pledges. However, currently the binding constraint on Gaza’s recovery
                                                                                         is not financing, but the limitations on imports of construction materials into Gaza.4 Therefore,
                                                                                         taking into account legitimate security concerns of neighboring countries, ways have to be found
                                                                                         to drastically improve access to construction materials in Gaza.




                                                                                         2	 Following the electoral victory of Hamas in the Palestinian national elections in 2006 and Hamas’ takeover of Gaza following
                                                                                            violence, Israel has imposed a blockade on Gaza that severely limits the movement of goods and people in an out.
                                                                                         3	 As the World Bank’s 2013 study, “Area C and the Future of the Palestinian Economy” shows only restrictions on access to Area
                                                                                            C, which comprises 61 percent of the West Bank’s territory reduce the Palestinian GDP by up to 35 percent.
                                                                                         4	 According to the Government of Israel, the restrictions are in place due to Israel’s legitimate security concerns.




                                                                            6   P a ge
I.	 Recent Developments
    Economic Growth
1.	 The Palestinian economy fell into recession in 2014 for the first time since 2006 following
    a sharp economic contraction in Gaza. Preliminary estimates indicate that the Palestinian
    economy shrank by 0.4 percent in 2014 due to a strong contraction of nearly 15 percent in
    Gaza’s real Gross Domestic Product (GDP), primarily as a result of the war that extended over
    52 days during the third quarter of 2014. Notably, the Gaza economy was struggling even
    before the onset of the war. The decline started in late 2013 when the majority of the illegal
    trade tunnels connecting Gaza to Egypt were destroyed. These tunnels served as a key feeder
    to Gaza’s construction sector which, together with internal trade, was the main contributor to
    growth and employment in recent years. In addition, the breakdown of tunnel trade prevented
    the de facto government from raising adequate revenues to pay salaries to its 70 thousand
    employees for over a year, which used to be an important injection into Gaza’s constrained
    economy.

2.	 The 2014 war has had a devastating impact on Gaza’s economy. It is estimated that it has
    shaved USD460 million off the Strip’s output. Economic activity in the private sector virtually
    stopped throughout the war’s duration as many enterprises were partially or fully destroyed,
    resulting in the loss of economic capacity that will persist for some time. For instance, the
    Ministry of National economy reports that 963 enterprises in the manufacturing sector were
    hit during the war reducing its output by 28 percent in 2014 compared to the previous year.
    Agriculture also suffered as a large part of Gaza’s farms and arable land were ruined by military
    activity or eaten up by the enlarged security buffer zone that was established near the border
    during the war, and hence its 2014 output declined by 31 percent, year-on-year. Construction
    activity came to a complete halt during the war, and lack of building materials as a result of
    the ongoing Israeli blockade and the closure of the illegal tunnels with Egypt continues to be
    a major challenge for this sector. Gaza’s infrastructure including roads, water and electricity
    networks also suffered significant damages estimated at about USD400 million, which has had
    a significant spillover effect on most economic sectors in Gaza.

3.	 On the other hand, the West Bank economy expanded in 2014. It is estimated that real
    growth in the West Bank exceeded 5 percent and it was mainly driven by exports and private
    consumption fueled by bank loans. According to the Palestine Central Bureau of Statistics,
    export growth in 2014 is mainly due to a sharp increase in exports of olive oil and medical
    herbs, particularly to countries other than Israel. Hence, the agriculture sector’s output grew
    by 3 percent in 2014. Retail and whole sale trade, real estate activities and public services
    continue to be amongst the main contributors to growth on the supply side. The manufacturing
    sector, on the other hand, continues to be restrained by the ongoing Israeli restrictions and
    hence, it contracted by 5 percent in 2014.

4.	 The economic decline has had a severe impact on the livelihoods of Palestinians, particularly
    in Gaza. On a per capita basis, the Palestinian economy is estimated to have declined by 3
    percent in 2014. Overall unemployment increased to 27 percent. It amounted to 43 percent
    in Gaza and 17 percent in the West Bank. Notably, yearly average unemployment in Gaza
    increased by 11 percentage points in 2015. Particularly alarming is youth unemployment in
    Gaza which soared to more than 60 percent by the end of 2014 – the highest in the region.




                                                                                                        7   Page
                                                                                         5.	 Preliminary Bank estimates suggest that poverty in the Palestinian territories reached 25
                                                                                             percent in 2014. The overall rate, however, masks wide regional divergence. Poverty in Gaza
                                                                                             was 39 percent which is almost 2.5 times higher than that in the West Bank at 16 percent in
                                                                                             2014. And, according to the United Nation’s Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), almost 80
                                                                                             percent of Gaza’s population is currently aid dependent. The stark regional divergence in the
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                             poverty incidence between the West Bank and Gaza started after the severe economic shock
                                                                                             that hit Gaza in 2006/7, when the Israeli blockade was imposed, and that led to a dramatic 20
                                                                                             percentage point poverty increase in the Strip.

                                                                                                   Figure 1: Recent trends and projections in growth and unemployment in the
                                                                                                                             Palestinian territories




                                                                                                                Source: Palestine Central Bureau of Statistics, IMF and WB staff projections

                                                                                         6.	 Inflation in the Palestinian territories is largely determined by Israeli inflation and remains
                                                                                             contained. In 2014, inflation stayed at the 2013 level averaging 1.7 percent. In the West Bank
                                                                                             it was 1.2 percent while it was higher in Gaza at 2.85 percent. Prices in Gaza started to rise
                                                                                             following the crackdown of the tunnels with Egypt in the summer of 2013, as access to cheaper
                                                                                             Egyptian fuel, construction material and other commercial goods significantly deteriorated.



                                                                                         7.	 Even though the trade deficit widened in 2014, the Current Account deficit (CAD) dropped
                                                                                             due to a significant increase in current transfers. Despite an increase in exports, the
                                                                                             chronically large trade deficit further widened as a percentage of GDP in 2014 due to a sharp
                                                                                             growth in imports. Nevertheless, the CAD declined by more than 8 percentage points and
                                                                                             reached 11 percent of GDP in 2014 mainly as a result of a significant increase in current
                                                                                             transfers. Growth in current transfers in 2014 was driven by an increase of official aid inflows
                                                                                             into Gaza, according to the Palestine Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS). Income receipts
                                                                                             also slightly grew due to an increase in compensation of employees working in Israel.




                                                                            8   P a ge
     Public Finance
8.	 The PA managed to reduce its recurrent deficit in 2014 mainly due to strong clearance
    revenues5 while domestic revenues performed worse than expected and expenditures
    increased by 9 percent compared to the previous year. The PA’s recurrent deficit was reduced
    by about 1 percentage point of GDP in 2014, which is a good achievement given the economic
    and political situation. Nevertheless, fiscal pressures continue to be high and this is particularly
    reflected in the growth of the wage bill and net lending. In 2015, the withholding of clearance
    revenues by the GoI through April have significantly worsened the fiscal difficulties.

9.	 The performance of clearance revenues was impressive in 2014. They grew by more than
    20 percent (year-on-year) and exceeded their budget target by 12 percent. This is mainly due
    to higher collections from customs, VAT and petroleum excise which grew by 22, 13 and 26
    percent, respectively, in 2014 relative to the previous year. The increase in clearance revenues
    is partly attributed to larger imports of Israeli fuel into Gaza as access to the cheaper Egyptian
    fuel was interrupted following the closure of the tunnel trade. Another key contributor to the
    growth of clearance revenues is an increase in non-Israeli imports, which increase custom
    tariff revenues and which grew by 19 percent in 2014 compared to the previous year.6

10.	 On the other hand, domestic revenues stagnated even though the economy of the West
     Bank- where the majority of these revenues are generated- expanded in 2014. Domestic tax
     collections in 2014 were very close to their 2013 level. Growth in VAT receipts was offset by
     a strong decline in collections from income tax and excise on tobacco by 4 and 38 percent,
     respectively. Efforts so far conducted by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to strengthen revenue
     performance and increase the number of taxpayers are commendable, but more needs to be done
     since only 30 percent of the potential tax base is covered. The focus should be on increasing
     the number of files in the Large Taxpayers Unit (LTU) and on strengthening tax enforcement
     and imposing financial penalties on evaders. The MoF should also work on strengthening
     procedures and practices in audit as well as developing a simplified tax regime for SMEs.
     Notably, the decision by the MoF to cancel the capital gains tax and freeze the 10 percent
     dividend tax is disappointing, particularly as the latter was passed as part of the Revenue
     Action Plan 2014-16 to mobilize previously untapped sources of revenue. Furthermore, even
     though it will not apply to large monopolies such as telecoms, the recent Cabinet decision to
     reduce corporate income tax from 20 to 15 percent and increase the ceiling for the exempted
     tax bracket from NIS30 thousand to NIS36 thousand is expected to reduce domestic revenue
     collections, particularly in the short term until this loss is compensated for by an expansion
     in the tax base. In addition to the West Bank, efforts to enhance revenue collection from Gaza
     will need to be pursued once governance arrangements over the territory are clarified. World
     Bank estimates show that yearly revenues from Gaza, including domestic taxes and import
     duties, could amount to USD350-400 million, which will increase the share of PA revenues in
     the economy from about 22 percent of GDP to 25 percent.

11.	 Aided by lower oil prices, fuel subsidies provided as tax refunds also declined in 2014. The
     monthly average of these subsidies was reduced to about USD12 million down from USD17
     million in 2013. Nevertheless, these subsidies remain a source of inefficiency in the PA’s
     budget and they should be fully eliminated. International experience shows that fuel subsidies
5	 Clearance revenues are VAT and import duties collected by the GoI on behalf of the PA and remitted on a monthly basis. Before
   remitting these revenues, the GoI makes deductions to clear debt owed by the PA for electricity, water, sewage and health referrals
   to Israeli hospitals. It also deducts a 3 percent administrative fee.
6	 Part of the growth in clearance revenues may not be due to a real increase in the volume of imports, but due to the PA’s efforts in
   combating under invoicing through tax cooperation with GoI.




                                                                                                                                         9   Page
                                                                                           not only have distortionary effects on economic activity, but they also disproportionally
                                                                                           benefit better-off segments of the population. The World Bank therefore recommends that
                                                                                           funds currently spent on fuel subsidies be gradually shifted to the PA’s well-targeted cash
                                                                                           transfer system which is a more effective mechanism to offset the impact of any cost of living
                                                                                           increase on the living standards of the poor.
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                      12.	 Wage bill growth was high in 2014. The wage bill represents more than half of recurrent
                                                                                          spending and increased by 6 percent in 2014, slightly exceeding its budget target -- despite a
                                                                                          delay in allowances. While the 2014 budget included a 1.75 percent Cost of Living Allowance
                                                                                          (CoLA), half of this amount was actually disbursed and only in some months of the year.
                                                                                          Savings that resulted from lower than budgeted CoLA were offset by a breach in the zero net
                                                                                          hiring policy that was assumed by the Budget. Figures provided by the MoF indicate that the
                                                                                          number of PA employees increased by 1,296 on a net basis in 2014. The net increase in staffing
                                                                                          took place in the West Bank and mostly in the military sector, which raises sustainability as
                                                                                          well as efficiency concerns given that the sector is already large by international standards and
                                                                                          suffers from significant grade inflation.

                                                                                      13.	 In addition, spending on goods and services was significantly higher than expected in 2014
                                                                                           mostly due to higher spending in the health sector. The exact reason for growth in spending
                                                                                           on goods and services is not known, but the increase was mostly in the health sector wherein
                                                                                           the cost of health referrals has been a concern for years. Referral expenditures increased from
                                                                                           USD8 million in 2000 to more than USD144 million in 2013 (latest available yearly data). The
                                                                                           MoH has taken several measures to reduce referrals including the establishment of specialized
                                                                                           committees in charge of reviewing and approving referral cases. In addition, a consolidated
                                                                                           Health Information System that covers referrals, billing and health insurance has been
                                                                                           constructed with support from USAID. The MoH has also focused recent efforts on reducing
                                                                                           the cost of referrals to Israeli hospitals where the highest unit price is charged.7 As a result, the
                                                                                           MoH reports that the cost of referrals to Israel between January and March 2015 was reduced
                                                                                           by USD4 million compared to the same period in 2014. These efforts are commendable;
                                                                                           however, reforming the generous Health Insurance System, which is the primary source of
                                                                                           hemorrhage, should also be a priority. In its current status, the Health Insurance System allows
                                                                                           individuals to gain access to health services through paying a minimal yearly registration
                                                                                           fee that grants them immediate access to the referral system. This creates a large imbalance
                                                                                           between the system’s revenues and its expenditures and ultimately places a strain on the
                                                                                           overall public health system.

                                                                                      14.	 Net lending, which mainly represents payments to Israel for electricity, continues to form
                                                                                           a major drag on the PA’s budget. In 2014, it was 35 percent higher than the previous year
                                                                                           and ran 70 percent above its budget target. The major cause of net lending is that funds
                                                                                           collected from consumers through electricity bills are used by Local Government Units to
                                                                                           finance expenditures rather than pay bills to the Israeli Electricity Company (IEC) -- the
                                                                                           main electricity supplier. A share of the unpaid amount is deducted by Israel from the PA’s
                                                                                           clearance revenues, and is called net lending. The rest accumulates as debt which, according
                                                                                           to IEC, stood at about USD0.5 billion as of March 2015.8 Revenues from electricity are in fact
                                                                                           being used as an indirect intergovernmental fiscal transfers, and while transfers from the PA to

                                                                                      7	 For instance, the MoH has already negotiated the price list of services provided with several major Israeli hospitals. It was also
                                                                                         agreed with these hospitals that invoices will be audited and scrutinized by the MoH before any deductions are made from clear-
                                                                                         ance revenues to cover the cost.
                                                                                      8	 The PA disputes this figure because it states that a large part of the debt is owed by the Jerusalem District Electricity Company
                                                                                         (JDECO) which is a privately owned company registered in East Jerusalem, and hence its debt should not be deducted from public
                                                                                         money. The GoI has so far rejected the PA’s claim.




                                                                            10   P a ge
      local governments are needed, they should be direct, equitable and transparent. It is therefore
      important that, in addition to efforts to improve bill collections and reduce technical losses, the
      PA reforms the currently distorted intergovernmental fiscal transfers system in order to reduce
      and ultimately eliminate net lending. The PA has already taken some steps to address this
      issue including passing a resolution that prevents municipalities from using electricity fees to
      finance their expenditures, which will hopefully bind municipalities to transfer collected fees
      to the IEC. In late 2014, the Cabinet also passed another resolution on the reconciliation of
      debt between the Palestinian MoF and some of the electricity providers. Other actions were
      also taken to increase the collection rate including a resolution preventing consumers from
      obtaining access to some public services, including renewing a driver’s license, applying for a
      visa, and obtaining travel permission, if they have accumulated unpaid bills. Furthermore, the
      Palestinian MoF and the Palestinian Electricity Transmission company (PETL) are negotiating
      a Power Purchase Agreement with the Israeli MoF and IEC.

15.	 The PA relied on arrears as a major source of financing in 2014. The PA’s total deficit
     amounted to USD1.59 billion in 2014 while aid received was USD1.23 billion, resulting in a
     financing gap of USD357 million. Net accumulation of arrears amounted to USD497 million
     – more than what was needed to close the financing gap. Around USD106 million of these
     arrears are to the private sector9 while the majority of the rest is to the pension fund. Excess
     financing enabled the PA to reduce its net domestic bank financing by more than USD140
     million in 2014.

              Figure 2: After a decline in recent years, PA expenditures as a share of GDP
                                             increased in 2014




                                                              Source: PA MoF

      Fiscal performance: Q1 2015
16.	 The PA did a commendable job managing the acute fiscal crisis due to the Israeli decision
     to withhold clearance revenues in Q1 2015. Clearance revenues represent 70 percent of total
     revenues and they cover about 50 percent of spending. The GoI withheld clearance revenues
     for December (2014), January, February and March (2015), and on April 21 it released these
     funds after deducting USD167 million to clear debt owed by the PA for electricity, water,
     sewage and health referrals to Israeli hospitals. The PA contests these deductions particularly
     the USD61 million deducted from February revenues to clear electricity debt because it states
     that the majority of this debt is owed by the Jerusalem District Electricity Company (JDECO)
     which is privately owned, and hence the debt should not be deducted from public funds. Due
     to the liquidity strain caused by clearance revenue suspension, the Palestinian Authority only
9	   Even though arrears to some private sector suppliers were repaid, a larger amount was accumulated which resulted in a net increase
     in private sector arrears in 2014.




                                                                                                                                          11   Page
                                                                                           paid 60 percent of staff salaries (with a minimum of NIS2000) during the first three months of
                                                                                           2015, while delaying most other expenditures and accruing NIS1.85 billion in arrears to the
                                                                                           pension system and the private sector. Partial salaries were paid with local revenues, aid and
                                                                                           credit from local banks. As a result, the PA had to increase its domestic borrowing by NIS809
                                                                                           million, leading to a total stock of domestic debt of NIS5.2 billion, as of March 2015.
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                      17.	 Given the Israeli decision to withhold clearance revenues, the PA passed an “emergency
                                                                                           cash rationing budget” by the end of March 2015 -- within the legal deadline. The emergency
                                                                                           budget is based on the assumption that domestic revenues are the only source of income and
                                                                                           that they will increase by 6 percent in 2015. On the expenditure side, it assumes partial wage
                                                                                           payments and that only half of non-wage expenditures will be paid in cash while the rest will
                                                                                           accumulate in arrears. However, a new supplementary budget is being finalized following the
                                                                                           resumption of clearance revenues (discussed in the outlook section of this chapter).

                                                                                      18.	 The recurrent fiscal deficit increased by as much as 169 percent in the first quarter of
                                                                                           2015 (year-on-year) due to a 14 percent drop in domestic taxes and 24 percent growth
                                                                                           in expenditures. Receipts from excise on tobacco decreased by 45 percent and this is due
                                                                                           to the elimination of subsidy to local tobacco producers, which is resulting in higher tobacco
                                                                                           imports with domestic excise being shifted to clearance revenues. There are also indications
                                                                                           that some customers have been shifting to roll up tobacco sold in the black market after the
                                                                                           PA has applied multiple tax hikes over the last two years to the price of a cigarette banderole.
                                                                                           Despite the continued exemptions to prepay VAT duties earlier in the year, collections from
                                                                                           VAT significantly decreased in Q1 2015 compared to the same period in the previous year by
                                                                                           32 percent. This steep decline cannot be fully explained by the economic decline in the West
                                                                                           Bank and its causes are not fully understood.10 Income tax collections dropped by about 1
                                                                                           percent probably as a result of a slowdown in economic activity in the West Bank where the
                                                                                           economy is thought to have contracted in Q1 2015 due to the liquidity squeeze brought about
                                                                                           by the withholding of clearance revenues. Main causes behind the expenditure increase are a
                                                                                           steep growth in net lending (115 percent), due to larger-than-usual and unilateral withdrawals
                                                                                           by Israel for unpaid utility bills by Palestinian municipalities and electricity distribution
                                                                                           companies, but also a drastic increase in expenditures on goods and services and transfers.
                                                                                           According to the PA, expenditure on goods and services has increased due to front loading of
                                                                                           procurement in the health sector. While part of the growth in transfers is related to the increase
                                                                                           in the number of beneficiaries of social benefits (from 108,712 to 115,951), a larger part of it
                                                                                           is not entirely clear and it appears that some of these expenditures are related to the payment
                                                                                           of arrears from previous years. 11

                                                                                           Money and Banking
                                                                                      19.	 The Palestinian banking sector continues to be broadly sound. The sector is well regulated
                                                                                           by the Palestine Monetary Authority (PMA), which has made continuous efforts to enhance
                                                                                           its institutional capacity and build the capabilities of a central bank. Annual growth of the
                                                                                           banking sector’s net assets was around 6 percent in 2014 and its net income grew by 2 percent
                                                                                           over the same period. There is ample liquidity in the banking sector as evidenced by the loans-
                                                                                           to-deposits ratio which stood at 55 percent as of December 2014, which mainly reflects a
                                                                                           risk-averse policy by banks given the high political uncertainty. The private credit-to-deposits

                                                                                      10	 Part of the decline is explained by lower tax base for banks due to the introduction of the deposit insurance scheme, which reduced
                                                                                          the tax base by an estimated NIS70 million. This explains less than half of the drop though and at the time clearance VAT (collect-
                                                                                          ed by Israel on imports) stayed at last year’s level.
                                                                                      11	 This also indicates a weakness in the accounting of commitments as the repayment of arrears should not be booked as an expendi-
                                                                                          ture.




                                                                            12   P a ge
     ratio, albeit low, has been on the rise in recent years and it currently stands at 38 percent.
     Notably, the majority of private credit is loans for construction and consumption, which raises
     concentration risks that should be monitored. Non-performing loans remain contained at a low
     level of under 3 percent as of December 2014.

20.	 Given the substantial exposure of the banking system to the PA and its employees, clearance
     revenue suspensions pose a risk. The Palestinian banking sector provided USD1.25 billion in
     credit facilities to the PA at the end of 2014. This represented about 11 percent of the sector’s net
     assets and around 85 percent of its equity. Credit to the PA employees reached USD885 million
     by the end of the year. Credit to the public sector and PA employees, combined, represented
     around 44 percent of the sector’s gross credit. This high credit concentration is a serious risk
     that can threaten the viability of the overall sector, particularly given the ability of Israel to
     freeze the transfer of PA revenues.

21.	 Notwithstanding the high level of liquidity in the banking sector, the PMA continues to
     proactively take measures to mitigate risk. To prevent PA employees from defaulting on their
     loans as a result of the fiscal crisis that followed the suspension of clearance revenues, the PA
     instructed banks to only deduct 60 percent of the due loan installment from the employees’
     salaries and reschedule loans for a longer maturity. The PMA has also upgraded its stress-
     testing methodology to better gauge the impact of the fiscal crisis on banks that are most
     exposed to the PA. Latest available test results are for December and they indicate that the
     banking sector is generally healthy with the Tier 1 capital as a ratio of risk weighted assets at
     20 percent – much higher than the minimum 8 percent required by the PMA.

     Outlook and Challenges
22.	 The expectation that the Palestinian economy will rebound significantly in 2015 vanished
     following the Israeli decision to freeze the transfer of Palestinian taxes. The overall real
     GDP growth rate is projected at 2.5 percent in 2015.12 The economy of the West Bank is
     expected to grow at a relatively meager rate of 1.1 percent, due to the liquidity squeeze that
     was brought about by the Israeli decision to withhold Palestinian taxes, the effects of which
     are expected to persist despite the restoration of clearance revenues, a reduction in donor
     aid, and weak confidence due to high political uncertainty and no significant improvement in
     reducing the movement and access restrictions in the West Bank. A relatively slow economic
     recovery with 7 percent growth is expected in Gaza (following a 15 percent recession in
     2014), reflecting the resumption of economic activity in the private sector and the acceleration
     of the reconstruction process observed in recent months. This rate of growth is significantly
     below what was earlier expected reflecting a much slower than anticipated pace of the
     reconstruction process. Moreover, downside risks remain significant. First, if implementation
     of donor pledges for Gaza fall short of expectations and/or materials are not delivered in a
     timely manner, the pace of reconstruction will be slower than expected. Second, any delay in
     the transfer of future revenues could lead to an even larger contraction in the West Bank.

23.	 The recurrent fiscal deficit (before grants) is expected to decline to 9.3 percent of GDP in
     2015. Even though the vast majority of the deficit will be financed through donor grants, a
     financing gap close to USD500 million is expected to arise, particularly given that budget
     support is expected to be about 25 percent less than its 2014 level amounting to USD850. In
     the absence of additional aid, the gap will be financed by bank borrowing, expenditure cuts,
     and arrears to the private sector and the pension fund.
12	 This estimate is produced by the IMF in cooperation with the WB and the PA MoF.




                                                                                                             13   Page
                                                                                      24.	 A setback could come from the result of the recent New York court ruling against the PA and
                                                                                          the PLO. In February, the PA was asked to pay USD655 million (that could increase to more
                                                                                          than USD1 billion if interest claimed by the plaintiffs is awarded) in compensation payments
                                                                                          after a New York jury found it liable for crimes that killed American citizens in Israel a decade
                                                                                          ago. The PA plans to appeal the ruling, but it may be obliged to place an amount in an escrow
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                          account until the appeals case is over. Given that the PA is cash strained, the New York court
                                                                                          may opt to freeze some of the PA’s assets instead. In case the appeal does not succeed and the
                                                                                          ruling goes into effect, the PA will be obliged to pay this amount, which represents about a
                                                                                          quarter of its total budget.

                                                                                      25.	 Another issue that adds to the risks stems from uncertainty about policies that the new Israeli
                                                                                           government will adopt regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. As the recent suspension
                                                                                           of clearance revenues demonstrates, the policies that the new Israeli government will adopt
                                                                                           regarding the transfer of Palestinian taxes, the restriction system and the peace negotiations
                                                                                           will have a substantial impact on the overall outlook. Furthermore, investor confidence will
                                                                                           also be affected by the stance the new Israeli government takes towards the two-state solution
                                                                                           and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.


                                                                                      II.	 The Staggering Cost of Violence and Blockade on Gaza’s
                                                                                           Economy and Living Standards
                                                                                           Current Situation
                                                                                      26.	 The armed conflict of July-August 2014 has had a severe impact on Gaza’s economy, lives
                                                                                           and livelihoods. The conflict has created a humanitarian crisis and dramatically augmented
                                                                                           the development challenges. More than 2,100 Palestinians died during the hostilities, more
                                                                                           than 11,000 were injured and a third of the population was internally displaced. The conflict
                                                                                           resulted in massive destruction of infrastructure. According to estimates, the total damage and
                                                                                           losses are close to USD4.4 billion. This includes about 12,000 destroyed or damaged houses.13
                                                                                           Infrastructure also suffered significant damages, including Gaza’s only power plant as well as
                                                                                           its electricity network, water and sanitation facilities, and telecommunication networks.

                                                                                      27.	 Currently, Gaza has higher unemployment than any other economy in the world. According
                                                                                           to the ILO unemployment database, in 2013 the highest measured unemployment rate of any
                                                                                           country was in Mauritania at 31 percent. In Q4 2014, the unemployment rate in Gaza stood
                                                                                           at 43 percent. The unemployment problem is much worse for young people between the ages
                                                                                           of 15 and 29 years: the unemployment rate for this group exceeds 60 percent. To make things
                                                                                           worse, about 70 percent of those who work in the private sector in Gaza receive less than the
                                                                                           still-not-enacted minimum wage of USD400. Their average monthly salary amounts to a
                                                                                           mere USD174.14 Preliminary estimates by the Bank show that the reduction in Gaza’s GDP
                                                                                           per capita in 2014, caused primarily by the July-August 2014 war, led to an increase in poverty
                                                                                           from 28 percent in 2013 to 39 percent.

                                                                                      28.	 Gaza’s economy is dependent on large inflows of foreign aid and the livelihoods of the large
                                                                                           majority of Gaza’s households depend on aid. According to UNWRA’s estimates as many as
                                                                                           80 percent of Gaza’s population depend on international donor aid and with severely limited
                                                                                      13	 Source: The National Early Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza prepared by the Palestinian Authority in cooperation with
                                                                                          donors.
                                                                                      14	 Source: Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, Labor Force Survey, 2014.




                                                                            14   P a ge
    inflow of foreign exchange from business transactions, donor aid and remittances have been
    the most significant drivers of Gaza’s economy. The amount of formal and informal assistance
    to Gaza is not entirely clear, but it is certain that aid and remittances are almost the only source
    of foreign exchange inflows that fuels consumption in Gaza—which stands at 118 percent of
    its depressed GDP. Exports, at 5 percent of Gaza’s GDP are extremely small. Investments
    activity has all but stopped in 2014. The major sources through which donor aid flows into
    Gaza are the following: budget of the Palestinian Authority, UNRWA programs, and donor-
    funded development projects outside of the PA’s budget. The PA spends roughly USD1.6
    billion in Gaza per year (58 percent of its 2014 revenue), which is the major source of its
    chronic deficit because the tax revenues it collects in Gaza amount to only about 13 percent
    of its revenues.

    Years of Decline
29.	 Economic decline in Gaza, however, started much earlier and it has been directly linked
     with armed conflict, movement restrictions, and recently the blockade. Gaza’s economic
     performance over the past two decades has been at the global bottom, with only three
     economies experiencing lower rates of growth. Thus, Gaza’s total real GDP is only a couple
     of percent higher now than it was 20 years ago in 1994. Whatever the choice of relevant
     comparators, this level of growth is tremendously small: during the same period, GDP in low
     income countries increased by 259 percent, that of middle income countries increased by 283
     percent, while the real GDP in the Arab world and the Middle East and North Africa increased
     by 244 and 241 percent, respectively. With a relatively educated population, access to sea
     and proximity of a developed country, in the absence of conflict and blockade, one would
     expect Gaza’s GDP to increase by at least as much as 250 percent over the past 20 years.
     Even with all the restrictions on movement and access and the unresolved political status as
     major obstacles to growth, West Bank GDP has increased by as much as 245 percent during
     this period of time.

   Figure 3: Aggregate real GDP growth in Gaza and comparator countries (1994-2013 for
                            comparators & 1994-2014 for Gaza)




                                     Source: World Bank and staff calculations

30.	 To fully understand Gaza’s economic performance over the past two decades and its impact
     on the standard of living of Gazan population, one has to take into account population
     growth. Over the past two decades Gaza’s population increased by roughly 230 percent.
     Therefore, real per capita income (GNI) did not increase over this period, but it in fact

                                                                                                           15   Page
                                                                                          decreased by 31 percent. Consequently, while GNI per capita in the West Bank was only 14
                                                                                          percent higher than in Gaza in 1994, by 2014 that difference increased to 141 percent. Even if
                                                                                          one takes into account remittances and official transfers, which buffer the impact of the drop
                                                                                          in GNI, to arrive to a measure of disposable real income per capita in Gaza (i.e. GNDI) which
                                                                                          is a better measure of purchasing power than GNI, a 20 percent reduction over the period is
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                          still observed. These numbers clearly indicate a substantial reduction in the standard of living
                                                                                          of Gaza residents over the past two decades. However, they do not fully reveal the severe
                                                                                          deterioration in the quality of life in Gaza caused by under-investments in public infrastructure
                                                                                          and the deterioration in the quality of some infrastructure services such as electricity, water,
                                                                                          and sanitation.

                                                                                          Figure 4: While real per capita income (GNI) increased modestly in the West Bank be-
                                                                                                        tween 1994 and 2014 it was reduced by one third in Gaza




                                                                                                                      Source: Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics

                                                                                      31.	 During the same period, manufacturing in Gaza, once significant, has all but disappeared
                                                                                           with its share in Gaza’s gross domestic product dropping more than 3 times since 1994. The
                                                                                           structure of Gaza’s economy changed significantly: public administration and defense more
                                                                                           than doubled, the share of trade (mostly domestic) increased, while the shares of industry
                                                                                           and agriculture shrunk quite substantially (see Figure 5 below for details). In real terms,
                                                                                           between 1994 and 2012, Gaza’s manufacturing sector—which should have been the engine of
                                                                                           sustainable economic growth--shrank by as much as 60 percent. In terms of its contribution to
                                                                                           GDP, it dropped from 17 percent to 5 percent. The manufacturing sector decline is not a recent
                                                                                           phenomenon—it has been happening gradually over the past 20 years as a result of repeated
                                                                                           cycles of violence and restrictions on movement of goods and people both in and out of Gaza.
                                                                                           However, the blockade introduced in 2007 has had the most significant impact on the sector.




                                                                            16   P a ge
   Figure 5: The structure of Gaza’s economy changed significantly since Oslo with a large
    growth in public administration and defense, significant growth in trade activities, at
                           the expense of industry and agriculture




                   Source: Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics and World Bank staff calculations

32.	 A comparison of Gaza’s manufacturing sector in 1994 and now with that of economies
     with similar geographic and human capital attributes, perhaps, illustrates best the degree
     to which the sector has suffered. While the manufacturing sector in developing economies
     across the globe enjoyed rapid growth over the past 20 years, Gaza’s manufacturing sector
     contracted significantly. Even developing economies in the Middle East & North Africa
     region, where growth in the manufacturing sector output has been one of the lowest among
     the comparators has almost doubled already by 2007 (last year with data available).

      Figure 6 : Manufacturing Sector cumulative growth since 1994 for Gaza and other
                                        comparators




                                   Source: World Bank Development Data Platform


   Note: Comparison is between 1994 and latest year data is available (2011 for most countries).


                                                                                                        17   Page
                                                                                      33.	 The loss of employment opportunities in Gaza as well as the loss of access to the Israeli
                                                                                           labor market, have drastically pushed up Gaza’s unemployment rate. Unemployment
                                                                                           rate has never been lower than 17 percent in Gaza since the Oslo Accords were signed.
                                                                                           However, in the early years of the Oslo era unemployment dropped considerably and mostly
                                                                                           due to growth in employment opportunities in Israel. Unemployment quickly bounced back
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                           around the Second Intifada reaching 38 percent when employment in Israel became virtually
                                                                                           impossible for Gazans. The 2006/7 blockade led to a sharp increase in unemployment from
                                                                                           29 to 41 percent. By the end of 2013, the crackdown of the illegal tunnel trade between Gaza
                                                                                           and Egypt led to a significant loss of employment opportunities. In 2014, the combination of
                                                                                           the ongoing Israeli blockade and the war pushed the rate of unemployment to a record high of
                                                                                           43 percent in Q4.

                                                                                           Figure 7: Following a strong decline in the early years of the Oslo era, unemployment
                                                                                          in Gaza has increased and reached a record high of 45 percent in the second quarter of
                                                                                                                                    2014




                                                                                                                     Source: Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics

                                                                                      34.	 Although Gaza is not a country, a comparison with other countries around the world
                                                                                           is illustrative of how high unemployment in Gaza is: it is higher than in any of the 207
                                                                                           countries in the World Bank’s database. The comparison was made using available 2013
                                                                                           data for other countries (last year available for most) and 2014 unemployment data for Gaza.
                                                                                           Furthermore, what is of particular concern in Gaza is the unemployment rate of 60 percent
                                                                                           for those between 15-29 years of age and 54 percent for women despite the staggeringly low
                                                                                           women labor force participation rate of 20 percent.




                                                                            18   P a ge
                   Figure 8: Unemployment rate in Gaza seems to be higher than that
                                     in any country in the world




                                       Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators



The Impact of the 2007 Blockade
35.	 Gaza’s economy has particularly suffered as a result of the 2007 blockade. Israel substantially
     tightened movement of goods and people in and out of Gaza in 2006 following the January
     2006 victory of Hamas and the formation of the Hamas-led PA government in March 2006.15
     In 2007 a full blockade was imposed. Consequently, between 2005 and 2008, Gaza’s
     gross domestic output was reduced by a third, first primarily as a result of a drastic drop in
     government consumption and investment and then after 2007 also a substantial drop in private
     consumption and investment, but also a virtual elimination of an already ebbed export sector.




15	 Hamas is considered a terrorist organization by the US and EU.




                                                                                                       19   Page
                                                                                           Figure 9: Gaza’s export’s virtually disappeared after the blockade was imposed in 2007
                                                                                                                (exports measured in number of truckloads)
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                                        Source: UN OCHA, http://www.ochaopt.org/dbs/crossings/commodityreports.aspx?id=1010003

                                                                                      36.	 Recent research papers found a strong link between Gaza blockade since 2007 and cycles
                                                                                           of violence on the loss of welfare of Gaza’s residents. For instance, a research paper on “The
                                                                                           Effects of Israeli Blockade and Assaults on the Economy of Gaza,” used the West Bank as a
                                                                                           counterfactual and found that the welfare loss between 2007 and 2012 has been large and that
                                                                                           Gaza’s 2012 GDP would have been 51.6 percent larger if it weren’t for the combined effects
                                                                                           of the blockade and armed conflict.16

                                                                                      37.	 Since the 2007 blockade, Gaza’s economy became almost entirely dependent on large
                                                                                           inflows of formal and informal aid, remittances, and later illegal tunnel trade with Egypt.
                                                                                           Good quality data on aid and remittance flows into Gaza is unfortunately not available. Even
                                                                                           data on formal donor inflows to finance humanitarian and development projects in Gaza is not
                                                                                           comprehensive. There is only speculation and informal estimates of the amount of aid that
                                                                                           the de facto government in Gaza has been receiving from its supporters in recent years and the
                                                                                           data on private remittances is equally hard to get. Gaza remains largely a cash economy so
                                                                                           figures from formal bank flows are not very helpful in trying to estimate either trade or non-
                                                                                           trade flows of foreign exchange into Gaza. However, it can be safely assumed that PA’s and
                                                                                           UNRWRA’s expenditures in Gaza represent the largest sources of non-trade related financial
                                                                                           inflows. In 2013, these two sources amounted to USD1.8 billion or 58 percent of Gaza’s
                                                                                           estimated GDP.17 Bank staff estimated that other sources, primarily remittances, informal
                                                                                           flows to de facto government, and out-of-budget donor projects amounted to another USD900
                                                                                           million. Thus, altogether it is estimated that transfers amount to roughly 90 percent of Gaza’s
                                                                                           GDP, which enabled financing of roughly the same amount of imports.

                                                                                      38.	 Furthermore, since the internal divide in August 2007, Gaza became the major source of
                                                                                           deficit and fiscal burden on the PA’s finances. With the drastic reduction in non-energy

                                                                                      16	 Suleiman Abu-Badar, World Bank, Mimeo, 2015.
                                                                                      17	 This includes donor projects financed through PA’s budget. Since donors provide budget support to the PA, these expenditures are
                                                                                          also indirectly enabled by donor aid.




                                                                            20   P a ge
     imports into Gaza from Israel of 75 percent following the blockade, the tax base for clearance
     revenues (70 percent of total revenues), was significantly reduced. Tax revenues dropped
     four percentage points between 2005 and 2007, from 28 percent of GDP to 24 percent of
     GDP and they have never recovered. On the other hand, the PA continued to incur substantial
     expenditures in Gaza, mainly on staff salaries and social assistance benefits. Roughly 43
     percent of PA’s expenditures are spent in Gaza, while only 13 percent of its revenues come
     from Gaza (increased recently from 3 percent, mostly due to growth in taxes collected on fuels
     imported into Gaza from Israel, as of 2014). In 2013, however, Gaza’s GDP accounted for
     roughly 28 percent of the Palestinian GDP and based on this, one would expect a similar share
     of Palestinian tax revenues to come from Gaza.18

39.	 Finally, it is noteworthy that the macroeconomic and poverty data provide but a hint about
     the large human toll and the extremely difficult living conditions experienced by Palestinians
     in Gaza even before the outbreak of the 2014 war. As noted earlier, the unemployment rate
     in Gaza is, probably, the highest in the world. Furthermore, despite the fact that nearly 80
     percent of Gaza’s population receives some kind of social assistance, 39 percent of them
     (according to Bank’s preliminary estimates for 2014) still fall below the poverty line. While
     shocking, these numbers fail to fully convey the difficult living conditions that nearly all
     Gaza’s residents have been experiencing since the blockade was imposed by Israel in 2007.
     For instance, most of Gaza’s 1.8 million residents are confined to an area of 160 km2 and are
     not able to travel beyond this area without permits. The psychological effects of confinements
     are not clear and neither are the effects on human capital from limiting travel and related
     knowledge absorption, etc. It is known, however, that as a consequence of confinement
     and repeated cycles of armed conflict, a sizeable share of Gaza’s population suffers from
     psychological trauma, including post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Apparently, as many
     as one third of Gaza’s children showed signs of PTSD even before the 2014 armed conflict.19
     The number is almost certainly larger following the last conflict. Poor access and quality of
     basic public services such as electricity, water, and sewerage have far reaching consequences
     on the lives of Gaza’s citizens.

40.	 The lack of electricity is a serious problem for Gaza’s citizens. The electricity supply in Gaza
     meets only 46 percent of its estimated needs.20 Consequently, Gazans have been suffering
     from regular electricity outages. Electricity is normally provided on a 5-8 hour on and off
     intervals. The lack of electricity is not only a key obstacle to investment and growth cited
     by Gaza’s private businesses, but it also substantially reduces the quality of life of Gaza’s
     residents. What makes the lack of electricity particularly difficult in Gaza is the dearth of
     alternative fuels caused by the blockade: firewood and gas are very scarce, while liquid fuel
     is costly and not easily available to many of Gaza’s residents. Consequently, many of Gaza’s
     citizens have lacked heating in their home, in particular during the last winter and they are
     limited in the use of household appliances.




18	 Without the blockade, as will later be shown, the revenue potential of Gaza would have been much higher than 28 percent, because
    Gaza’s economy would have been larger and in turn the tax base would have been larger.
19	 According to the Washington based Center for Mind-Body Medicine quoted by the New York Times by Anne Barnard of April 4,
    2014: http://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/05/world/middleeast/gaza-strip-israel-psychologist-trauma.html?_r=0.
20	 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “The Humanitarian Impact of Gaza’s Electricity and Fuel
    Crisis,” March 2014.




                                                                                                                                       21   Page
                                                                                                      Figure 10: Gazan companies cite access to electricity as a major obstacle
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                                                Source: World Bank, Investment Climate Assessment for West Bank and Gaza (2014)

                                                                                      41.	 Although almost all houses in Gaza have water connection, access is still inadequate and
                                                                                           the quality of water is poor, while the lack of access to sanitation services has reached crisis
                                                                                           proportions. Estimates dating from 2008 showed that Gaza’s aquifer, its sole source of fresh
                                                                                           water, was overdrawn by 200 percent. This is causing seawater intrusion and consequently
                                                                                           only 5-10 percent of aquifer water in Gaza is drinkable. According to UN OCHA report of
                                                                                           March 2014, around one third of Gaza’s residents only have access to water for 6-8 hours once
                                                                                           in four days.21 In addition to electricity outages, access to spare parts for network maintenance
                                                                                           and repairs is restricting water supply in Gaza. The situation with sewerage is even worse.
                                                                                           About 60 percent of Gaza’s households are connected to sewerage. However, only a small
                                                                                           portion of sewerage gets treated and untreated sewerage (about 100 million liters) ends up in
                                                                                           the Mediterranean Sea every day. Back in 2008, WHO estimated that 26 percent of diseases
                                                                                           in Gaza were water-related.22

                                                                                      42.	 Access to decent housing is also a major hindrance on the quality of life in Gaza. Gaza’s
                                                                                           citizens are crammed in small living space due to population growth, lack of adequate access
                                                                                           to building materials, restrictions on building on land close to borders with Israel, which
                                                                                           ranges from 300-1,000m from the border fence, and destruction of tens of thousands of homes
                                                                                           in armed conflict (28,000 damaged or destroyed during the last war), and of course as a result
                                                                                           of poverty as well. It is estimated that on average three people share one room in Gaza’s
                                                                                           residences.23




                                                                                      21	 The GoI states that it has recently committed to increasing water supply to Gaza by about 5 million cubic meters per year, which
                                                                                          would nearly double the current supply of potable water available to Gaza. .
                                                                                      22	 Source: Fieldwork interview, Gaza City, November 24, 2008.
                                                                                      23	 1999 census data by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics.




                                                                            22   P a ge
     The 2014 War
43.	 As noted in the first section of this report, the crackdown on the illegal tunnel trade by the
     Egyptian government has drastically reduced international trade, which had a substantial
     impact on Gaza’s economy even before the outbreak of the July-August 2014 war.
     Consequently, Gaza’s GDP contracted by four percent during the first half of 2014.24

44.	 The 2014 war impacted the Gazan economy through several channels. First and the most
     significant economic impact is related to the fact that most businesses were unable to operate
     during the conflict, which resulted in the loss of output. These losses were often not related
     to damages suffered by enterprises and were not included in the enterprise-level damage and
     loss assessment that has been carried out by the PA together with donor partners. Second,
     many enterprises suffered partial damage and a number of them were totally destroyed as a
     consequence of the war, resulting in the loss of economic capacity, which will persist until the
     real assets of those enterprise are repaired. Third, the war also damaged Gaza’s utilities and
     infrastructure, such as transportation, water and sanitation, and electricity, which not only led
     to loss of output in those sectors, but also had a significant spillover effect on most sectors
     of Gaza’s economy. Specifically, infrastructure sector damages have been estimated at over
     USD400 million. Fourth, a number of enterprises are still incurring conflict-induced losses,
     even if they were not damaged by the war due to losses in consumer and investor confidence.
     In addition those who were damaged by the war continue incurring losses due to restrained
     access to construction materials to repair and reconstruct the damages. Others are debilitated
     by the loss of human capital, supply chain disruptions and other reasons.

45.	 Bank staff have estimated that only in 2014, the conflict has reduced Gaza’s GDP by about
     USD460 million. Gaza’s real GDP was reduced by as much as 15 percent in 2014, as economic
     activity across all non-government sectors of the economy reduced their output. Construction,
     agriculture, manufacturing, and electricity sectors were hit the most with output reductions in
     the construction sector slashed by 83 percent in the second half of 2014 and output reduced by
     roughly a half in these other sectors.

                Figure 11: The 2014 conflict caused a 15 percent drop in Gaza’s real GDP




                                               Source: Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics




24	 The construction sector suffered the most, in particular during the first quarter of 2014, and it shrank by 42 percent during the first
    half of 2014 compared to the first half of 2013. While the precise fiscal impact on the de facto authority in Gaza is not known, it is
    clear that the crack-down on the tunnel trade has drastically reduced its revenues as a consequence of which at least 70,000 civil
    servants and security staff on its payroll were not paid for several months.




                                                                                                                                              23   Page
                                                                                      46.	 The economy will continue to suffer as a result of the conflict, not only because of its
                                                                                           significant impact on the productive capacity of Gaza’s private sector, but also because of the
                                                                                           impact on infrastructure, business confidence, the loss of human capital, and other indirect
                                                                                           losses. Future losses induced by the conflict are, however, very hard to project, as they depend
                                                                                           on a number of variables, mainly: the degree of restrictions on movement of goods, people and
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                           financial flows in and out of Gaza, availability of reconstruction financing, and other possible
                                                                                           constraints on the reconstruction program. Under the baseline scenario, Gaza’s economy is
                                                                                           expected to grow at 7 percent in 2015, albeit there are significant downside risks. Even with
                                                                                           this rate of growth, the GDP losses in 2015 compared to the counterfactual (i.e. the projection
                                                                                           of Gaza’s 2015 GDP prior to the conflict) are expected to amount to USD530 million.

                                                                                      47.	 On the other hand, one cannot but ask the hypothetical question as to what Gaza’s economy
                                                                                           and standard of living would have been today without conflicts and the blockade? West Bank
                                                                                           provides a good counterfactual for this kind of estimate. Given that the West Bank economy-
                                                                                           -despite the movement and access restrictions--has grown by as much as 245 percent between
                                                                                           1994 and 2014, it is safe to assume that had Gaza and the West Bank remained a single and
                                                                                           functioning market, growth in Gaza would have at least equaled that of the West Bank. As
                                                                                           shown in Figure 3 all relevant comparators have experienced growth in this range. Years
                                                                                           of schooling are also a good proxy for potential GDP. Thus, if one were to estimate Gaza’s
                                                                                           GDP today based on its expected years of schooling, its size would be 4.5 times the current
                                                                                           estimate. However, taking a more conservative approach and using West Bank growth as a
                                                                                           proxy over the past twenty years, it can be estimated that Gaza’s 2014 GDP would have been
                                                                                           USD3.9 billion higher than it currently is. Unemployment would probably have been close to
                                                                                           that in the West Bank at 17 percent (26 percentage points decline) and tax revenues from Gaza
                                                                                           would have been USD1.5 billion higher than they currently are, assuming the same revenue
                                                                                           collection efficiency now observed for the West Bank.

                                                                                           Figure 12: Estimations show that without conflicts and blockade Gaza’s economy and
                                                                                                               public finances would look starkly different




                                                                                                 Source: World Bank staff estimates and Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics for actual unemployment rate




                                                                            24   P a ge
     The Way Forward
48.	 A status quo in Gaza is unsustainable and could have further incalculable socioeconomic
     and ultimately human consequences. As unambiguously shown by the above analysis, the
     combination of armed and political conflict and the blockade imposed by Israel in 2007 have
     had a huge toll on Gaza’s economy. Unemployment and poverty have reached staggering
     rates and the quality of life for the large majority of Gaza’s citizens is hardly bearable. The
     feeling of hopelessness is pervasive, in particular following the summer 2014 war. The access
     and quality of basic services such as electricity, water and sewerage is rapidly deteriorating
     and pandemics of infectious diseases are a real threat.

49.	 Sustained economic growth, driven by the private sector, and substantial infrastructure
     investments are needed to improve the quality of life for Gaza’s population and to reduce
     their plight. The potential shown above and quick rebounds of Gaza’s economy that followed
     cycles of violence when conditions improved provide sufficient comfort that Gaza’s economy
     can be removed from life support quickly if the blockade is lifted and the right economic and
     governance policies are put in place.

50.	 Short to medium term socioeconomic recovery in Gaza will essentially be determined by two
     factors: First, the degree of easing of the Israeli blockade, in particular to allow reconstruction
     materials in25 and exports out;26 Second, the level of inflows of donor financing for the
     reconstruction activities. Obviously, top priority in Gaza is to step up reconstruction and
     repair the damages caused by the 2014 war so that homes can be reconstructed and repaired,
     to reconstruct and repair the business infrastructure, and to restore all the essential public
     services, which have been disrupted by the war. This requires that donors follow through on
     the pledges made at the Cairo conference and cooperation by Israel and other parties to allow
     unimpeded access to construction materials for civilian purposes in Gaza. The reconstruction
     efforts alone are expected to give a direct boost to Gaza’s construction and trade sectors
     equivalent to some USD450 million a year over the next three years.27 Significant indirect
     effects on other sectors of Gaza’s economy can also be expected. Given that Gaza’s GDP
     contracted by as much as 15 percent in 2014, strong reconstruction activity would merely
     ensure that Gaza’s real GDP per capita returns to the pre-2014 level by the end of 2016.

51.	 Sustained economic recovery beyond the immediate reconstruction effort will require
     systematic policy efforts to create the enabling environment for private sector-led growth. In
     this regard, several policies and activities will be critical determinants of sustained economic
     growth, employment, poverty reduction and ultimately the improvement in the quality of life
     for Gaza’s population including:

     a.	 Effective governance systems and institutional strengthening under PA’s leadership are a
         necessary precondition for the sustained economic recovery of Gaza. Building legitimate
         institutions in Gaza that enjoy the support of the international community and that will
         govern Gaza in a transparent, accountable, effective, and efficient manner is a sine
25	 The GoI states that it has already allowed over one million tons of construction material into Gaza following the 2014 war but ac-
    cording to the GISHA, an Israeli NGO, which monitors movement in and out of Gaza, this only represents 9 percent of the amount
    needed for reconstruction.
26	 According to the GoI, following the 2014 war, agricultural products from Gaza were exported to Israel for the first time since
    2007. The GoI has also recently allowed the entrance of textile and furniture manufactured in Gaza to the West Bank. Between
    September 2014 and March 2015, an average of 48 trucks carrying goods exited Gaza every month which represents a mere 4.5
    percent of what exited monthly before the blockade was imposed, according to GISHA - an Israeli NGO: http://www.gisha.org/
    UserFiles/File/publications/Info_Gaza_Eng.pdf.
27	 The Bank projects an increase in construction sector output of around USD330 million per year and an increase in domestic whole-
    sale and retail trade output of around USD120 million per year.




                                                                                                                                         25   Page
                                                                                              qua non for Gaza’s sustained development, as stated previously by the Bank and other
                                                                                              development partners. It is therefore regrettable that the effort to create these institutions
                                                                                              with the appointment of the consensus government in 2014 has not made much progress
                                                                                              and it is imperative upon the international community to strongly encourage and support
                                                                                              the achievement of this objective.
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                          b.	 Once the Palestinian Authority is fully in charge of Gaza’s public sector, it will have to
                                                                                              take prompt actions to ensure sustainability of its governance arrangements in Gaza, in
                                                                                              particular through revenue mobilization and civil service reform. Currently only around
                                                                                              13 percent of all PA’s revenues are collected on Gaza’s tax base. The potential is much
                                                                                              larger even now when Gaza’s economy is severely depressed as shown in the analysis
                                                                                              above. If Gaza’s share of revenues were commensurate to its GDP, PA would already be
                                                                                              receiving up to USD400 million more from Gaza. However, eventual integration of the
                                                                                              civil service in Gaza would require more or less this whole amount and the PA’s Gaza-
                                                                                              related deficit would still continue to be unsustainably large. The deficit will have to be
                                                                                              reduced by conducting civil service reform to reduce the size of the central government
                                                                                              wage bill, which as a share of national GDP, is amongst the largest in the world. Further
                                                                                              efforts to increase the tax base in both the West Bank and Gaza will also be essential. In
                                                                                              Gaza, along the collection efforts, efforts to support economic growth can lead to a drastic
                                                                                              growth in Gaza’s tax base and tax collection (see Figure 9 above).

                                                                                          c.	 The trade blockade imposed upon Gaza by both Egypt and Israel needs to be lifted.
                                                                                              Sustainable development of Gaza will be impossible without efforts to integrate Gaza into
                                                                                              the regional and global economy through trade, while taking into account neighboring
                                                                                              countries’ legitimate security concerns.      Gaza’s industry and agriculture will not
                                                                                              experience substantial growth without access to imported raw materials and machinery.
                                                                                              Gaza’s construction sector also depends crucially on imported raw materials. Just like
                                                                                              that of any small economy, Gaza’s long term growth prospects will depend to a large
                                                                                              extent on its export sector. The export sector will require both access to imported raw
                                                                                              materials and machinery, but also unimpeded access to foreign markets, including the
                                                                                              Israeli market. Trade between West Bank and Gaza is also important and it is therefore
                                                                                              essential to ease the access of Gaza’s products into the West Bank.

                                                                                          d.	 Continued donor support for a number of years with a stronger emphasis on the
                                                                                              development of Gaza’s infrastructure is also necessary. Gaza’s economy will continue to
                                                                                              depend critically on donor support for several years to come, and gradually Gaza’s tradable
                                                                                              sectors will be replacing the role of donor aid as the key source of foreign exchange to fuel
                                                                                              Gaza’s economy. For the next 2-3 years, donors should focus their assistance to support
                                                                                              the ongoing reconstruction effort to repair the damages of the 2014 armed conflict as well
                                                                                              as the provision of budget support to the PA to enable it to cover the deficit emanating
                                                                                              from its operations in Gaza (i.e. PA expenditures in Gaza are larger than revenues it raises
                                                                                              from Gaza by more than USD1 billion). After the reconstruction effort is over, the PA
                                                                                              and donors will need to focus their assistance on revitalizing Gaza’s public infrastructure
                                                                                              (primarily electricity, water and sewerage services) beyond the damage repairs. In
                                                                                              addition, efforts should also focus on revitalizing and developing other infrastructure that
                                                                                              will enable growth of Gaza’s tradable sector, such as transportation network (including
                                                                                              looking at the feasibility of building a commercial port in Gaza), product safety and
                                                                                              quality infrastructure, etc.




                                                                            26   P a ge
Annex I: An Overview of disbursement and implementation
of Pledges made at the Cairo Conference on Palestine
“Reconstructing Gaza”, Cairo 12th October, 2014
52.	 On October 12th 2014, Egypt, Norway and the Palestinian Authority (PA) convened the Cairo
     Conference on Palestine, “Reconstructing Gaza” to respond to the humanitarian needs of the
     Palestinian people in the aftermath of the Gaza war that took place in July and August 2014,
     and to enable early recovery and the reconstruction of Gaza.

53.	 At the request of Norway, as Chair of the Ad-Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC), and the
     Palestinian Authority (PA), the World Bank is leading a stocktaking exercise to assess the
     disbursement and implementation progress of support to Gaza pledged at the conference.
     The Bank has been closely coordinating with the Palestinian Ministry of Planning and
     Administrative Development (MoPAD) while carrying out this exercise. The Bank’s findings
     will be updated regularly and presented in the World Bank’s report to the AHLC twice a year.28

54.	 A review of total pledges captured at the Cairo Conference shows that participant countries
     and agencies pledged approximately USD5 billion to the Palestinian territories over the period
     2014-2017, of which USD3.5 billion was intended to support Gaza.29 A breakdown by donor of
     support pledged at the Cairo Conference can be found in Table 1. About 72 percent of support
     to Gaza captured at the conference is new funding committed by participants to support Gaza
     recovery and reconstruction after the 2014 war.30 The remainder is (as shown in figure 14)
     part of existing commitments, reallocated from existing commitments or assistance that was
     already disbursed during the war.31
  Figure 13: Total Pledges announced at                                               Figure 14: Support to Gaza
      Cairo Conference (in million)                                                    Classification (in million)




                                Source: Data provided by donors and World Bank staff calculation




28	 Findings can be also found online at (http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/rebuilding-gaza-donor-pledges#5).
29	 Figures for pledges announced at Cairo Conference were revised due to some inaccuracies in recording original pledges and for
    the use of inflated commodity.
30	 Check Glossary for more details about classification of Support to Gaza.
31	 Classification of funding may be subject to change in cases where donors did not verify their figures.




                                                                                                                                    27   Page
                                                                                           Disbursement Progress
                                                                                      55.	 More than six months after the Cairo Conference, total disbursement of pledges to support
                                                                                           Gaza is estimated at USD967 million,32 and hence, the overall disbursement ratio of Support
                                                                                           to Gaza reached 27.5 percent. 33 As seen in figure 15, 20 percent of actual disbursements
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                           (USD194 million) had already been disbursed prior to the Cairo Conference in response to the
                                                                                           urgent humanitarian needs in Gaza.34 A significant 45 percent of actual disbursements is from
                                                                                           existing commitments and re-allocation of existing commitments. The remaining 35 percent
                                                                                           reflects disbursement of new funding. According to data collected by the World Bank, the
                                                                                           disbursement ratio of new funding to Gaza is estimated at 13.5 percent only.

                                                                                                            Figure 15: Classification of Disbursements of Support to Gaza




                                                                                                                     Source: Data provided by donors and World Bank staff calculation

                                                                                      56.	 Based on data provided by participant countries, 22 participants already fully delivered
                                                                                           their original pledge to support Gaza made at the conference. However, their overall
                                                                                           disbursements (USD217 million) represent only 6.2 percent of total support to Gaza.
                                                                                           Pledges from the top seven donors combined represent around 78 percent of total support
                                                                                           to Gaza announced at Cairo Conference over the period 2014-2017 (USD2.7 billion).
                                                                                            Total disbursements so far by the top 7 donors amounted to USD525 million –19 percent of
                                                                                           their total original pledges.

                                                                                      57.	 Figure 16 shows the expected flow of funding to Gaza over the period 2014-2017 based on
                                                                                           information provided in the pledging forms filled out by donors at the conference. According
                                                                                           to this information, more than 70 percent of total support to Gaza is expected to be disbursed
                                                                                           over the period 2014-2015. Nonetheless, actual disbursements so far (USD967 million) fell
                                                                                           short of the planned disbursements by around USD582 million.35 Therefore, it’s evident that
                                                                                           efforts need to focus on accelerating the disbursement of funds to address the urgent needs in
                                                                                           Gaza.




                                                                                      32	 This estimate may change once further data is collected from donors who did not provide information about disbursements and
                                                                                          allocations of pledges.
                                                                                      33	 Check Glossary for definition of disbursement ratio.
                                                                                      34	 These figures were re-announced and captured in the pledging exercise during the conference.
                                                                                      35	 The top seven donors are Qatar, Saudi Arabia, European Union, USA, Kuwait, Turkey and UAE.




                                                                            28   P a ge
                                   Figure 16: Expected Flow of Support to Gaza




                                   Source: Data provided by donors and World Bank staff calculation


     Disbursement Status by Sector
58.	 Support to the humanitarian sector has attracted a large portion of Cairo Conference pledges to
     Gaza. Around 41 percent of actual disbursements went to the humanitarian sector followed by
     24 percent to infrastructure. The social sector comes in third (16 percent) followed by budget
     support (14 percent).

                              Figure17: Actual Disbursement by Sector (in million)




                                   Source: Data provided by donors and World Bank staff calculation




     Disbursements by Implementing Agency
     A significant portion of funding already disbursed was channeled through international agencies
     working in Gaza (75 percent of disbursements). About USD437 million of disbursements to Gaza
     were absorbed through UNRWA in addition to USD289 million through other implementing
     agencies.About USD156 million was channeled through the PAtreasury and implemented through
     PA institutions. Another USD84 million was channeled to PA’s treasury through the PEGASE
     mechanism administered by the EU. Figure 19 shows the distribution of funding received
     by UNRWA mainly to support its general fund, the flash appeal and the emergency Appeal.36
36	 Actual disbursements compared to planned disbursements up to the first quarter of 2015.




                                                                                                       29   Page
                                                                                                 Figure 18: Disbursements by                                    Figure 19: Disbursements through
                                                                                               implementing agency (in million)                                        UNRWA (in million)
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                                                    Source: Data provided by donors and World Bank staff calculation


                                                                                           Allocation of undisbursed Funds
                                                                                      59.	 Only USD513 million of undisbursed pledges are allocated to specific projects and programs
                                                                                           while the remaining USD2 billion is yet to be allocated to priority needs.37 Out of future funds
                                                                                           already allocated, the majority is to be spent on infrastructure, budget support and economic
                                                                                           sectors, as shown in figure

                                                                                                                           Figure 20: Future Allocations by Sector




                                                                                                                    Source: Data provided by donors and World Bank staff calculation

                                                                                      60.	 Based on available data, the top two sectors receiving highest donor funding so far are
                                                                                           humanitarian and infrastructure.38Comparing actual disbursement with the estimated recovery
                                                                                           and reconstruction costs of the infrastructure sector, as presented in the National Early
                                                                                           Recovery and Reconstruction Plan for Gaza, donor funding covers a mere 12 percent of the
                                                                                           estimated needs. The percentage increases to 22 percent when we take into account future
                                                                                           allocations to the same sector.


                                                                                      37	 Based on data collected from donors.
                                                                                      38	 Taking into account actual disbursements and future allocations.




                                                                            30   P a ge
Glossary:
Currency: Total Pledges announced at Cairo Conference are in USD million. All original pledges
in other currencies were converted into USD using the Historical currency exchange rates obtained
from (www.oanda.com) dated October 9th 2014. For donors with pledges in currencies other than
USD, actual disbursed amounts may slightly differ from figures in table due to fluctuations in
exchange rates. Disbursed amounts in other currencies were converted to USD based on historical
exchange rate to reflect accurate progress in disbursement.

Pledges defined: The output of the pledging exercise in Cairo Conference was a combination of
two types of pledges; Pledges by donors of Total Support for the Palestinian territories for the
period 2014-2017 and Pledges by donors of support to Gaza ONLY over the same period. 39 The
difference in pledges reporting by donors at Cairo Conference required a classification of total
support figures to better reflect Support to Gaza for the period 2014-2017 and to allow tracking
disbursement of Support to Gaza over that period.

Support to Gaza: Funds pledged during the Cairo conference intended to support Gaza recovery
and reconstruction.40

Support to Gaza Classification

Total support to Gaza that was announced at Cairo Conference is classified into 4 main categories:

      •	 Humanitarian assistance disbursed during conflict and Prior to Cairo Conference that was part of
         the Pledge declared at the conference.

      •	 Existing commitments by donor that were planned and programmed for Gaza for the period 2014-
         2017 prior to conflict and were part of the pledge.

      •	 Reallocation of existing commitment by donor to support Gaza in response to the conflict.

      •	 New funding announced at Cairo Conference to support Gaza recovery and reconstruction.

Disbursement defined: Disbursement of Support to Gaza does not necessarily reflect actual
expenditures made on purchasing project-related goods and services but that a donor funds have
been made available for use by the relevant implementation agency.41

Disbursement ratio of support to Gaza: This is the ratio of the amount disbursed of support to
Gaza, as per the disbursement definition above, to the amount pledged to support Gaza at the Cairo
Conference.




39	 The Pledging Exercise at Cairo Conference took two forms; the first where participant countries declared ALL their commitments
    to the Palestinian Territories over the period 2014-2017 and the second where participant countries declared Gaza specific funds
    only in their pledge.
40	 Support to Gaza figure refers to pledges made at Cairo Conference and therefore does not reflect all support spent on Gaza after
    the latest war.
41	 When a pledge (part of pledge) is disbursed that means that funds were received and secured by implementation agency and donor
    had fulfilled the pledge committed at Cairo conference.




                                                                                                                                       31   Page
                                                                                           Table 1: Summary Status of Support pledged at Cairo Conference on Palestine “Recon-
                                                                                                                structing Gaza” Cairo, October 12, 2014
                                                                                      in USD Million

                                                                                                                       Total Pledges announced at Cairo
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                                       Donor                                              Of which Support to Gaza
                                                                                                                                  Conference

                                                                                          Algeria                                   61.40                          61.40
                                                                                          Argentina1                                 2.14                           2.14
                                                                                          Australia                                  83.5                          13.18
                                                                                          Austria2                                   8.80                           8.80
                                                                                          Bahrain                                    6.50                           6.50
                                                                                          Belgium3                                   7.92                           7.92
                                                                                          Brazil4                                    5.00                           5.00
                                                                                          Bulgaria                                   0.06                           0.06
                                                                                          Canada                                    14.66                          14.66
                                                                                          Chile                                      0.25                           0.25
                                                                                          China                                      1.60                           1.60
                                                                                          Croatia                                    1.24                           0.40
                                                                                          Czech Republic                             3.75                           0.75
                                                                                          Denmark                                   186.17                          14.46
                                                                                          Estonia                                    1.27                            1.27
                                                                                          European Investment Bank5                 70.00                          70.00
                                                                                          European Union6                          348.28                         348.28
                                                                                          Finland                                   29.57                           9.31
                                                                                          France7                                   50.66                          10.13
                                                                                          Germany                                   63.32                          63.32
                                                                                          Greece                                     1.27                           1.27
                                                                                          Hungary                                    0.16                           0.16
                                                                                          India                                      4.00                           4.00
                                                                                          Indonesia                                  1.00                           1.00
                                                                                          Ireland                                    3.17                           3.17
                                                                                          Italy8                                    62.90                          23.68
                                                                                          Japan9                                   200.00                          61.00
                                                                                          Kuwait                                   200.00                         200.00
                                                                                          Luxembourg                                37.72                           8.97
                                                                                          Malaysia                                   1.45                           0.10
                                                                                          Mexico                                     1.10                           1.10
                                                                                          Norway10                                 362.44                         144.98
                                                                                          Poland                                     0.10                           0.10
                                                                                          Portugal                                   0.03                           0.03
                                                                                          Qatar                                    1000.00                        1000.00
                                                                                          Romania                                    0.05                           0.05
                                                                                          Russia                                    10.00                          10.00
                                                                                          Saudi Arabia                              500.00                         500.00
                                                                                          Serbia                                     0.05                            0.05
                                                                                          Singapore                                  0.10                            0.10
                                                                                          Slovakia                                   0.05                            0.05
                                                                                          Slovenia                                   0.19                            0.19
                                                                                          South Africa                               1.00                            1.00
                                                                                          South Korea                                12.00                           2.00




                                                                            32   P a ge
                                              Total Pledges announced at Cairo
                  Donor                                                                       Of which Support to Gaza
                                                         Conference

    Spain                                                     45.59                                       22.80
    Sudan11                                                   20.00                                       20.00
    Sweden                                                    410.00                                      10.00
    Switzerland                                               130.00                                      69.88
    The Netherlands                                           227.97                                      15.30
    Turkey                                                    200.00                                      200.00
    UAE                                                       200.00                                      200.00
    UK                                                         32.16                                       32.16
    USA                                                       414.00                                      277.00
    World Bank                                                 62.00                                       62.00
    TOTAL                                                      5,087                                       3,512

1
 	 Argentina’s contribution is in the form of technical assistance agreement to support Gaza which was signed with MOPAD.
2
  	 Austria’s contribution of USD8.8 million is programmed for the benefit- with some minor exceptions- of people living in Gaza.
3
  	 Belgium’s contribution is its 2014 General Fund contribution to UNRWA.
4
  	 Brazil’s contribution is in the form of In-Kind (6000 tons of rice and 4000 tons of beans).
5
  	 European Investment Bank contribution is in the form of a loan.
6
  	 European Union contribution includes contribution to UNRWA General Fund pro-rata Gaza for 2014-2015.
7
  	 France’s contribution includes total aid for Palestinian territories for the year 2014 only.
8	
     Italy’s contribution includes a soft loan to the Palestinian National Authority of EUR 15 million.
9
  	 Japan pledged USD200 million for Palestinian territories. No specific-pledged amount for Gaza reconstruction. So far, about USD199
     million was disbursed of which USD61 million for projects in Gaza, 106 for West Bank and Gaza, 28 million for West Bank and 4.2
     million for others.
10
    	Norway did not specify the allocation of its total support between West Bank and Gaza. The amount to Support Gaza is an estimate.
11 	
     Sudan’s contribution is in the form of in kind assistance (100 thousand tons of cement and USD3 million of medical supplies).


                                     Table 2: Support to Gaza Classification1
in USD Million
                                                           Of which                               Of which
                                                                           Of which
                                       Total Support       assistance                           reallocation Of which new
               Donor                                                       existing
                                          to Gaza          disbursed                             of Existing    funding
                                                                         commitment
                                                         during conflict                       Commitments
    Algeria                                 61.4               36.4               25.0                 0.0               0.0
    Argentina                                2.1                0.0                0.0                 0.0               2.1
    Australia                               13.2               13.2                0.0                 0.0               0.0
    Austria                                  8.8                3.2                5.7                 0.0               0.0
    Bahrain                                  6.5                0.2                0.0                 0.0               6.3
    Belgium                                  7.9                0.0                7.9                 0.0               0.0
    Brazil                                   5.0                0.0                0.0                 0.0               5.0
    Bulgaria                                 0.1                0.0                0.0                 0.0               0.1
    Canada                                  14.7                0.0               14.7                 0.0               0.0
    Chile                                    0.3                0.3                0.0                 0.0               0.0
    China                                    1.6                0.0                0.0                 0.0               1.6
    Croatia                                  0.4                0.1                0.0                 0.0               0.4
    Czech Republic                           0.8                0.0                0.0                 0.0               0.8
    Denmark                                 14.5                0.0                0.0                10.2               4.3
    Estonia                                  1.3                0.0                0.0                 0.0               1.3
    European Investment Bank                70.0                0.0               70.0                 0.0               0.0
    European Union                          348.3               0.0                0.0               323.0              25.3




                                                                                                                                     33   Page
                                                                                                                               Of which                      Of which
                                                                                                                                               Of which
                                                                                                             Total Support     assistance                  reallocation Of which new
                                                                                                     Donor                                     existing
                                                                                                                to Gaza        disbursed                    of Existing    funding
                                                                                                                                             commitment
                                                                                                                             during conflict              Commitments
                                                                                          Finland                 9.3             3.0           6.3            0.0           0.0
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                          France                 10.1             3.8           0.0            6.3           0.0
                                                                                          Germany                63.3             0.0           0.0            0.0          63.3
                                                                                          Greece                   1.3            0.6           0.0            0.0           0.6
                                                                                          Hungary                  0.2            0.0           0.0            0.0           0.2
                                                                                          India                    4.0            0.0           0.0            0.0           4.0
                                                                                          Indonesia                1.0            0.0           0.0            0.0           1.0
                                                                                          Ireland                  3.2            0.6           0.0            0.0           2.5
                                                                                          Italy                  23.7             0.0          19.0            0.0           4.7
                                                                                          Japan                  61.0             5.5           0.0           55.5           0.0
                                                                                          Kuwait                 200.0            0.0           0.0            0.0          200.0
                                                                                          Luxembourg               9.0            0.0           9.0            0.0           0.0
                                                                                          Malaysia                 0.1            0.1           0.0            0.0           0.0
                                                                                          Mexico                   1.1            1.1           0.0            0.0           0.0
                                                                                          Norway                 145.0            3.3           0.0            0.0          141.7
                                                                                          Poland                   0.1            0.0           0.0            0.0           0.1
                                                                                          Portugal                 0.0            0.0           0.0            0.0           0.0
                                                                                          Qatar                 1000.0            0.0           0.0            0.0         1000.0
                                                                                          Romania                  0.1            0.0           0.0            0.0            0.1
                                                                                          Russia                  10.0            0.0           0.0            0.0           10.0
                                                                                          Saudi Arabia           500.0            0.0           0.0            0.0          500.0
                                                                                          Serbia                   0.1            0.0           0.0            0.0            0.1
                                                                                          Singapore                0.1            0.0           0.0            0.0            0.1
                                                                                          Slovakia                 0.1            0.1           0.0            0.0            0.0
                                                                                          Slovenia                 0.2            0.0           0.0            0.0            0.2
                                                                                          South Africa             1.0            0.0           0.0            0.0            1.0
                                                                                          South Korea              2.0            0.0           0.0            2.0            0.0
                                                                                          Spain                   22.8            0.0           0.0           17.7            5.1
                                                                                          Sudan                   20.0            0.0           0.0            0.0           20.0
                                                                                          Sweden                  10.0            0.0           0.0            0.0           10.0
                                                                                          Switzerland             69.9            5.0          64.9            0.0            0.0
                                                                                          The Netherlands         15.3            0.0           8.2            0.0            7.1
                                                                                          Turkey                 200.0            0.0           0.0            0.0          200.0
                                                                                          UAE                    200.0            0.0           0.0            0.0          200.0
                                                                                          UK                      32.2            0.0           0.0            0.0           32.2
                                                                                          USA                    277.0           118.0         84.0           0.0           75.0
                                                                                          World Bank             62.0             0.0           0.0           62.0           0.0
                                                                                          TOTAL                 3,512             194          315            477          2,526




                                                                            34   P a ge
 Table 3: Disbursement Status by Donor of Support to Gaza pledged at Cairo Conference
                          on Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”
in USD Million (As of April 24th 2015)
                                                       Disbursement of   Disbursement Ratio of
            Donor                    Support to Gaza
                                                       Support to Gaza      Support to Gaza
 Algeria                                  61.40            36.40                59%
 Argentina1                                2.14              0.00                 0%
 Australia                                13.18            13.18                100%
 Austria2                                  8.80              4.40                50%
 Bahrain*                                  6.50              5.70                88%
 Belgium3                                  7.92              7.92               100%
 Brazil4                                   5.00              0.00                 0%
 Bulgaria                                  0.06             0.06                100%
 Canada                                   14.66            14.66                100%
 Chile                                     0.25             0.25                100%
 China                                     1.60              N/A                 N/A
 Croatia                                   0.40             0.15                 38%
 Czech Republic                            0.75              0.00                 0%
 Denmark                                  14.46             14.46               100%
 Estonia                                   1.27              0.00                 0%
 European Investment Bank5                70.00              N/A                 N/A
 European Union6                         348.28            140.58                40%
 Finland                                   9.31              9.31               100%
 France7                                  10.13             10.13               100%
 Germany                                  63.32             45.09                71%
 Greece                                    1.27              0.63                50%
 Hungary                                    0.16             0.16               100%
 India                                      4.00             4.00               100%
 Indonesia                                  1.00             N/A                 N/A
 Ireland                                    3.17             1.27                40%
 Italy8                                   23.68              3.42                14%
 Japan9                                   61.00             61.00               100%
 Kuwait                                  200.00              0.00                 0%
 Luxembourg                                8.97              N/A                 N/A
 Malaysia                                  0.10              0.10               100%
 Mexico                                    1.10              1.10               100%
 Norway10                                144.98             56.21                39%
 Poland                                    0.10              0.10               100%
 Portugal                                  0.03              0.03               100%
 Qatar                                   1000.00           102.00                10%
 Romania                                    0.05             0.05               100%
 Russia                                    10.00             0.00                 0%
 Saudi Arabia                             500.00            48.50                10%
 Serbia                                     0.05             0.00                 0%
 Singapore                                  0.10             0.10               100%
 Slovakia                                   0.05             0.05               100%
 Slovenia                                   0.19             0.06                33%
 South Africa                               1.00             1.00               100%
 South Korea                                2.00             2.00               100%
 Spain                                     22.80             3.47                15%




                                                                                                 35   Page
                                                                                                                                                                Disbursement of             Disbursement Ratio of
                                                                                                    Donor                       Support to Gaza
                                                                                                                                                                Support to Gaza                Support to Gaza
                                                                                          Sudan11                                     20.00                             N/A                            N/A
                                                                                          Sweden                                      10.00                            6.69                            67%
                                                                                          Switzerland                                 69.88                           35.74                            51%
Economic Monitoring Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
                                                             May 27, 2015




                                                                                          The Netherlands                              15.31                          15.31                           100%
                                                                                          Turkey                                      200.00                           0.52                             0%
                                                                                          UAE                                         200.00                            N/A                            N/A
                                                                                          UK                                           32.16                          25.65                            80%
                                                                                          USA                                         277.00                          233.35                           84%
                                                                                          World Bank                                   62.00                           62.00                          100%
                                                                                          TOTAL                                        3512                             967                           27.5%

                                                                                      1
                                                                                        Argentina’s contribution is in the form of technical assistance agreement to support Gaza which was signed with MOPAD.
                                                                                      2
                                                                                        Austria’s contribution of USD8.8 million is programmed for the benefit- with some minor exceptions- of people living in Gaza.
                                                                                      3
                                                                                        Belgium’s contribution is its 2014 General Fund contribution to UNRWA.
                                                                                      4
                                                                                        Brazil’s contribution is in the form of In-Kind (6000 tons of rice and 4000 tons of beans).
                                                                                      5
                                                                                        European Investment Bank contribution is in the form of a loan.
                                                                                      6
                                                                                        European Union contribution includes contribution to UNRWA General Fund pro-rata Gaza for 2014-2015.
                                                                                      7
                                                                                        France’s contribution includes total aid for Palestinian territories for the year 2014 only.
                                                                                      8
                                                                                        Italy’s contribution includes a soft loan to the Palestinian National Authority of EUR 15 million.
                                                                                      9
                                                                                        Japan pledged USD200 million for Palestinian territories. No specific-pledged amount for Gaza reconstruction. So far, about USD199
                                                                                      million was disbursed of which USD61 million for projects in Gaza, 106 for West Bank and Gaza, 28 million for West Bank and 4.2
                                                                                      million for others.
                                                                                      10
                                                                                         Norway did not specify the allocation of its total support between West Bank and Gaza. The amount to Support Gaza is an estimate.
                                                                                      11
                                                                                         Sudan’s contribution is in the form of in kind assistance (100 thousand tons of cement and USD3 million of medical supplies).
                                                                                      * Source of data is UNRWA Overall Pledges-Cash to Gaza (EA, Gaza Flash Appeal, and Reconstruction) dated 16 March 2015.




                                                                                      References
                                                                                      Abu-Bader, S., The World Bank, Mimeo, The Effects of Israeli Blockades and Assaults on the Economy of Gaza, 2015.

                                                                                      Anne Bernard, The New York Times, “In Fatal Flash, Gaza Psychologist Switches Roles, Turning Into a Trauma
                                                                                      Victim,” August 2014.

                                                                                      International Monetary Fund, West Bank and Gaza Report to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, May 2015.

                                                                                      Orhan Niksic, Nur Nasser Eddin and Massimiliano Cali, A World Bank Study, Area C and the Future of the Palestinian
                                                                                      Economy, 2013.

                                                                                      Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, Census 1997, 1999.

                                                                                      Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, Labor Force Survey 2014, 2014.

                                                                                      Palestinian Authority with United Nations, World Bank and European Union, Detailed Needs Assessment (DNA) and
                                                                                      Recovery Framework, 2015.

                                                                                      United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “The Humanitarian Impact of Gaza’s Electricity
                                                                                      and Fuel Crisis,” March 2014.

                                                                                      World Bank, Fieldwork interview, Gaza City, November 24, 2008.

                                                                                      World Bank, Investment Climate Assessment, 2014.




                                                                            36   P a ge
The World Bank
www.worldbank.org/ps
