                                                                                      96834


                                    Approach Paper
     Accelerating Growth through Skills and Knowledge:
    An Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support for
                      Higher Education
                                           May 14, 2015

Background and Context
1.      The World Bank Group’s support for higher education is at a crossroads. As
developing countries have expanded basic education systems and transition into the knowledge
economy, the World Bank Group is facing increased demand for support of higher education.
Despite agreement on the contribution of higher education to development, there is no consensus
about the degree and type of support the Bank Group should provide. There are also concerns
that the quality of higher education offered in many countries does not sufficiently address the
challenges of modern global economies. While the Bank Group has been a pioneer in providing
policy support for higher education, its higher education portfolio has not been evaluated for at
least a decade.

2.      This evaluation is a component of the Inclusive Growth Strategic Engagement Area
of the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG). Higher education lies at the nexus of growth,
jobs, and competiveness. It has the potential to create new and better quality employment as well
as to serve as a catalyst for economic transformation. Higher education also contributes to the
post-2015 Development Agenda and the Bank Group’s twin goals. The development of a
country’s higher education system can have a positive impact in many other areas, including
social equity, political stability, and regional development. For the World Bank, it is important to
understand what approaches and interventions have been effective in promoting higher education
as a public good and in improving access for excluded groups. Likewise, the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) can benefit from an examination of how its support for higher
education might better contribute to its development objectives. Both organizations can benefit
from understanding their complementary functions in this context.

Higher Education and Development: A Brief Survey
3.      The higher education system plays several important roles by educating
professionals, supporting research, and contributing to social capital. Higher education is
multifaceted, often combining research, teaching, and regional development into a single
institute. It has the potential to generate positive externalities that benefit the economy and other
aspects of society (Bloom, Hartley, and Rosovsky 2006; McMahon 2009). It builds on secondary
education, with learning activities in specialized fields of education that often complement
research. Higher education addresses learning at a high level of complexity and specialization
(UNESCO Institute of Statistics 2015).

                                                  1
Box 1. The World Bank Group’s Definition of Higher Education
In classifying interventions, the World Bank Group defines its support for higher or tertiary
education under the Sector Definition Guidelines of Operations Policy and Country Services as:

          “…efforts to improve the teaching and research capacity of degree-granting educational
          institutions that support students beyond the secondary school level, specifically colleges,
          universities, graduate schools, and professional schools.”
This definition focuses on formal post-secondary educational institutions and generally excludes
technical and vocational education programs that do not grant degrees and institutions focused
exclusively on research. The Bank Group definition appears to reflect a dual objective of
improving the teaching and research capacity of higher education institutions. Broadly speaking,
this corresponds to levels 5, 6, 7, and 8 of the International Standard Classification of Education
developed by the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO):
short-cycle tertiary education, bachelor’s degree or equivalent, master’s degree or equivalent,
and doctoral degree or equivalent. Higher or tertiary education differs from training; the latter
focuses on imparting a specific set of skills.
Tertiary education is the official term as defined in the UNESCO classification. However, in
practice, many organizations, including the World Bank and UNESCO, use the term higher
education. Despite some technical differences, the two terms are often used interchangeably. In
this evaluation, both terms are used to describe Bank Group practices.
Source: UNESCO Institute of Statistics 2015; Campbell and Carayannis 2013.


4.     A key function of higher education is to educate professionals, knowledge workers,
and skilled civil servants. While higher education institutions perform many functions, they
primarily offer specialized education for adults in a wide range of fields, ranging from the
humanities to medicine and science (UNESCO 1998). The number of higher education students
has grown substantially from 68 million (46 percent from developing countries) in 1990 to 196
million (68 percent from developing countries) in 2012. Globally, it appears that the social
sciences, business, and law are the most popular programs. Women tend to be more highly
represented in education and health fields and men in engineering and scientific fields.

5.      Higher education also has positive externalities that contribute to economic growth
by promoting technological potential. The Commission for Growth and Development argues
that balanced economic growth requires local innovation as well as the capacity to adapt
technology and know-how from the rest of the world (Commission on Growth and Development
2008). Adapting foreign technology relies on local research capacity (Todtling and Trippl 2005;
Dolreux and Parto 2005). Likewise, technologies cannot be adapted to local conditions unless the
workforce is sufficiently educated (Lucas 1988; Romer 1990). To bring in foreign knowledge
workers is an expensive undertaking and not a sustainable strategy for most developing
countries. Universities play a major role as local hubs for research by supplying knowledge,
technology, and innovations to many sectors (Altbach, Reisberg, and Rumbley 2009). Overall,
investing in higher education has led to greater economic growth, partly through its contribution
to sector and national productivity as well as through its impact on labor productivity (Bloom

                                                                   2
and others 2013; Bloom, Hartley, and Rosovsky 2006). Studies have shown these results in
countries as diverse as Cameroon (Fonkeng and Ntembe 2009), China (Wang and Yao 2003;
Whalley and Zhao 2010), and Pakistan (Stengos and Aurangzeb 2008).

6.      Higher education supports private sector development in a number of ways. As
industries move up the “value chain,” they require a more educated and productive workforce.
By providing better educated workers, higher education can contribute to increased national
productivity and economic growth (Heckman and Ji 2012; Jung 2011). In many cases, firms
work with universities to identify areas where greater skills are needed. In addition to the direct,
two-way relationship between firms and universities in producing and hiring employees,
universities often collaborate with the private sector to promote innovation. This can take the
form of contracted research, where a firm engages a university for a particular research project.
Moreover, universities provide “basic research” to support industries with projects that might
benefit more than one firm.

7.      Employers are willing to pay more in exchange for the higher productivity of a
better educated worker. In the past, many estimates showed a pattern of diminishing returns
across education levels, implying lower rates of return at the tertiary level (Psacharopoulos and
Patrinos 2004; Psacharopoulos 1994). However, recent literature has found evidence that the
marginal rate of return for earnings has been increasing more quickly for more educated groups
(Montenegro and Patrinos 2014). This trend have been seen in a wide range of countries and
regions, including India, Pakistan, the Philippines (Schady 2003), the Pacific Islands, and
Vietnam (Fasih and others 2012). For countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana,
Kenya, and South Africa), returns for schooling are highest at the higher education level, with a
decreased rate at lower school levels (Schultz 2004).

8.      There are other important nonmonetary benefits associated with higher education.
Increased earnings do not reflect the full value of a higher education. In India, several studies
have shown that university graduates have greater knowledge about health risks (Agrawal and
others 2011; Sansone and others 2012). In Sudan, evidence shows that while primary education
is insufficient to induce a large change in fertility, higher education has a significant impact on
family composition (Ahmed 2010). In Eritrea, university access led to greater career and
marriage choice (Müller 2004). In Pakistan (Shafiq 2010), university study had a positive effect
on women’s independence and awareness of rights (Malik and Courtney 2011). More broadly, a
university education is commonly understood as a vital source of social mobility.

9.      In addition to the benefits to individuals, higher education can make important
contributions to the public and social sectors. By supplying qualified graduates and housing
policy institutes and NGOs, higher education institutions can address the public sector demand
for civil servants and for other professionals who serve the public interest. Higher education also
has a positive effect on civic participation and governance in low-income countries (Dee 2004;
Shafiq 2010) and on political stability in Africa (Gyimah-Brempong, Paddison, and Mitiku
2006). Through Third Mission activities that complement their research and teaching functions,
universities can make a variety of social contributions through community service, outreach, and
technology transfer.


                                                  3
10.     Higher education can play an important role in promoting regional and urban
development. Universities can serve as “development universities” that directly engage with the
community to improve productivity and efficiency (Oketch, McCowan, and Schendel 2014).
Working in partnership with local industries—and often through regional campuses—higher
education institutions can help to harness the competitive advantage of a particular region and
prepare graduates for jobs in applicable fields (Fetters, Green, and Rice 2010). As vital
components of a regional ecosystem and as centers for innovation, these institutions can
transform cities in aspects that include quality of life, infrastructure, and culture.

11.      Higher education institutions in both developed and developing nations have
steadily increased their efforts toward internationalization, online education, and other
new modes of delivery. These trends are likely to continue in the face of ongoing growth in
overall higher education enrollments, globalization, and economic development. In 2012, at least
4 million students went abroad for study, up from 2 million in 2000 and representing 1.8 percent
of all higher education enrollments (UNESCO Institute of Statistics 2014). While institutions in
high income-countries remain a common destination for students and faculty, the earlier, one-
directional South–North flows of students, scholars, and revenue have been balanced by greater
North–South exchange and South–South engagement (Chao 2014). There is strong interest in
expanding online and distance education as well as other non-traditional modes of instruction,
particularly those that are scalable and can be delivered at lower cost. Massive open online
courses (MOOCs), which are offered by both established universities and for-profit companies,
have enrolled millions of students worldwide.

12.      For many countries, universities are viewed as a source of prestige. Governments
often support higher education to promote national pride, pushing for the development of a
“world class university” beyond a country’s development needs. This trend is often reflected in
efforts to improve the international rankings of a country’s flagship universities (Rigoglioso
2014; Ramirez and Tiplic 2014). These efforts can alter the trajectory of higher education
systems in several ways. First, substantial resources may be diverted to elite research and
teaching institutions. Second, students—often from affluent backgrounds—may, in a similar
manner, seek degrees from top universities to acquire prestige rather than marketable skills
(Usher 2012). Third, pursuing prestige and reputation has led to increased competition among
higher education institutions, both locally and globally (The Economist 2014). With standards for
quality (often expressed through rankings) becoming internationalized, countries may strive to
conform their systems to homogenous global standards rather than to local and national needs.

13.      Higher education institutions vary widely in financing, function, and form.
Institutions that closely integrate teaching with research are common in British and U.S.
universities, which have been widely held as models for structuring higher education (Salmi
2009; Marginson 2006). It is often impossible to separate the different functions of higher
education institutions as the varied activities they engage in tend to reinforce each other.
Ownership and funding in higher education varies, with public and private institutions supported
by combinations of tuition revenues, public subsidies, and institutional endowments. In many
countries, leading universities have expanded their ability to generate revenue from government,
the private sector, and philanthropic organizations to support the production of academic
research and other knowledge-based activities. Many higher education systems have promoted

                                                4
partnerships with the private sector locally and internationally as well as with foreign universities
(Rhoads 2011). Private colleges and universities offer the same fields of study as public
institutions but often focus exclusively on teaching (Altbach, Reisberg, and Rumbley 2009).

14.    While the organization of higher education systems vary greatly from country to
country, many developing countries face a number of common challenges. There is rapidly
growing demand for post-secondary education as a result of the substantial expansion in primary
and secondary education. However there is also a great deal of inequality, as students from
poorer households often lack the same access to quality education as students from wealthier
backgrounds. Access and results often differ for male and female students. Likewise, many
students with disabilities and from ethnic minorities face serious issues with access. As higher
education systems expand, they face increased challenges to sustain the quality of teaching and
academic research. Low quality in higher education threatens the employability of graduates.
Attachment 2 presents a more detailed discussion of these challenges.

The World Bank Group and Higher Education
15.    The World Bank Group’s support for higher education began in the 1960s as it
sought to expand its development impact. Initially, the World Bank focused on adult
education, including support for universities and vocational education. As part of efforts to
improve economic productivity, there was a gradual shift toward higher education. Later,
concerns about poverty and excluded populations led to a greater focus on basic education
(Kapur, Lewis, and Webb 1997).

16.    In 1980s and 1990s, the World Bank shifted its focus away from higher education.
This shift reflected concerns that the higher education system was regressive and that subsidies
primarily benefited upper income groups. The World Bank’s 1999 education strategy identified
higher education as a secondary priority (World Bank 1999), but it also recognized that the
demand for higher education was often quite high (World Bank 1995). The World Bank’s
approach may have led to the “neglect” of higher education, particularly in low-income countries
(Bloom and others 2013; Kent 2005). This trend may have also affected other areas of education,
such as technical and vocational education and secondary education.

17.     By the 2000s, the World Bank Group reevaluated its approach to higher education.
As country demand for higher education increased, the Bank Group changed its approach. A
policy paper on higher education recommended that each country establish its own priorities
(Task Force on Higher Education and Society 2000). This was incorporated in the education
strategy update, calling for “greater awareness of the role of tertiary education and lifelong
learning in promoting knowledge-driven economic growth” (World Bank 2005). Higher
education was explicitly included in the 2009 Education Strategy, and most World Bank Regions
have developed strategic documents for higher education. The IFC developed its Strategic
Directions for Education (focusing largely on higher education) with the business objectives of
improving financial viability and mobilizing private resources. Its development objectives are
promoting education innovation, strengthening the education system, promoting opportunities,
and bridging the digital divide (IFC 2001).


                                                 5
18.    Other development partners offer a variety of support to higher education. A few
development partners like Japan and the United States provide direct support for higher
education as have several regional development banks, such as the Asian Development Bank.
Most development partners do not directly finance higher education. However, many
governments, foreign universities, and non-state actors promote university-to-university
collaboration and offer scholarships. This support has been influential in developing new
research agendas and academic talent.

19.     The World Bank Group has a large and diverse investment and knowledge portfolio
in all Regions and in both middle- and low-income countries. The combined Bank Group
investment portfolio from 2003 to 2014 includes 160 higher education-related projects totaling
$10.9 billion. Table 1 presents a summary of the public sector portfolio. These operations are
well-distributed in all Regions and include support to low-income countries such as Bangladesh
and Tanzania, middle-income countries such as Mexico and Vietnam, and fragile and conflict-
affected states such as Afghanistan and the West Bank and Gaza. The IFC’s private sector
financing (see table 2) was largely concentrated in middle-income countries in Europe and
Central Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean. The IFC has supported global education
providers for their operations in developing countries, creating centers of excellence and
providing employment opportunities for professionals.

Table 1. World Bank Higher Education Investment Portfolio, 2003–2014
                                                                                                Amount
                                                       Number of Projects
                                                                                             (US$, millions)
Higher education projects
                                                      IBRD       IDA      Total       IBRD       IDA         Total
                                                        46        85      131        5,619.0   4,707.8     10,326.8
Sector board                            ED              28        59       87        2,502.5   3,843.4      6,345.9
                                     Non-ED             17        27       44        3,116.5    864.4       3,980.9
Project status                        Active            19        40       59        1,149.3   2,594.9      3,744.2
                                      Closed            27        45       72        4,469.7   2,112.9      6,582.6
Lending instrument type             Investment          36        76      112        2,680.9   4,279.5      6,960.4
                                       DPO              10         9       19        2,938.2    428.3       3,366.5
Region                                 AFR               2        38       40          15.0    1,848.6      1,863.6
                                       EAP               9        12       21         407.4     826.6       1,234.0
                                       ECA              14        11       25        2,262.8    257.3       2,520.1
                                       LAC              15         2       17        2,176.4     14.2       2,190.6
                                      MNA                6         2        8         757.4      19.0        776.4
                                       SAR               0        20       20           0.0    1,742.1      1,742.1
Source: World Bank Group and IEG databases.
Note: AFR = Africa; DPO=Development Policy Operation; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; ED =
Education; IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and development; IDA = International Development Association; LAC =
Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia.




                                                             6
Table 2. IFC Higher Education Investment Portfolio, 2003–2014
                                                                                                     Amount
                                                             Number of Projects                   (US$, millions)
Higher education investment projects
                                                           Equity Loan     Mixed              Total   Equity     Loan
                                                             8      20        1                29     178.7     359.0
Project status                             Active            8      17        0                25     177.1     312.5
                                           Closed            0       3        1                 4       0.0       46.5
Region                                      AFR              0       4        0                 4       0.0       18.4
                                            EAP              0       1        1                 2       1.6       23.0
                                            ECA              0       4        0                 4       0.0       78.0
                                            LAC              4      11        0                15      54.0     239.6
                                           MNA               2       0        0                 2      18.1       0.0
                                            SAR              0       0        0                 0       0.0       0.0
                                           World             2       0        0                 2     105.0       0.0
Source: World Bank Group and IEG databases.
Note: AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia.

20.     Public sector projects support both higher education institutions and students.
Based on an initial review of project objectives, World Bank public sector investments appear to
focus primarily on improving the quality of teaching, research, and higher education governance.
An important subset of operations focus on improving access and equity by strengthening
student credit, providing scholarships, and using other relevant instruments. The World Bank
typically promotes university autonomy with interventions to strengthen governance, capacity,
and quality assurance.

21.     The World Bank Group has a large and diverse portfolio of knowledge products at
the global, regional, and country levels. The Bank Group supports both regional projects and
country-based projects. Some of the regional projects focus on a group of countries such as the
Caribbean or the European Union accession states. Table 3 presents the distribution of Bank
Group knowledge products. Many of these knowledge products are diagnoses of higher
education that often shape World Bank strategy. The IFC’s support has largely focused on the
Africa and the Middle East and North Africa regions. Its advisory services in higher education
are quite diverse, ranging from support, to developing university-based commercial activities, to
results monitoring, to studies on developing student loan markets. In addition to direct financing,
the IFC has also been active in promoting public-private partnerships in the education sector. In
addition, the Bank Group has provided fee-based services in the area of higher education, either
as self-standing operations or in coordination with Bank-financed knowledge projects. For
example, in Kazakhstan, the World Bank has a partnership program to support the development
of the higher education system. Likewise, in Chile, the World Bank worked with the government
to review higher education finance.




                                                            7
Table 3. Number of World Bank Group Higher Education Knowledge Projects and
Advisory Services, 2003–2014

             Regional and Subregional Level                           Country Level
             Public Sector   Private Sector                  Public Sector      Private Sector
Area         (World Bank)        (IFC)                       (World Bank)           (IFC)                         Total
AFR                8               3                              21                   7                            39
EAP                0               0                              10                   0                            10
ECA                9               0                              12                   0                            21
LCR                3               0                               7                   2                            12
MNA                2               0                               7                   5                            14
SAR                2               0                               7                   2                            11
Global             5               0                               0                   0                            5
Total             24               3                              64                  16                           107
Source: World Bank Group and IEG databases.
Note: AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; IFC = International Finance Corporation; LAC
= Latin America and the Caribbean; MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia.

Purpose, Objectives, and Audience
PURPOSE

22.     This evaluation aims to increase knowledge about the World Bank Group’s
approach to higher education. While there is agreement over the contribution higher education
can make to development, there is no consensus about the degree to which the Bank Group
should support higher education. Crucial questions remain about whether the Bank Group should
be involved in higher education, how it might leverage its competitive advantage where it is
engaged, and how its support for higher education might best reflect the World Bank Group
Strategy. The information gathered by the evaluation may serve as a resource for addressing
these types of questions.

OBJECTIVES

23.     The evaluation aims to understand the design of the Bank Group’s support for
higher education and its contribution to the World Bank Group’s objectives. The evaluation
seeks to provide clarity on the complementary and sometimes competing objectives for higher
education that inform the Bank Group’s support and to identify areas where a coherent vision is
lacking. It will attempt to discern the underlying rationale behind the Bank Group’s support for
higher education, what strategies have worked to address the challenges for higher education in
developing countries, and how it might improve its capacity to learn from its experience with
higher education. This includes the range of strategies pursued in interventions from improving
teaching and research, to addressing governance issues, to promoting autonomy, to bolstering
capacity in quality assurance—interventions that are expected to support inclusive economic
growth, jobs, and competitiveness. It will examine how the Bank Group combines these types of



                                                             8
interventions at the country level. The evaluation will identify lessons based on the Bank
Group’s recent experiences that can inform future support for higher education.


Box 2. The Evaluation and the Inclusive Growth Strategic Engagement Area
The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) organizes its work plan around three strategic engagement
areas (SEAs): (i) Sustained Services for the Poor; (ii) Equity and Sustainability of Natural Capital; and
(iii) Inclusive Growth. The evaluation fits in the third SEA as higher education plays an important role in
generating the resources for growth, providing pathways out of poverty, and improving living standards.
In addition, higher education contributes to jobs that are important for development and are
transformational in people’s lives and productive work.
This evaluation will be carried out in parallel with the IEG’s evaluation on jobs and competiveness, which
also falls under the Inclusive Growth SEA. The two evaluations will work together to understand the role
of Bank Group support for higher education in promoting competitiveness at both the country and
operations levels. The higher education evaluation is likely to focus on Bank Group support for
information and communication technology and the role of higher education in supporting these
investments. The two evaluation teams will study the possibility of a joint country case study and will
coordinate in the design of evaluation instruments.


AUDIENCE

24.     The evaluation will be of interest to internal stakeholders as they address questions
about the role of higher education in development. The evaluation should be of interest to the
Board of Executive Directors, offering a report that can help it better understand the Bank
Group’s rationale for supporting higher education and the effects of its support on a broad range
of pressing public, private, and social sector development themes. The Education Global Practice
can benefit from an evaluation of its activities in light of the new Bank Group strategy and other
changes in the organization. The evaluation may provide insight and guidance to the IFC as it
develops strategies for supporting private sector higher education institutions.

25.      The evaluation also has an external audience. The evaluation will be of interest to
stakeholders who want to understand the Bank Group’s approach and to engage it on issues
involving higher education. This audience includes governments and policy makers, universities
and the academic community in developed and developing countries, development partners and
international organizations, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Although the
evaluation will focus on the Bank Group and its support, it is likely to draw lessons that are
useful to development partners. Many donors face similar issues in defining their support for
higher education and can benefit from an evaluative report on the Bank Group’s experience.
These include governments, the Bank Group’s trust fund contributors, and peer financial
institutions that are engaged in higher education or that seek to reassess their public and private
sector involvement.




                                                     9
Evaluation Questions
26.    The evaluation’s overarching question is: “How has the World Bank Group’s
support to higher education contributed to its twin goals of poverty reduction and shared
prosperity?” To address this subject, the evaluation is divided into three questions and 13
subquestions. Each of the evaluation questions was designed with three criteria: (i) the question
should serve the evaluation’s purposes and objectives; (ii) a viable methodology should be
available to answer it; and (iii) the question should not be merely descriptive. While the
evaluation does have an accountability function, it will not rate the efficacy or relevance of the
Bank Group’s overall higher education program.

27.     The evaluation will be both prospective and retrospective in its analysis. While the
evaluation will identify the channels through which higher education contributes to the Bank
Group’s twin goals, it will not hold the Bank Group accountable for achieving goals that were
articulated after an operation was approved. This examination will help deepen the
understanding of how higher education can best contribute in the future.

28.     The first evaluation question asks: “Is the World Bank Group’s support for higher
education consistent and well-articulated?” This question focuses on the logic behind the Bank
Group’s strategies in higher education. The evaluation question will aim to understand whether
its approach to higher education is internally coherent and in line with established policy
approaches. Likewise, it will identify how the Bank Group generates and applies evidence and
lessons, and how the Bank Group works in partnership with other actors. This question is divided
into four subquestions:

      How has the Bank Group incorporated higher education in its strategic documents?
      How does it coordinate its support for higher education internally within the Bank
       Group?
      How does it coordinate its support for higher education with external development
       partners and nongovernment actors?
      How does it conceptualize higher education and incorporate local context into the design
       of its operations?

29.    The second evaluation question asks: “How has World Bank Group support
contributed to higher education systems?” This question focuses on the linkages between the
design of the Bank Group’s operations and outcomes affecting higher education systems. The
evaluation will analyze its support that contributes to the reform of higher education institutions
and systems. The evaluation addresses this line of inquiry through four subquestions:

      How has the Bank Group contributed to changes in the financial sustainability and
       management of higher education systems?
      How has its support strengthened the connection between higher education and both the
       public and private sectors?
      How has it supported regulation and quality assurance in public and private universities?

                                                 10
      How has its support contributed to internal efficiency in higher education?

30.    The third evaluation question asks: “How has the World Bank Group’s support for
higher education contributed to social and economic outcomes? This question focuses on the
linkages between the design of the Bank Group’s operations and outcomes affecting society and
the economy. The question will identify how the Bank Group’s support has addressed vulnerable
groups and improved opportunities for women. The evaluation question has five subquestions:

      How has Bank Group support improved access and equity for lower income households?
      How has its support addressed gender and other issues affecting traditionally excluded
       groups in higher education?
      How has its support contributed to external efficiency through developing skills and
       improving the employability of graduates?
      How has its support contributed to external efficiency through private sector development
       and increased industry competiveness?
      How has its support contributed to the quality of research and its relevance to local
       development challenges?

Evaluation Design
UNIVERSE, SCOPE, AND LIMITATIONS

31.     The evaluation will be limited in scope and focuses on the World Bank Group’s role
in higher education. As outlined in box 1, the evaluation will focus on higher education and not
on other types of post-basic education. While other post-secondary education interventions are
important, they are fundamentally different from higher education in the objectives and the
organization of the institutions involved. This limitation in scope does not imply that other areas
are less important or do not complement higher education. When compatible with its scope, the
evaluation questions, and budgetary considerations, the evaluation will explore connections
between higher education and other areas of the education sector as well as other sectors. The
IEG Youth Employment Evaluation provides insight on alternative forms of post-secondary
education (IEG 2013) as does IEG’s ongoing Jobs and Competitiveness Evaluation. There are
several interventions that the evaluation will not analyze, including:

      Other types of post-basic and post-secondary education, including nondegree technical
       and vocational training programs at the secondary and post-secondary level; and
      Non-degree adult education such as “second chance” learning or lifelong learning
       initiatives.

32.     In addition, the evaluation will not focus on higher level objectives or impacts that
are beyond the immediate influence of the Bank group’s operations. This reflects the
difficulty in establishing causality as well as the paucity of data. Specifically, the evaluation will
not be able to measure directly:


                                                  11
      Impacts on broad education outcomes, such as the average level of education; and
      Direct impacts on broad economic outcomes, such as employment rates, productivity,
       poverty reduction, and economic growth.

33.     The evaluation will primarily use the self-classification of operations to define the
evaluation universe. For public sector projects, the portfolio includes all projects that are
classified to the tertiary education (ET) sector or to the education for the knowledge economy
(66) theme. The portfolio review inspected all projects classified as “ET” of less than 20 percent.
The evaluation classified operations that focus primarily on strengthening the higher education
system as core higher education projects to distinguish them from operations where higher
education is part of a larger project. This classification includes standalone higher education
projects as well as projects that have a substantial focus on the higher education sector. The
private sector portfolio includes all projects classified as colleges, universities, and professional
schools. This was followed by an inspection to ensure appropriateness for inclusion in the
portfolio. A similar approach identified knowledge products and advisory services. The
evaluation universe broadly corresponds to categories 5, 6, 7, and 8 of the International Standard
Classification of Education (UNESCO Institute of Statistics 2015). It will include teacher
training carried out through a degree program as well diploma programs offered at community
colleges. The team will confirm the portfolio with the Education Global Practice.

34.     The primary unit of inquiry is the higher education country programs. At the
country level, the Bank Group offers a variety of services including public and private sector
investments, knowledge products, and policy dialogue. Further analysis is expected to uncover
why and how these drivers are able to yield results in each country’s circumstances and to what
extent these experiences can be replicated in other country situations.

APPROACH AND METHODOLOGY

35.     The evaluation will utilize a variety of methods to develop an understanding of the
World Bank Group’s support for higher education. The evaluation will triangulate both
qualitative and quantitative data to understand how the Bank Group’s support for higher
education works. Figure 1 presents a conceptual model for Bank Group support and the
evaluation’s approach.




                                                 12
Figure 1. The Evaluation Framework for Higher Education




   36.     The evaluation will provide qualitative answers to the evaluation questions in order
   to develop a better understanding of the Bank Group’s contribution to higher education.
   The evaluation will not attempt to rate or grade the Bank Group’s performance against any
   particular question. The evaluation will report on existing self-evaluation and IEG ratings of
   Bank Group operations. The methodological tools are outlined in greater detail in attachment 2.
   They include:

         Consultation with country higher education stakeholders. The evaluation will hold
          consultation with higher education leaders at the country level to identify key issues in
          the sector. This might include government officials, university administrators and staff,
          students, private sector actors, and NGOs. In addition, the evaluation will establish a
          Sounding Board, composed of higher education experts and practitioners, to provide
          feedback on the evaluation and its relevance.


                                                  13
      Portfolio review. The portfolio review will examine project documents and
       evaluations— Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICRs), ICR Reviews,
       and Project Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs). This will include both a
       description of the portfolio and analysis of individual operations as well as a review of
       the lessons reported by the Bank Group in both project and evaluation documents.
      Review of the Bank Group’s strategies. The evaluation will analyze corporate, sector,
       and country strategies as well as associated documents, such as Systematic Country
       Diagnoses and Country Economic Memoranda.
      Review of the Bank Group’s knowledge work. The evaluation will review a range of
       the Bank Group’s knowledge products, including non-lending technical assistance,
       economic and sector work, sector analyses, advisory services, economic analysis, and
       impact evaluations as well as policy dialogue that supports higher education.
      Review of academic and policy literature. The evaluation will review the existing
       academic and policy literature to better understand current thinking about the sector.
      Interview with key informants. The evaluation will interview Bank staff, development
       partners, and higher education specialists to discuss the Bank Group’s strategy and
       performance. The evaluation will maintain an open line of communication with the Bank
       Group’s tertiary education community of practice, the Core Higher Education Group
       (COREHEG).
      Country case studies. The evaluation will draw on evidence gathered from field-based
       country case studies. This step will include collection of data as well as interviews with
       government officials and local stakeholders.

37.     The evaluation will support some complementary knowledge work on key issues and
on “what works.” The primary function of the evaluation is to understand the Bank Group’s
role in supporting higher education. To complement this, the evaluation will support the
preparation of several background papers on key issues in higher education, such as the Third
Mission of universities of supporting the wider community or the development of new
technologies. This knowledge work serves two purposes. First, the papers will identify common
themes, practices, and policies in higher education that may provide a reference point for
understanding the Bank Group’s strategies and operations. Second, the background papers will
serve to organize and share knowledge for higher education policy makers.

FIRST STEPS: SETTING THE STAGE

38.    The evaluation’s initial work will focus on describing the World Bank Group’s
higher education investment and knowledge portfolios and on understanding pressing
global issues. Although the evaluation’s primary focus is on analysis, it will include a detailed
description of what the Bank Group supports and the impact of this support. This will be built
around an ongoing portfolio review, which will support the analysis of all of the evaluation
questions. In addition, the evaluation will analyze country and global data to characterize the
higher education sector in quantitative terms. The portfolio review will look at both the design
and results of higher education operations and will classify the lessons reported in project
documents and evaluations.



                                                14
39.     The evaluation will hold consultations and review literature to understand higher
education priorities. This process will support efforts to ensure that evaluation benefits from a
diverse set of views. Opinions vary on the major issues facing higher education and future
directions for the sector. Through consultations with stakeholders and a review of the academic
and policy literature, the evaluation will prepare an analysis of the state of thinking on higher
education—in country contexts, with reference to Bank Group involvement, and more broadly.
This will provide a benchmark or normative framework to which the evaluation can compare the
objectives and design of the Bank Group’s interventions.

FIRST EVALUATION QUESTION: IS THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S SUPPORT FOR HIGHER
EDUCATION CONSISTENT AND WELL-ARTICULATED?

40.     The evaluation will analyze how the World Bank Group views higher education and
how it designs its operations. The evaluation will use the review of Bank Group strategies to
understand the logic model for higher education at the corporate, regional, and country levels.
Then, applying the normative framework as outlined, the evaluation will analyze the Bank
group’s logic model compared to views of stakeholders. This will lead to a qualitative discussion
of the relevance of the Bank Group’s higher education strategy. A similar approach will be used
to evaluate the design of the Bank Group’s higher education operations. The evaluation will use
the portfolio review to classify and analyze the design of investment operations and the review of
knowledge work for technical support. In both cases, the country case studies will provide
detailed data to complement the analyses of strategies and portfolios. Interviews with key
informants will also provide an understanding of all four of the subquestions. The interviews
with a diverse set of key informants, along with the country case studies, are important for
understanding how the Bank Group coordinates internally and with other stakeholders. Together,
this evidence will be useful to identify the Bank Group’s logic model for higher education.

SECOND EVALUATION QUESTION: HOW HAS WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT CONTRIBUTED
TO HIGHER EDUCATION SYSTEMS?

41.     The evaluation will examine available data to understand the impact of World Bank
Group support on higher education systems. The portfolio analysis and the review of
knowledge work will provide data on the performance of the Bank Group’s operations in
transforming higher education systems. The country case studies will provide additional data in
the selected countries and will include specific questions tailored to evaluate the Bank Group’s
contribution to higher education systems. Interviews with key informants will provide
corroborating information to understand results and the Bank Group’s value added.

THIRD EVALUATION QUESTION: HOW HAS THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S SUPPORT FOR
HIGHER EDUCATION CONTRIBUTED TO SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES?

42.     The evaluation will examine available data to understand how the World Bank
Group’s support for higher education has contributed to social and economic outcomes.
The portfolio analysis will provide data on the performance of operations on higher level
outcomes. The inquiry will require the application of the Bank Group’s logic model in the
interpretation of social and economic outcomes. The country case studies will provide additional

                                               15
data and will include specific questions tailored to the country and the higher education system
contexts when evaluating the Bank group’s contributions. Interviews with key informants will
provide corroborating information to understand results and value added.

43.     Secondary data will play a major role in providing evaluation results. The evaluation
will not produce any primary quantitative data and will instead rely on secondary data, including
those from the Bank Group’s results frameworks. Particularly in the country cases, the
evaluation may also benefit from data from other sources, such as governments or universities. It
will provide data disaggregated by gender and other socioeconomic indicators when possible.

Selection of Country Cases
44.      Evidence gathered from the field plays a central role and will be vital to answering
all of the evaluation questions. The country case studies will provide in-depth analysis by
collecting information needed from a range of countries where the Bank Group is active in
higher education. A purposeful country selection will ensure that the case studies cover the
diversity of support that the Bank Group provides as well as the diversity of country contexts
where it supports higher education. The unit of observation is the Bank Group’s country program
in higher education—that is, the portfolio of public and private investments in the country, the
Bank Group’s knowledge work, and its advisory services. The countries selected are not
intended to be a random sample of beneficiary countries or of Bank Group interventions.

45.    The countries are divided using two primary criteria. The primary criteria are
designed to ensure a mix of different types of country interventions. The evaluation will organize
the countries where the Bank Group is active. The criteria include:

      The public and private sector mix of World Bank Group support for higher
       education. Support is provided through both the public sector window—primarily from
       the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International
       Development Association (IDA)—and the private sector window primarily from IFC.
       The first category consists of countries where the Bank Group has only provided support
       through its public sector window (IBRD and IDA). The second category is for countries
       that receive IFC support, either on its own or in conjunction with public sector support.
       For a country to be included, it must have either a core higher education World Bank
       project or an IFC project.
      The continuity of the World Bank Group’s support for higher education. In some
       countries, the Bank Group has long provided support for tertiary education, and the
       investment represents part of a long-term engagement with the sector. In other cases, this
       support is more recent. For purposes of the evaluation, the cut-off date is 2005. When the
       World Bank has an engagement in higher education from 1995 to 2005, the Bank Group
       country portfolio will be classified as having a continuous engagement. Otherwise, it will
       be classified as having a recent engagement in higher education.

46.     The final categorization of countries will be finalized as part of the portfolio review
and will be confirmed with the Bank Group’s Education Global Practice. As part of the
portfolio review, the evaluation team will confirm the correct classification of each country,

                                                16
including a determination of whether the World Bank’s public sector support is sufficiently
important to be counted as public sector support. Table 4 outlines the initial division of countries.

Table 4. Initial Classification of Countries by World Bank Group Support
                                                      Countries with Core Higher Education Operations
   INITIAL CLASSIFICATION                         RECENT BANK GROUP             CONTINUOUS BANK GROUP
                                                     ENGAGEMENT                       ENGAGEMENT
    WORLD BANK SUPPORT                                 Afghanistan                     Burkina Faso
                ONLY                                     Armenia                          Ethiopia
                                                       Bangladesh                        Indonesia
                                                        Cambodia                        Mauritania
                                                        Costa Rica                     Mozambique
                                                         Guyana                            Nepal
                                                         Malawi                           Senegal
                                                        Maldives                         Sri Lanka
                                                       Montenegro                         Uganda
                                                         Tanzania                         Vietnam
                                                    West Bank & Gaza                   Yemen, Rep.
IFC SUPPORT ONLY OR BOTH                           Antigua and Barbuda                     Brazil
                                                        Botswana                            Chile
                                                          Kenya                            China
                                                         Namibia                        Colombia
                                                          Nigeria                  Dominican Republic
                                                           Peru                            Egypt
                                                       South Africa                        Ghana
                                                          Turkey                            India
                                                                                           Jordan
                                                                                          Mexico
                                                                                         Morocco
                                                                                          Pakistan
                                                                                   Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                          Tunisia
Note: The following countries have World Bank Group higher operations but were excluded because they did not have a core investment
project: Albania, Argentina, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Croatia, Djibouti, The Gambia,
Georgia, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Madagascar, Mali, Philippines, Poland, Tuvalu, Ukraine, and Uruguay. IFC = International Finance Corporation.
Source: IEG.
47.     To ensure diversity among the choice of countries, the evaluation will use two
secondary criteria based on country characteristics. These secondary characteristics will help
ensure the evaluation looks at the different types of countries that the Bank Group supports:


                                                                    17
      Enrollment in higher education. The evaluation will group countries based on the size
       of the higher education sector, measured by the gross enrollment rate for tertiary
       education. To the extent possible, this grouping will focus on enrollment at the beginning
       of the evaluation period using available data from the Bank Group’s education statistics
       database (EdStats). When data for this period are not available, the evaluation will use
       data from independent sources of data and other years.
      Share of private higher education. The evaluation will also group countries according
       to the share that private higher education contributes to total higher education enrollment.
       Given the scarcity of data, the indicator uses all available data from 2000 to 2014. The
       primary source of data is EdStats, with other sources used to supplement missing data.


Quality Assurance Process
48.     The draft report will be reviewed by both internal and external experts in higher
education to ensure the accuracy in the findings and messages. The report will be prepared
under the direction of Mark Sundberg, Manager IEGPS and Nicholas York, Director IEGCC. It
will follow the IEG quality assurance process. The peer reviewers for the Approach Paper are
Philip Altbach (Research Professor and Director of the Center for International Higher
Education; Lynch School of Education, Boston College); Richard Hopper (President, Kennebec
Valley Community College and Former Senior Education Specialist, World Bank); Ravi Kanbur
(T.H. Lee Professor of World Affairs, International Professor of Applied Economics, and
Professor of Economics, Cornell University); and Fernando Reimers (Ford Foundation Professor
of International Education, Harvard University).

49.     The evaluation will also have a Sounding Board that will provide feedback during
critical stages of the process. In addition to the Approach Paper peer reviewers, the evaluation
will convene panels of experts from a variety of backgrounds and regions. These will be
organized as a Sounding Board that will meet in person and virtually to provide feedback on the
relevance and quality of the evaluation.

Expected Outputs and Dissemination
50.     The primary output will be an evaluation report that will be submitted to the
Committee on Development Effectiveness. The evaluation team will engage with COREHEG
and focus groups to explore preliminary findings and messages from the evaluation. The
evaluation report will be 30 to 40 pages, in addition to annexes. Some or all of the background
papers that are prepared in connection to the evaluation may also be disseminated separately.

51.     Dissemination will be integrated into the evaluation. The team will develop a
dissemination plan while the evaluation is being conducted. This will ensure that it can be widely
disseminated at existing forums and events upon completion. The team also will use social media
to solicit inputs and engage in dialogue over themes explored in the evaluation. It is expected
that there will be large interest in the dissemination of the findings among internal and external
stakeholders. Appropriate outreach venues will be identified, including the Bank group’s annual
meetings and academic and policy workshops and conferences. Dissemination of the findings to

                                                18
Bank staff will be conducted through workshops and learning events and externally through
seminars and conferences.

Resources
52.     The evaluation will be undertaken in the 2015 and 2016 fiscal years, with the CODE
discussions held in the fourth quarter of the 2016 fiscal year. The evaluation team will be led by
Erik Bloom (Senior Economist), who will be responsible for supervising the evaluation as well
as drafting the final report. The team will include Susan Caceres, Ann Flanagan, and Viktoriya
Yevsyeyeva, supported by several consultants including Karol Acon, Robert Alcala, Shang Gao,
Nazumi Takeda, Mercedes Vellez, Ayenachew Aseffa Woldegiyorgis, Robert Yin, and Simone
Zhang. Other staff and consultants will be included as needed.

References
Agrawal, J., P. Murthy, M. Philip, S. Mehrotra, K. Thennarasu, J. John, N. Girish, V.
       Thippeswamy, and M. Isaac. 2011. “Socio-Demographic Correlates of Subjective
       Wellbeing in Urban India.” Social Indicators Research 101 (3): 419–434.
Ahmed, H. 2010. “Non-Market Returns to Women Education in Sudan: Case of Fertility.”
       Journal of Comparative Family Studies 41 (5): 783–798.
Altbach, P., L. Reisberg, and L. Rumbley. 2009. Trends in Global Higher Education: Tracking
       an Academic Revolution. Paris, France: UNESCO.
Andresen, C., T. Bunda, and M. Walter. 2008. “Indigenous Higher Education: The Role of
       Universities in Releasing the Potentail.” Australian Journal of Indigenous Education 1–8.
Barone, C. 2011. “Some Things Never Change: Gender Segregation in Higher Education across
       Eight Nations and Three Decades.” Sociology of Education 157–176.
Barro, R., and J. Lee. 2013. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950–
       2010.” Journal of Development Economics 184–198.
Bloom, D., D. Canning, K. Chan, and D. Luca. 2013. Higher Education and Economic Growth
       in Africa. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University.
Bloom, D., M. Hartley, and H. Rosovsky. 2006. “Beyond Private Gain: The Public Benefits of
       Higher Education.” In International Handbook of Higher Education, edited by J. Forest
       and P. Altbach, chapter 15. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
Campbell, D., and E. Carayannis. 2013. “Conceptual Definition of Two Key Terms: Governance
       and Higher Education.” In Epistemic Governance in Higher Education, by D. Campbell
       and E. Caravannis, 3–11. New York: Springer.
Chao, R. 2014. “Idealism and Utilitarianism in Internationalization of Higher Education.”
       International Higher Education 3–4.
Commission on Growth and Development. 2008. The Growth Report. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.
Dee, T. 2004. “Are There Civic Returns to Education?” Journal of Public Economics 1697–
       1720.
Dolreux, D., and S. Parto. 2005. “Regional Innovation Systems: Current Discourse and
       Unresolved Issues.” Technology in Society 133–153.


                                                19
Economist Intelligence Unit. 2014. High University Employment, Low Graduate Employment:
        Analysing the Paradox in Afghanistan, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. London,
        United Kingdom: British Council.
Education for Employment. 2012. Education for Employment: Realizing Arab Youth Potential.
        Washington, DC: International Finance Corporation.
Evans, P., and S. Ebersold. 2012. “Achieving Equity in Secondary and Tertiary Education for
        Students with Disabilities and Learning Difficulties. “ In Lessons in Education Equality,
        by J. Heyman and A. Cassola, 78–97. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Fasih, T., G. Kingdon, H. Patrinos, C. Sakellariou, and M. Soderbom. 2012. Heterogenous
        Returns to Education in the Labor Market. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Fetters, M., P. Green, and M. Rice. 2010. The Development of Universtiy-Based
        Entrepreneruship Ecosystems: Global Practices. Cheltenham, United Kingdom: Edward
        Elgar Publishing.
Filmer, D. 2003. The Incidence of Public Expenditures on Health and Education. Washington,
        DC: World Bank.
Fonkeng, G., and A. Ntembe. 2009. “Higher Education and Economic Development in Africa:
        The Case of Cameroon.” Educational Research and Review 4 (5): 231–246.
Ford Foundation. 2008. Pathways to Higher Education. New York: Ford Foundation.
Guloba, M., N. Magidu, and J. Wokadala. 2010. Public Spending in the Education Sector in
        Uganda: Evidence from Benefit Incidence Analysis. Kampala, Uganda: Economic Policy
        Research Center.
Gyimah-Brempong, K., O. Paddison, and W. Mitiku. 2006. “Higher Education and Economic
        Growth in Africa.” Journal of Development Studies 42 (3): 509–529.
Heckman, J., and Y. Ji. 2012. "Human Capital, Economic Growth, and Inequality in China."
        NBER Working Paper No. 18100, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
        Mass.
Hénard, Fabrice, and Alexander Mitterle. 2009. Governance and Quality Guidance in Higher
        Education. Paris, France: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2013. Youth Employment Programs: An Evaluation of
        World Bank and International Finance Corporation Support. Washington, D.C.: World
        Bank. doi: 10.1596/978-0-8213-9794-7. License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY
        3.0.
IFC (International Finance Coporation). 2001. Investing in Private Education: IFC’s Strategic
        Directions. Washington, DC: IFC.
Jung, C.S. 2011. “Higher Education Development in Korea: Western University Ideas,
        Confucian Tradition, and Economic Development.” Higher Education 59–72.
Kapur, D., J. Lewis, and R. Webb. 1997. The World Bank, Its First Fifty Years. Washington, DC:
        Brookings.
Kent, R. 2005. “Two Positions in the International Debate about Higher Education.”
        Washington, DC: Latin American Studies Association.
Lebeau, Y., R. Stumpf, R. Brown, M. Abrahão, S. Lucchesi, and M. Kwiek. 2012. “Who Shall
        Pay for the public Good? Comparative Trends in the Funding Crisis of Public Higher
        Education.” Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education 137–157.
Lucas, R. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary
        Economics 3–42.


                                               20
Malik, S., and K. Courtney. 2011. “Higher Education and Women’s Empowerment in Pakistan.”
        Gender and Education 23 (1): 29–45.
Marginson, S. 2006. “The Anglo-American University at its Global High Tide.” Minerva: A
        Review of Science, Learning, and Policy 65–77.
McMahon, W. 2009. Higher Learning, Greater Good: The Private and Social Benefits of Higher
        Education. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Montenegro, C., and H. Patrinos. 2014. Comparable Estimates of Returns to Schooling Around
        the World. Policy Research Working Paper No. WPS 7020, World Bank Group,
        Washington, DC.
Müller, T. 2004. “‘Now I Am Free—Education and Human Resource Development in Eritrea:
        Contradictions in the Lives of Eritrean Women in Higher Education.” Compare: A
        Journal of Comparative and International Education 34 (2): 215–229.
Oketch, M., T. McCowan, and R. Schendel. 2014. The Impact of Tertiary Education on
        Development: A Rigorous Literature Review. London, United Kingdom: U.K.
        Department for International Development.
Psacharopoulos, G.. 1994. “Returns to Investment in Education.” World Development 1325–
        1343.
Psacharopoulos, G., and H. Patrinos. 2004. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Further
        Update.” Education Economics 12 (2): 111–134.
Ramirez, F., and D. Tiplic. 2014. “In Pursuit of Excellence? Discursive Patterns in European
        Higher Education Research.” Higher Education 439–455.
Rhoads, R. 2011. “The U.S. Research University as a Global Model: Some Fundamental
        Problems to Consider.” InterActions: UCLA Journal of Education and Information
        Studies. http://escholarship.org/uc/item/8b91s24r.
Rigoglioso, M. 2014. “The Demand for ‘World-Class Universities’.” June 23.
        https://ed.stanford.edu/news/demand-world-class-universities-what-driving-race-
        top?newsletter=true.
Romer, P. 1990. “Endogenous Technical Change.” Journal of Political Economy 71–102.
Salmi, J. 2009. The Challenge of Establishing World-Class Universities. Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
Sansone, G., L. Raute, G. Fong, M. Pednekar, A. Quah, M. Bansal-Travers, P. Gupta, and D.
        Sinha. 2012. “Knowledge of Health Effects and Intentions to Quit among Smokers in
        India: Findings from the Tobacco Control Policy (TCP) India Pilot Survey.”
        International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 9 (2): 564–578.
Schady, N. 2003. “Convexity and Sheepskin Effects in the Human Capital Function: Recent
        Evidence for Filipino Men.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 171–196.
Schultz, T. 2004. “Social Value of Research and Technical Skills: Does It Justify Investment in
        Higher Education for Development?” Journal of Higher Education in Africa 2 (1): 92–
        134.
Shafiq, M. 2010. “Do Education and Income Affect Support for Democracy in Muslim
        Countries? Evidence from the Pew Global Attitudes Project.” Economics of Education
        Review 29 (3): 461–469.
Shierholz, H., A. Davis, and W. Kimball. 2014. The Class of 2014: The Weak Economy Is Idling
        Too Many Young Graduates. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.


                                              21
Stengos, T., and Aurangzeb, A. 2008. “An Empirical Investigation of the Relationship between
       Education and Growth in Pakistan.” International Economic Journal 22 (3): 345–359.
Task Force on Higher Education and Society. 2000. Higher Education in Developing Countries.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.
The Economist. 2014. “Building a Global University Brand.” The Economist, January 30.
Todtling, F., and M. Trippl. 2005. “One size Fits All? Towards a Differentiated Regional
       Innovation Policy Approach.” Research Policy 1203–1219.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization). 1998. World
       Declaration on Higher Education for the Twenty-First Century: Vision and Action. Paris,
       France: UNESCO.
UNESCO Institute of Statistics. 2014. “Global Flow of Tertiary-Level Students.”
       http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Pages/international-student-flow-viz.aspx.
______. 2015. “Glossary.” UNESCO Institute of Statistics.
       http://www.uis.unesco.org/Pages/Glossary.aspx.
Usher, A. 2012. “The Limits of Vocational Education in Developing Countries.” Higher
       Education Strategy Associates. Accessed 2015. http://higheredstrategy.com/the-limits-of-
       vocational-education-in-developing-countries/.
Wang, Y., and Y. Yao. 2003. “Sources of China’s Economic Growth, 1952–99: Incorporating
       Human Capital Accumulation.” China Economic Review (World Bank) 32–52.
Whalley, J., and X. Zhao. 2010. The Contribution of Human Capital to China’s Economic
       Growth. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.
World Bank. 1995. Priorities and Strategies for Education. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 1999. Education Sector Strategy. Washington, DC: World Bank.
______. 2005. Education Sector Strategy Update. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Health Organization. 2011. “World Report on Disability, 2011.”
       http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2011/WHO_NMH_VIP_11.01_eng.pdf?ua=1.




                                              22
Attachment 1
Evaluation Design Matrix

                                                                                                    Evaluation Method                                                                                 Approach and Limitations




                                                               consultations
                                                               Stakeholder
                                                                               Portfolio analysis
                                                                                                     strategies
                                                                                                     Review of Bank Group

                                                                                                                            knowledge work
                                                                                                                            Review of Bank Group

                                                                                                                                                   informants
                                                                                                                                                   Interview with key

                                                                                                                                                                        Country case studies
Evaluation Questions




Evaluation Question 1: Is the World Bank Group’s support for higher education consistent and well-articulated?

How has the Bank Group incorporated higher education in                                                     
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Evaluation question focuses on the
its strategic documents?                                                                                                                                                                           conceptual design of Bank Group
How does it coordinate support for higher education                                                                                                                                           support for higher education
internally within the Bank Group?                                                                                                                                                                 The evaluation will use qualitative
                                                                                                                                                                                                   evidence to develop a framework that
How does it coordinate support for higher education with                                                                                                                                      will be used to assess the Bank
external development partners and non-government actors?                                                                                                                                           Group’s designs
How does it conceptualize higher education and                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                   
incorporate local context into the design of its operations?

Evaluation Question 2: How has World Bank Group support contributed to higher education systems?

How has the Bank Group contributed to changes in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                Results will use qualitative data from
financial sustainability and management of higher                                                                                                                                                  projects
education systems?                                                                                                                                                                                The field-based country studies will be
How has its support strengthened the connection between                                                                                                                                         an important source of quantitative
                                                                                                                                                                                                  data to complement qualitative data
higher education and both the public and private sectors?


                                                                                                    23
                                                                                                  Evaluation Method                                                                                 Approach and Limitations




                                                             consultations
                                                             Stakeholder
                                                                             Portfolio analysis
                                                                                                   strategies
                                                                                                   Review of Bank Group

                                                                                                                          knowledge work
                                                                                                                          Review of Bank Group

                                                                                                                                                 informants
                                                                                                                                                 Interview with key

                                                                                                                                                                      Country case studies
Evaluation Questions




How has it supported regulation and quality assurance in                                                                                                               
public and private universities?
How has its support contributed to internal efficiency in                                                                                                               
higher education?

Evaluation Question 3: How has the World Bank Group’s support for higher education contributed to social and economic outcomes?

How has Bank Group support improved access and equity                                                                                                                                        Focus is on outcomes that are directly
for lower income households?                                                                                                                                                                     influenced by the higher education
                                                                                                                                                                                                 sector
How has its support addressed gender and other issues                                                                                                                                           Some outcomes can be measured
                                                                                                                                                                       
affecting traditionally excluded groups in higher                                                                                                                                                quantitatively while other can only be
education?                                                                                                                                                                                       evaluated qualitatively
How has its support contributed to external efficiency
through developing skills and improving the employability                                                                                                              
of graduates?
How has its support contributed to external efficiency
through private sector development and increased industry
                                                                                                                                                                       
competiveness?
How has its support contributed to the quality of research                                                                                                             
and its relevance to local development challenges?



                                                                                                  24
Attachment 2

Challenges to Higher Education in Developing Countries
Many countries face a demographic and education transition that is expanding the number
of potential students. Table 2A.1 shows the increase in the gross enrollment rate in lower
secondary education and in higher education by Bank Group Region. In most countries, the
coverage of secondary education has grown substantially over the past two decades. At the same
time, a higher proportion of students is transitioning from secondary to higher education. The
growing demand for higher education is leading to political challenges in many developing
countries. Rapid growth in enrollment has added pressure on the higher education system to
ensure equitable access and quality across a growing number of providers. This situation has
sparked controversy as countries seek to address the cost of higher education and attempt to
divide this cost between students and the government (Lebeau and others 2012).

Table 2A.1. Gross Enrollment Rate for Lower Secondary and Higher Education, by Region
Region                                 Gross Enrollment Rate    1995      2000     2005    2010
Africa                                    Lower secondary       N.A.      30.6     38.6    47.6
                                          Lower secondary       69.3       73.4    84.7    93.8
East Asia and Pacific
                                          Higher education       6.9       11.4    19.2    24.3
                                          Lower secondary       88.0       89.7    95.3    97.8
Europe and Central Asia
                                          Higher education      26.4       30.0    40.1    47.3
                                          Lower secondary       N.A.       97.9    99.4    100.2
Latin America and the Caribbean
                                          Higher education      16.6       21.9    29.8    39.7
                                          Lower secondary       72.4       82.3    88.0    91.7
Middle East and North Africa
                                          Higher education      15.7       20.0    23.3    31.0
                                          Lower secondary       59.8       58.1    67.6    76.2
South Asia
                                          Higher education       5.1       8.2     9.6     16.0
Source: World Bank EdStats database.
Note: N.A. = not available.

The rapid growth of demand for higher education presents challenges for delivering
quality in teaching and learning. Student populations are expanding, often entering the higher
education system with lower levels of academic preparation and a more diverse set of academic
and nonacademic needs. With class sizes and teaching loads increasing, many universities have
supplemented or replaced full-time academic staff with lower-cost part-time faculty, or they have
hired staff with lower academic qualifications. Private universities, including for-profit higher
education institutions, have helped to meet some of the increased demand, but they often pose
quality concerns (Altbach, Reisberg, and Rumbley 2009; Economist Intelligence Unit 2014).
Many universities also lack infrastructure to provide quality learning environments as they
attempt to accommodate growing enrollments.

                                                 25
There is concern about the equity of public subsidies for higher education as the wealthier
segments of society tend to have better access to a university education. In most low- and
middle-income countries, few individuals from poor households graduate from upper secondary
school. Poorer households often have no physical access to the secondary level or have access
only to low quality schools. The pattern in figure 2A.1 shows that the enrollment rate for
secondary education is usually substantially higher for the richest quintile than for the poorest
quintile. At the same time, wealthier households have access to the best quality schools. On a per
capita basis, public subsidies for higher education students are higher than subsidies in other
levels of education. Since university students tend to come from wealthier households, public
subsidies tend to be regressive. For example, in Uganda in 2005, the subsidy per university
student was around $175, compared to $35 per secondary student and $21 per primary student;
and 51 percent of students came from the highest decile, compared to 12 percent from the lowest
five expenditure deciles (Guloba, Magidu, and Wokadala 2010). These results are typical for
low-income countries. The same bias exists in middle income countries, although it is generally
not as severe. For example, in 2001 the poorest quintile in Azerbaijan and Costa Rica received
12 percent of public subsidies for higher education (Filmer 2003).

Figure 2A.1. Upper Secondary Enrollment Rate for the First and Fifth Quintiles




Source: World Bank EdStats database.
Note: Estimates are drawn from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and the Multipurpose Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS).


Access to higher education can also be skewed by gender and ethnicity. While traditionally,
higher education institutions have been populated largely by men, access for women has been
expanding rapidly, though unevenly, across regions. The proportion of women in higher
education tends to be lower in poorer countries. Gender equality in higher education tends to
follow gender equality in secondary education; while in some regions women are
overrepresented in higher education (Barone 2011; Barro and Lee 2013). Ethnic minorities are
often underrepresented in higher education as the result of a variety of factors, such as
inadequate academic preparation, inability to afford higher education, and discriminatory
admissions processes. Many countries have introduced policies to address this disparity, with
varying degrees of success (Ford Foundation 2008; Andresen, Bunda, and Walter 2008).
                                                                  26
Students with disabilities often face significant challenges in accessing higher education.
Relatively little is known about access for students with disabilities in developing countries, but
the lack of physical accommodations, transition programs to prepare them for entry into higher
education, inclusive instruction, and academic support remain significant barriers (Evans and
Ebersold 2012; World Health Organization 2011). The lack of proper accommodations and
support can lead to poor retention, educational achievement, and employability.

Increasing the employability of graduates is another challenge for developing countries. In
many countries, unemployment is high even among graduates of post-secondary institutions.
While the expansion of access to higher education requires corresponding macroeconomic
development to ensure productive work for graduates (Bloom and others 2013; Shierholz, Davis,
and Kimball 2014), higher education systems often do not adequately address the needs of the
labor market (Education for Employment 2012). A discrepancy is found between the kinds of
skills demanded by labor markets and the number of graduates with adequate skills, including
soft skills and technical skills in key disciplines (Economist Intelligence Unit 2014). This gap
results from the low quality of education and the imbalance between skilled labor supply and
demand, with some fields facing shortages while others have too many graduates.

Most higher education systems in developing countries have insufficient capacity in the
areas of basic and applied research. New pressures on university systems in developing
countries further threaten their capacity to support research. These pressures include reduced
public subsidies for higher education accompanied by rapidly growing demand for enrollment in
higher education. Higher education institutions increasingly rely on tuition revenue from these
growing enrollments. However, in the process, many of these institutions have lowered academic
standards and diluted teaching labor while also shifting their operations away from conducting
research and educating the next generation of researchers (Altbach, Reisberg, and Rumbley
2009).

Many higher education systems face serious challenges with internal efficiency. In the face
of rapidly increasing enrollments, student progress toward successful degree completion has
become increasingly strained. Many countries have seen an increase in enrollment without a
subsequent increase in graduates. For example, between 2003 and 2013, the number of higher
education students more than doubled while the number of graduates only increased by 50
percent. While data on these trends remain sparse, few developing countries appear to have
experienced a significant increase in the graduation rate during the past decade. Many higher
education institutions lack the capacity to address many of the critical variables affecting internal
efficiency, such as student retention, transition programs, student support, and time to degree
completion.

Expansion of the higher education sector is putting pressure on the governance systems for
higher education. Governance systems may allow institutions a high degree of autonomy, or
they may be linked to a quality assurance system that imposes greater structure and oversight of
institutions. Both models of governance face challenges of leadership, strategic direction, and
financial management. These challenges are enhanced by rapidly increasing demand; reduced
public subsidies; proliferation of new types of institutions; new forms of delivery that include
competitors to traditional colleges and universities; more diverse student populations;

                                                 27
internationalization; and pressures on institutions to leverage their knowledge production
(Henard and Mitterle 2009). Promoting institutional autonomy is not sufficient to allow for rapid,
relevant, and sustainable adjustment to the changing landscape (Salmi 2009). Similarly, a more
structured and monitored governance system cannot ensure efficiency and accountability without
improving capacity in accreditation and quality assurance.

Most countries lack mechanisms to provide effective quality assurance. Quality assurance
provides a means of ensuring that the higher education system responds in a timely fashion to the
changing needs of society and the economy. Quality assurance has increasingly relied on data
and indicators that demonstrate “outcomes” of higher education and that comply with
internationalized standards (Altbach, Reisberg, and Rumbley 2009). In many countries, the
capacity to carry out these processes is not well established, rigorous, or sufficiently funded.




                                               28
Attachment 3

Evaluation Methodology
The evaluation will utilize a variety of methods to develop an understanding of the Bank
Group’s support for higher education. Evidence will be triangulated and synthesized to
answer the respective evaluation questions. The goal of this approach is to understand the Bank
Group’s support for higher education rather than to provide quantitative grades or ratings of its
support.

FIRST STEPS: SETTING THE STAGE

Although the evaluation’s primary focus is on analysis, it will include a detailed description of
what the Bank Group supports and the impact of this support. This will be built around an
ongoing portfolio review. The portfolio review will look at both the design and results of the
Bank Group’s higher education operations and will classify the lessons reported in project
documents and evaluations. Through consultations with stakeholders and a review of the
academic and policy literature, the evaluation team will prepare an analysis of the state of
thinking on higher education in country contexts with reference to the Bank Group’s
involvement and more broadly. This will provide a benchmark or normative framework to which
the evaluation can compare the objectives and design of the Bank Group’s interventions.

The First Evaluation Question: Is the World Bank Group support for higher education
consistent and well-articulated? The evaluation will use the review of the Bank Group
strategies to understand the logic model for higher education at the corporate, Regional, and
country level. Then, using the normative framework, the evaluation team will analyze the Bank
Group’s logic model compared with the views of stakeholders. This will lead to a qualitative
discussion of the relevance of the Bank Group’s higher education strategy. A similar approach
will be used to evaluate the design of higher education operations. The evaluation will use the
portfolio review to classify and analyze the design of investment operations and the review of
knowledge work for technical support. In both cases, the country case studies will provide
detailed data to complement the analyses of strategies and portfolios. Interviews with key
informants will also provide an understanding of all three of the subquestions. The interviews
with key informants, along with the country case studies, are especially important for
understanding how the Bank Group coordinates internally and with other stakeholders. Together,
this evidence will be useful to identify its logic model for higher education.

The Second Evaluation Question: How has World Bank Group support contributed to
higher education systems? The portfolio analysis and the review of the Bank Group’s
knowledge work will provide data on the performance of operations in transforming higher
education systems. The country case studies will provide additional data in the selected countries
and will include specific questions tailored to evaluate the Bank Group’s contribution to
strengthening the higher education system. Interviews with key informants will provide
corroborating information to understand results and value added.



                                                29
The Third Evaluation Question: How has the World Bank Group’s support for higher
education contributed to social and economic outcomes? The portfolio analysis will provide
data on the performance of Bank Group operations on higher level outcomes. The inquiry will
require the application of the Bank Group’s logic model in the interpretation of social and
economic outcomes. The country case studies will provide additional data and will include
specific questions tailored to the country and higher education system context when evaluating
the Bank Group’s contributions. Interviews with key informants will provide corroborating
information to understand results and value added.

CONSULTATION WITH COUNTRY AND REGIONAL HIGHER EDUCATION STAKEHOLDERS

The evaluation team will hold consultation with higher education leaders at the country and
regional levels to identify key issues in the sector. This might include government officials,
university administrators and staff, students, the private sector, and NGOs. The evaluation will
also explore options to dialogue with students and university staff using social media or similar
approaches. The consultations will be used to identify received understanding of the different
options to support efforts to increase the coverage, quality, and relevance of higher education.

The evaluation team will work with the Bank Group and external experts to identify policy and
academic leaders and will consider a number of different mean to hold the consultations,
including online and through interviews, among others.

PORTFOLIO REVIEW

The portfolio review will examine project documents and evaluations (i.e., ICRs, ICR Reviews,
and PPARs). The evaluation will develop instruments to code areas of interest from the portfolio
to answer particular evaluation questions. This will include information about project design
from Project Appraisal Documents (PADs) as well as information about project execution and
results from ICRs, ICR Reviews, and PPARs.

The initial screening was based on data from the World Bank Business Warehouse, which was
downloaded on December 1, 2014. The higher education projects included in this evaluation
were identified based on the following steps: (i) the basic data for all 3,734 projects approved
between FY03 and FY14 was downloaded from Business Warehouse on December 1, 2014; (ii)
263 projects mapped to the sector code ET (tertiary education) and the theme code 66 (education
for the knowledge economy) were extracted; and (iii) project activities for these 263 projects
were examined through the quick PAD review to refine the selection of higher education projects
based on the following criteria:

1. The project is considered a “higher education project” and included in the evaluation if it
either:

      Includes the activities that support higher education institutions, which offer a degree
       program (e.g., diploma or bachelor’s, master’s or doctoral degree). This may include
       quality enhancement, institutional strengthening, capacity development, enhancement of
       facilities, system reform, and policy reform of higher education.


                                                30
      Targets students in higher education institutions as main beneficiaries of project
       activities.

2. A project that is classified as ET is excluded if its focus differs from the evaluation’s
objectives. This includes projects that:

      Primarily support non-degree programs at the higher education level, including short-
       term training and certificate programs.
      Interact with higher education only through the services provided by higher education
       institutions to the project.

3. The private sector portfolio includes all projects classified as “colleges, universities, and
professional schools,” followed by an inspection to ensure appropriateness. A similar approach is
used to identify relevant knowledge products and advisory service products.

In addition, the evaluation will divide higher education operation into two categories. The first,
core higher education operations, refers to projects whose primary function is to support higher
education. A second group of operations, other higher education operations, are projects that
include a higher education intervention or objective as part of a larger project. This could include
a health sector project that includes an effort to strengthen a medical school along with many
other health interventions.

The classification was determined by the World Bank Group’s classifications. For public sector
projects, projects were that were classified as 50 percent or more ET are identified as core
operations. In addition, the evaluation team inspected other public sector projects and identified
those projects that primarily focused on higher education. All IFC projects that focus on higher
education (colleges, universities, and professional schools) are classified as core.

REVIEW OF BANK GROUP STRATEGIES

The evaluation will analyze corporate, sector, and country strategies as well as associated
documents, such as Systematic Country Diagnoses and policy documents that aim to inform
Bank Group management on higher education. The evaluation will develop instruments to code
areas of interest from the countries to answer particular evaluation questions to understand how
the Bank Group incorporates higher education in its strategies.

REVIEW OF BANK GROUP KNOWLEDGE WORK

The evaluation will review a range of the Bank Group’s knowledge products, including non-
lending technical assistance, economic and sector work, sector analyses, advisory services,
economic analysis, and impact evaluations as well as policy dialogue that supports higher
education. The evaluation will review the knowledge portfolio using the Business Portfolio for
products classified as sector code ET and the theme code 66. In addition, the evaluation team
will consult with the Bank Group to identify improperly coded knowledge work. The evaluation
will develop an instrument based on the evaluation questions to extract necessary information for
the evaluation.

                                                  31
REVIEW OF ACADEMIC AND POLICY LITERATURE

An initial review shows that there are few rigorous quantitative evaluations focusing on higher
education, particularly for interventions in low- and middle-income countries. Given this paucity
of research, there is little room to carry out a systematic review of evidence.

The evaluation will review the existing academic and policy literature to develop a database of
evidence and policy approaches. The literature review will be partly guided by the results of the
consultations with the country and global higher education stakeholders.

INTERVIEW WITH KEY INFORMANTS

In addition to interviews carried out as part of the field-based cases studies and the interaction
with country and global higher education leaders, the evaluation team will meet with Bank staff
and consultants and with development partners, higher education specialists, NGOs, and
foundations. These interviews will provide general context and address specific evaluation
questions using a qualitative instrument based on the evaluation questions.

COUNTRY CASE STUDIES

The country case studies will not focus on information already available in project document and
project evaluation documents. An instrument will be prepared to gather information during the
country visits based on the evaluation questions. This will include questions on how well the
Bank Group has responded to the country’s needs in higher education, what its support focuses
on, and how the Bank Group incorporates lessons and evidence in the design and implementation
of projects. The country case studies will include interviews with Bank Group and government
staff as well meetings with beneficiaries and the development community.




                                                32
Attachment 4

Preliminary Portfolio Review
IDENTIFICATION OF WORLD BANK GROUP SUPPORT TO HIGHER EDUCATION

Table 4A.1 presents a summary of the World Bank’s lending portfolio, based on operations
approved from 2003 to 2014. It includes all projects classified by the evaluation as “higher
education.” In terms of number of projects, around 30 percent of education projects are in higher
education. Table 4A.2 presents a summary of IFC’s private sector lending program.
Table 4A.1. Distribution of World Bank Public Sector Investment
                                                                                                  Amount
                                                        Number of Projects                     (US$, millions)
Tertiary education projects
                                                      IBRD        IDA     Total       IBRD          IDA           Total
                                                        46        85       131       5,619.0      4,707.8        10,326.8
Sector board                             ED             28        59        87       2,502.5      3,843.4        6,345.9
                                      Non-ED            17        27        44       3,116.5       864.4         3,980.9
Project status                         Active           19        40        59       1,149.3      2,594.9        3,744.2
                                       Closed           27        45        72       4,469.7      2,112.9        6,582.6
Lending instrument type              Investment         36        76       112       2,680.9      4,279.5        6,960.4
                                        DPL             10         9        19       2,938.2       428.3         3,366.5
Region                                  AFR              2        38        41         15.0       1,848.6        1,863.6
                                        EAP              9        12        21        407.4        826.6         1,234.0
                                        ECA             14        11        25       2,262.8       257.3         2,520.1
                                        LAC             16         2        18       2,176.4        14.2         2,190.6
                                        MNA              6         2        8         757.4         19.0          776.4
                                         SAR              0       20        20          0.0        1,742.1        1,742.1
Source: IEG Data.
Note: AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; ED = Education; IBRD = International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development; IDA = International Development Association; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia.




                                                             33
Table 4A.2. Distribution of World Bank Private Sector Investment
                                                                                                          Amount
                                                               Number of Projects                      (US$, millions)
Tertiary education investment projects
                                                        Equity    Loan      Mixed     Total    Equity       Loan     Total
                                                          8         20        1         29      178.7       359.0    537.7
Project status                           Active           8         17        0         25      177.1       312.5    489.6
                                         Closed           0         3         1         4        0.0        46.5     46.5
Region                                    AFR             0         4         0         4        0.0        18.4     18.4
                                          EAP             0         1         1         2        1.6        23.0     24.6
                                          ECA             0         4         0         4        0.0        78.0     78.0
                                          LAC             4         11        0         15       54.0       239.6    293.6
                                         MNA              2         0         0         2        18.1        0.0     18.1
                                          SAR             0         0         0         0        0.0         0.0         0.0
                                         World            2         0         0         2       105.0        0.0     105.0
Source: IEG Data.
Note: AFR = Africa; EAP = East Asia and Pacific; ECA = Europe and Central Asia; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean;
MNA = Middle East and North Africa; SAR = South Asia.




                                                            34
Attachment 5

List of Completed and Current PPARs
Table 5A.1. Completed and Current PPARs
PPAR        Project        Approval        Closed                                                    Relevance and
                                                       Country             Project Title
FY          ID             FY              FY                                                        Remarks
2013        P050741        2003            2010        Sri Lanka           Improving                 Curriculum and
                                                                           Relevance and             institutional reform to
                                                                           Quality of                improve employability
                                                                           Undergraduate             of university graduates
                                                                           Education Project
2012        P077282        2003            2007        Chile               Science for the           Support for research
                                                                           Knowledge                 and scholarships at
                                                                           Economy Project           doctoral level in
                                                                                                     science and technology
                                                                                                     sector
            P074138        2003            2009        Colombia            Higher Education-         Support for low-
                                                                           Improving Access          income students to
                                                                           Project                   improve equity; quality
                                                                                                     improvement of
                                                                                                     doctoral programs
            P050658        2001            2007        India               Technician                Support for
                                                                           Education III             polytechnics at
                                                                           Project                   undergraduate diploma
                                                                                                     level
            P072123        2003            2009        India               Technical and             Reforms in technical
                                                                           Engineering               and engineering
                                                                           Education Quality         education at HE level
                                                                           Improvement               to improve
                                                                           Project                   competitiveness
2011        P069326        2000            2007        Jordan              Higher Education          Strengthening of
                                                                           Development               governance and
                                                                           Project                   systems in HE sector
            P056236        2002            2009        Egypt, Arab         Higher Education          Legislative reform,
                                                       Rep.                Enhancement               institutional
                                                                           Project                   restructuring, and
                                                                                                     establishment of QA
                                                                                                     and monitoring
                                                                                                     mechanisms
            P076183        2002            2008        Yemen, Rep.         Higher Education          Preparation and
                                                                           Learning and              implementation of HE
                                                                           Innovation Project        sector reform strategy
                                                                                                     and capacity
                                                                                                     development of
                                                                                                     ministry
            P001786        1999            2006        Mozambique          Education Sector          One component
                                                                           Strategic Program         focuses on HE strategy
                                                                                                     for expansion and
                                                                                                     quality
Note: HE = higher education; PPAR = Project Performance Assessment Report; QA = quality assurance.


                                                               35
