                                                          96853

Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building




          Report of the twelfth meeting
                       of the
          TFSCB Advisory Panel (AP)
                   (March 9-13, 2015)



The TFSCB: Making a success story work in the future




                  The World Bank
               Washington DC, USA




                                              April 22, 2015
                                           Waltraud MOORE
                                          Jean-Louis BODIN




                                                           1
                              ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AP          Advisory Panel (TFSCB)
ASEAN       Association of South East Asian Countries
AU          Administrative Unit (TFSCB)
BAPS        Busan Action Plan on Statistics
BRICS       Emerging countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa)
CAPI        Computer Assisted Personal Interviews
CARICOM     Caribbean Community
CIS         Community of Independent States
DECDG       Development Economics Vice Presidency (World Bank)
DFID        Department for International development (UK Government)
ECASTAT     Trust fund for Statistical Capacity Building in Countries of Eastern Europe and central Asia
            (Federation of Russia)
GFR         Grant Funding Report
ICT         Information and Communication Technology
IMC         Internal management Committee (TFSCB)
INDOTEL     Instituto Dominicano de las Telecommunicaciones (Dominican Rep.)
ISI         International Statistical Institute
MDG         Millennium Development Goals
NSDS        National Strategy for Statistical Development
ODRA        Open Data Readiness Assessment
OLADE       Organizacion Latinoamericana de Eenrgia (Latin American Energy Organization)
PARIS21     Consortium Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21 st Century
SRF         Statistics for Results Facility (WB)
STATCAP     Lending program to support more efficient and effective statistical systems in developing
            countries (WB)
TF          Trust Fund
TFSCB       Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building
TTL         Task Team Leader (WB projects)
UNSD        United Nations Statistical Division
WAEMU       West African Economic and Monetary union
WB          The World Bank




                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


Executive Summary                                                                                    3
Introduction                                                                                         4
Past Experience                                                                                      5
State-of-Play                                                                                        6
Thoughts on the Future Directions of TFSCB                                                           7
Summary of Recommendations                                                                          11
ANNEX: Survey of the recent project proposals received by the AU                                    13


                                                                                                           2
                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



Since its inception the objectives and mode of operation of the Trust Fund for Statistical
Capacity Building (TFSCB) have changed. In recent years its thrust has moved from the
development of national strategy plans for statistical systems (NSDS) to the funding of short
term subject matter projects in response to topical priorities as resulted for instance from the
Busan Action Plan for Statistics (BASP) or Post 2015 Data Revolution Initiative of the UN. A
total of $ 46.6 million has been disbursed by the TFSCB to date for projects ranging from $ 100
000 to $ 500 000. Since 2012, the TFSCB has changed its application procedures to a two-stage
approach, which has helped to better steer applications towards achieving funding.

While the number of applications has grown steadily, present donorship has decreased to one
donor, DFID, the Government of Korea being expected to join the Fund soon. Given the increase
in applicants with a total of 63 proposals having been received over 2014, concerns are justified
that the TFSCB may be depleted in the foreseeable future. To remedy this situation, the TFSCB
is faced with the challenge of attracting new donors. In order to be successful it has to broaden
its remit because donors, be they governmental or private, tend to be more interested in
supporting subject matters of their particular priority which seem to be of direct impact on policy
implementation rather than investing in the more general topics of statistical strategy
development and capacity building. The AP of the TFSCB has reviewed this critical situation,
conducted interviews with stakeholders and proposed 17 recommendations, which are grouped
together in the following:

      The TFSCB should review its remit and broaden its scope to reconcile the topics of
       statistical strategy development and capacity building with emerging funding
       opportunities from governments, with a focus on attracting new donors from BRICS, as
       well as from the private sector (e.g. Gates Foundation) for subject matter areas, such as
       international development goals (e.g. SDGs) and resolutions of economic or social
       summits. Where appropriate, supplementary funding and contributions in-kind should
       be considered. In order to attract new donors, the TFSCB could make case presentations
       and organise discussion fora at high level meetings where leaders of government and the
       private sector convene to discuss global concerns and future directions.

      To put this reconciliation of topics into effect operationally, special consideration should
       be given to project applications where topical work in subject matter areas is expected
       to sustainably impact statistical capacity building. At the same time, the WB and
       PARIS21 should encourage countries to update their NSDS in relation to their present
       needs, developmental priorities and actual capacity situation. Consequently to promoting
       full country ownership of NSDS, recipient ownership of all stages of TFSCB funded
       projects should also be strengthened.


                                                                                                      3
           Proposals from regional organizations especially in low capacity areas should be
            encouraged and synergies from such projects should be gained by the sharing of
            experience among countries engaged in similar projects via internet platforms.

           The TFSCB should place more emphasis on monitoring concrete and sustainable project
            results and use success stories of high visibility to attract donors.

           Efforts should be made to include ministry staff in TFSCB project activities and to
            conduct special courses on data analysis and interpretation for government users.




INTRODUCTION
        An Advisory Panel (AP) was created in 2003 to conduct a yearly technical review of the
World Bank Trust Fund Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) activities and propose
recommendations to enhance its operation. Since its inception, the AP consists of two external
consultants who meet the managers and other stakeholders of this TF (AU: Administrative Unit;
IMC: Internal Management Committee; etc.) once a year at the Headquarters of the World Bank
(WB). The 12th AP meeting was held from March 9 to 13, 20151. According to their present terms
of reference the two consultants are commissioned to reflect on the history and past practices of
the Trust Fund and to make recommendations on its future scope and practices. Specifically, they
will:
      -    review and evaluate project proposals and approval decisions taken by the IMC in a general
           manner;
      -    prepare an annual report containing the findings from the abovementioned tasks;
      -    reflect and give their recommendations on the future direction and overall management of
           the TFSCB.

        In the course of this mission, the consultants conducted a series of interviews with
management and stakeholders of the TFSCB, namely: Mr Grant Cameron (Manager, Development
Data Group, DECDG, and Head of the IMC), Ms Ingrid Ivins, Messrs Mustafa Dinc and Mizuki
Yamanaka (TFSCB Administration Unit), several IMC members (Ms Amparo Ballivian, Ms
Barbro Hexeberg, Mr. Neil Fantom; all DECDG, and Messrs Victor Sulla, Africa Region, and Mr.
Manohar Sharma, Global Practice Unit), as well as several TFSCB project managers (Ms Olga
Shabalina and Mr. Thomas Danielewitz, both DECDG). These discussions were fruitful and are
reflected in the review and recommendations below.
       The AP was provided with documents for review and discussions on project proposals
submitted to the Internal Management Committee (IMC) of the TFSCB since the 11th meeting of
the AP in 2014, in particular:

1
    The reports of the previous AP meetings are available on the WB Website: http:/www.worldbank.org/tfscb
                                                                                                             4
      -    the Grant Funding Requests (GFR) with their Grant Financing Plans and Budget Tables for
           the three proposals made under the National Strategies for the Development of Statistics
           (NSDS) Window and submitted for virtual review by the IMC in 2014;
      -    the Grant Funding Requests (GFR) with their Grant Financing Plans and Budget Tables for
           the proposals made under the Spring (24 proposals) and Fall (23 proposals) Non-NSDS
           Windows;
      -    the minutes of the IMC meeting held on July 2, 2014 for the proposals made under the
           Spring Non-NSDS Windows2; and
      -    the copy of a message e-mailed on June 20, 2014, by Grant Cameron to the IMC members
           proposing new procedures to review 2014 Spring Non-NSDS Window.


1- PAST EXPERIENCE
        The initial thrust of TFSCB was on awareness raising of the importance of quality statistics
in developing and transition countries among potential donors and users. As more and more donors
became engaged in this thrust, funds were used to enable statistical agencies in recipient countries
to develop national strategy plans (NSDS) for their statistical systems in response to national and
international data demands and in adherence to international quality standards.
        The TFSCB has evolved over a period of its operations into a sound financial and
management tool for providing, in cooperation with the development partners, small grants to
developing countries for statistical projects in a flexible manner. It has built up organization,
management, guidelines and procedures for operations with well-defined objectives. Since its
establishment, PARIS21 supported with the financial help of the TFSCB and some other donors
more than one hundred countries in setting up their National Strategies for Statistical Development.
The TFSCB has granted a total of 46.6 million USD to date to conduct small-scale projects, with
project volumes ranging from 100,000 to 500,000 USD3. The project activities encompassed
preparation of NSDS and statistical capacity building activities as well as statistical subject matters,
the latter responding to pre-defined and emerging topical priorities resulting for instance from the
Busan Action Plan for Statistics (BAPS) and the Post-2015 Data Revolution Initiative, such as
data for measuring sustainable development, open data, data for improving production and use of
Gender Statistics and exploration of innovative approaches to data collection and dissemination.
        The TFSCB was designed as a funding instrument of short term effectiveness and relatively
high flexibility to complement other higher volume funding instruments, such as STATCAP or
SRF. It enabled donor countries to invest their funds in a trust fund of broad and flexible scope and
to delegate the administration and monitoring on the individual grant level to the responsible unit
of the World Bank.



2 - STATE–OF-PLAY

2
    The IMC meeting for the proposals made under the Fall 2014 Non NSDS Window was held on March 10, 2015.

3
    The TFSCB rules impose a ceiling of $ 500,000 to the budgets of the proposals.
                                                                                                             5
2.1. Administration and management of TFSCB
        For years the TFSCB was a multi-donor fund supported by a significant number of donors.
In recent years, the number of donors has decreased and by mid-2013 the resources of the Fund
had decreased to a balance of just about $ 2 million of unallocated funds. The AP recommended to
DECDG during its previous meetings to develop a concerted strategy and pursue all the available
avenues for additional continued funding. In the fall of 2013, the DFID agreed to contribute $20
million to the TFSCB and transferred this sum in one single tranche in November 2013.
Accordingly, the closing date of the TFSCB programme was extended from end-2015 to end-2020.
When created, the TFSCB was designed as a multi-donors fund. At the moment, it has become a
one-donor fund (DFID). However new donors, such as the Government of Korea, are expected to
join soon (the GoK has committed $3 million).

       To some extent and paradoxically, the TFSCB is again in danger of becoming a victim of
this new gift from DFID. Is it possible to maintain the initial spirit of the TFSCB when the number
of proposals increases very quickly, as it was the case in 2014? 63 proposals have been received
over 2014 (3 proposals received under the NSDS Window; Non-NSDS Spring Window: 28
proposals, 24 of which for discussion by the IMC meeting; Non-NSDS Fall Window: 32 proposals,
23 of which for discussion by the IMC meeting). That means that the total amount in 2014 for the
approved or conditionally approved proposals has been around 10 million USD. At this trend the
Fund will be exhausted by the end of 2016 which is not in line with the objective of DFID to
disburse the funds by 2020. Two solutions are to be considered: (i) finding new donors (ii) being
more selective in the approval process, or a mix of these two solutions.

        The TFSCB has successfully operated, since its inception in 1999, in promoting medium-
to long-term system-wide visions on statistical development in developing countries. Its financing
has also contributed to the design, creation, implementation and updating of NSDS in a large
number of countries. These NSDS have provided the basis for STATCAP projects of the World
Bank or for country projects that are being implemented with financing from the SFR Catalytic
Fund. In addition, TFSCB financing has contributed to the implementation of a large number of
smaller country or regional, sector specific and training projects on statistical capacity building.
Improved communication media created through World Bank and PARIS21 websites led to a better
understanding of Trust Fund goals and resulted in a greater percentage of proposals in line with the
main objective of statistical capacity building. The AP has found that all decisions made during the
meetings of the IMC were generally decided according to the guidelines after a well-informed
thinking and debate.


        Following the World Bank’s decision to streamline small and micro-grant procedures to a
2-stage application process, the TFSCB program implemented these procedures in early 2012. In
2013, the AU specified more clearly the criteria taken into account for shortlisting proposals for
the stage 2. In 2014, the AU decided that a change will be introduced in the way of transmitting
proposals for discussion by the IMC meetings. Recommendations by the AU to the IMC have been
organized into four groups: (i) proposals that should be approved “as is”; (ii) proposals to be
approved, but with modifications to the budget and contents (conditional approval); (iii) proposals


                                                                                                  6
that require a substantial clarification or revision and a virtual review by the IMC; and (iv)
proposals to be rejected with or without invitation to re-submit.

2.2. Focus and emerging issues
        The TFSCB has proven that it can adapt flexibly to new needs.
        Taking into consideration the broad mandate established by the WB President Jim Yong
Kim when he made his opening remarks at the Annual Meetings in Tokyo, Japan, on October 11,
20124, and the growth areas proposed by donors and the priorities resulting from the BAPS and
from Post 2015 beyond the MDGs, special emphasis have been successfully placed on: (i) Making
government data more accessible by participating actively in the Bank policy on Open Data
Readiness Assessment (ODRA) and Action Plan5; (ii) Improving the production and use of Gender
Statistics: (iii) Improving the data foundation for measuring sustainable development; (iv) Funding
innovative approaches; and (v) Improving TFSCB’s results focus.

       The AP welcomed this proposal during its two previous meetings but nevertheless reiterated
the importance of pursuing its support to the preparation of new or updated NSDS and their
implementation. According to the last PARIS21 progress report, 15% of IDA countries and 35%
of low and lower-middle income countries have no strategy or an expired strategy. PARIS21 has
prepared with the help of a Task Team an update of the NSDS Guidelines. Producing NSDS or
updating NSDS will therefore remain an important task. Efforts should also go on for implementing
NSDS.



3 - THOUGHTS ON THE FUTURE DIRECTION OF TFSCB
3.1 Funding environment
        The funding environment for statistical capacity projects has changed in recent years. Many
donor countries have reduced their budgets for technical cooperation, now either concentrating
their bilateral assistance on a selection of target countries or earmarking a major part of their
available budget for subject matter areas of international political attention, e.g. environmental or
gender issues. While they acknowledge statistics to be a valuable tool for describing phenomena
and observing developments in policy relevant subject matter areas, national donors have become
increasingly reluctant to invest in statistical capacity building per se.
       The TFSCB, by its very name, thus, operates in a challenging funding environment. In order
to succeed in this environment, the TFSCB should review its remit and strive to reconcile its
original thrust of implementing national strategies for developing statistics and statistical capacity
building with emerging funding opportunities for subject matter areas. While this would require

4
 Invest in data and analytical tools building on the success of the Open Data Initiative; and Work with partners (in
building statistical capacity) to ensure virtually all developing countries have timely and accurate data.

5
  Action 2, “A Busan Action Plan for Statistics”, Statistics for Transparency, Accountability and Results, at
http://www.paris21.org/busan-action-plan.

                                                                                                                  7
some repositioning it would not mean that the TFSCB would have to abandon its original objectives
but rather that it would broaden its scope. Consequently, in future, special attention should be given
to such project applications in emerging domains in particular those of relevance to development
policies of recipient countries or regions. It could also be useful to give attention to projects which
are able to demonstrate how expected results in subject matter areas would also benefit statistical
capacity building, for example a project on conducting a household survey in connection with
poverty statistics in a given country could include a component on producing video based
interviewer training courses which constitutes a training tool in terms of statistical capacity
building.
        3. 2. Attracting new donors

         As previously noted, the TFSCB has been designed as a multi-donor fund, but as of last
year, it has become a one-donor fund (DFID). Even if the AU has recently received a pledge from
the Government of Korea, it’s necessary to attract new donors. There is the challenge of how to
make the TFSCB more attractive for potential donors?
       Private donors, i.e. large charitable trusts, play an increasing role in supporting public
causes, be it health related concerns or environmental issues6. In view of the dwindling number of
government donors for statistical capacity building, the possibility of raising funds from this donor
community should be investigated. While it is to be expected that private donors would invest only
in such statistical activities which are related to their subject matter of interest, a case could still be
made of the merits of sound statistical evidence either of the need situation to be remedied or of
the quantifiable results achieved from the donor´s inputs. In order to achieve this, the TFSCB could
make case presentations and organize discussion fora as side events at international economic
summit meetings7 where leaders of government and the private sector convene to discuss global
concerns and future directions.
       An attempt should also be made to attract new government donors from the group of
emerging countries (i.e. BRICS8) by offering them the TFSCB as a vehicle for promoting statistical
capacity building in relevant policy or subject matter areas and as a vehicle to foster good
governance and transparency9.




6
  For instance, the Bill and Melinda Gates Fundation has accepted to contribute to the funding of the project
launched by PARIS21 The Roadmap for a Country-led Data Revolution.

7
 For example, the World Economic Forum that is yearly held in Davos, Switzerland, as an international institution
committed to improving the state of the world through public-private cooperation.
8
  It is worthy of note that the Russian Government has signed in April, 2012, a US$ 15 million grant with the World
Bank to support its Multi-Donor Programmatic Trust Fund (ECASTAT) that will enhance capacity and address
financial constraints of the statistical systems in Eastern Europe and the CIS, with an emphasis on IDA borrower
countries.
9
 It was also proposed to use some events like the 60th World Statistical Congress to be held in Rio-de-Janeiro, Brazil,
at the end of July 2015, to organize a side event to promote the TFSCB and attract new donors.
                                                                                                                     8
        3.3. Focus and priorities
         To a considerable extent the TFSCB has already broadened its focus to encompass subject
matter areas of international interest. This could be intensified by explicitly aligning its remit and
objectives to international development goals as established by UN summits. In this respect,
statistical monitoring of the UN MDGs has made a major impact on statistical capacity building in
developing countries. Monitoring of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) could have a similar
effect and should, therefore, be explicitly referred to in the TFSCB remit.
       In terms of effectiveness of TFSCB inputs, special attention should continue to be given to
synergies to be gained from regional projects (proposed by sub-regional organizations such as
CARICOM, SADEC, East African Community, ASEAN). Sharing experiences among countries
engaged in similar projects should also be recommended10 (e.g. via internet platforms).
        Subject matter projects which can demonstrate concrete benefits to be expected for
sustainable statistical capacity building in addition to their subject matter goals should be given
priority over projects which are only oriented to work in a subject matter.
       In order to promote awareness of statistics as the most important tool of evidence based
policy making, efforts should be made to include ministry staff in TFSCB project activities and to
conduct training courses on analysis and interpretation of statistics for ministry staff as component
of TFSCB projects.
         The scope of TFSCB grants is short-term by nature, yet, the TFSCB sees itself as a
contributor to the long term development goals of statistical capacity building. There is no inherent
contradiction as long as the short term project objectives contribute to the long term goals. To this
effect, recipients should be encouraged to strive for coherence when submitting project applications
over the course of years. Priority should be given to coherent projects for example, projects or
project components of a technical nature (e.g. ICT in data collection funded by one grant, new
venues of data dissemination by a subsequent project) which could build upon another.
        3.4 Role of WB vs role of recipients
        While in theory projects should be recipient initiated and conducted in order to ensure sound
recipient ownership, i.e. recipient-executed, this stipulation is not always feasible. In countries with
low capacity statistical offices it may not be possible to task them with the full preparation,
application and management of a project which may be relatively small in scope but requires
comparatively high administrative and management inputs. In such cases, it seems reasonable to
task the WB with the project management.
       However, if national statistical offices are repeatedly alleviated or even freed from
administrative and management tasks associated with projects conducted to their benefit or if
projects are perceived to exclusively serve the information demand of international agencies or the
WB, there is a real danger of non-ownership and dissociation from the goals of the project on the

10
   e.g. the IMC meeting having examined the Fall Non NSDS proposals has recommended to combine one proposal
from Vietnam for SCB in public procurement with a similar project presented by Mongolia. Another example is the
proposal made jointly by Kenya and Rwanda
                                                                                                             9
part of the beneficiary country and national statistical office. Therefore, greatest efforts should be
made to involve the recipient country or statistical office in the initiation, application and
implementation of projects by orienting the project content closely to the needs and priorities of
the recipient country.
        Ownership of regional projects which are usually conducted under the auspices of the WB
is not a matter of concern as the mutual benefits and synergy effects of these projects outweigh the
lack of country ownership. Ideally, however, one of the participating statistical offices could
assume the lead role in a regional project and, thus, foster country ownership. When the actual
recipient is a sub-regional organization (e.g. CARICOM, ASEAN …), it should be possible for this
organization to execute the project?
        More attention should be given to possibilities of having recipient countries contribute
matching funds or support in kind to TFSCB grants, in particular for grants to non-IDA countries.
This would foster recipient ownership and ensure that the project content and goals fully respond
to the development needs of the country and the recipient institution.
       3.5. Operational issues
        The success of the TFSCB is largely due to its flexibility in scope and in operation which
should be maintained. The recently adopted two-step approach to project application is efficient
and in the interest of applicants and WB administrators. There is comparatively little bureaucracy
attached to the TFSCB.
        The TFSCB should place more emphasis on monitoring concrete and sustainable project
results. The result monitoring and reporting should be a joint task of the recipient and the donor.
Close attention should be paid to the project history of recipients in terms of projects completed
successfully and on schedule.
       The results of successful projects with high visibility subject matters should be used as case
presentations to attract donors.
        The AP considers it appropriate to the TFSCB objectives to continue to award individual
grants the volume of which is between 100 000 USD and 500 000 USD.


4 - SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1.      In order to succeed in a challenging funding environment, the TFSCB should review its
remit and strive to reconcile its original thrust of statistical capacity building with emerging funding
opportunities for subject matter areas. While this would require some repositioning it would not
mean that the TFSCB would have to abandon its original objectives but rather that it would broaden
its scope.

2.    Special attention should be given to such project applications which are able to demonstrate
how expected results in subject matter areas would also benefit statistical capacity building.


                                                                                                     10
3.     In order to keep alive the TFSCB until 2020, the WB is encouraged to find new donors with
the support of PARIS21 and to be more selective in the approval process of proposed requests. To
achieve the latter, better criteria for selectivity should be developed and communicated to those
seeking TF funding.

4.      In view of the dwindling number of government donors for statistical capacity building, the
AU and the PARIS21 Secretariat should investigate the possibility of raising funds from the private
sector, i.e. charitable trusts, private foundations (e.g. Bill Gates Foundation). In order to achieve
this, the TFSCB could make case presentations and organize discussion fora as side events at
international economic summit meetings where leaders of government and the private sector
convene to discuss global concerns and future directions.

5.     An attempt should also be made to attract new government donors from the group of
emerging countries (i.e. BRICS) by offering them the TFSCB as a vehicle for promoting statistical
capacity building in relevant policy or subject matter areas and as a vehicle to foster good
governance and transparency.

6.      Efforts should continue to be made by the WB and PARIS21 to encourage the countries to
prepare more comprehensive and updated NSDS really adapted to their actual situation and to look
at the implementation of the NSDS when they are adopted.

7.       The TFSCB should align its remit and objectives to international development goals as
established by UN summits (e.g. SDGs) while at the same time reconciling its original thrust of
statistical capacity building with the new subject matter areas emerging from the international
development initiatives.

8.     Special attention should be given to synergies to be gained from regional projects,
especially in low capacity areas, and the sharing of experience among countries engaged in similar
projects via internet platforms.

9.     Efforts should continue to encourage proposals from regional organizations (e.g. the
Caribbean Community).

10.     While it may be a challenge for recipients to find the balance between stand-alone activities
and sustainable capacity development in applying for and executing TF grants, the TFSCB should
encourage such efforts and capture more information on the results achieved to assess the
likelihood of good impact on capacity development. The AU should also make efforts to add
references to past projects, i.e. where applicable present a track record of successfully completed
activities, to the material sent for decision to the IMC when it has to prepare its decisions.

11.    The AU should try to guide sector specific projects to look for supplementary funding
through alternative WB facilities or sources external to the WB (e.g. FAO, UNDP) so as to free a
portion of TFSCB funds to be used for proper statistical capacity building purposes in connection

                                                                                                  11
with the sector specific activities to be funded. Non-IDA countries should be encouraged to afford
significant contributions (not only in kind) to the sum funded by the TFSCB.

12.     Greater efforts should be made to include ministry staff in project activities and to conduct
special courses for users on analysis and interpretation of statistics within the scope of TFSCB
grants.

13.     Efforts should be made to involve the recipient country or statistical office in the initiation,
application and implementation of projects by orienting the project content closely to the needs and
priorities of the recipient country.

14.    To foster ownership more attention should be given to possibilities of having recipient
countries contribute matching funds or support in kind to TFSCB grants.

15.     The TFSCB should place more emphasis on monitoring concrete and sustainable project
results. The results of successful projects with high visibility subject matters should be used as
show case to attract donors.

16.     The AU is encouraged to make much more visible the achievements of some success
stories, with the idea that countries may benefit of these achievements for their own projects.

17.     The AU should clarify the respective advantages of having bank-executed projects vs
recipient-executed activities based on the objectives and expectations, while keeping in mind WB
regulations.




                                                                                                     12
                                                   ANNEX


                 SURVEY OF THE RECENT PROJECT PROPOSALS RECEIVED
                      BY THE TFSCB ADMINISTRATION UNIT (AU)

        In April 2012, the TFSCB Administrative (AU) Unit proposed new guidelines and
procedures to prepare TFSCB funding proposals. The new procedure consists of a two-Stage
procedure. During the Stage 1, TTLs submit, in consultation with the agency who has expressed
interest, a short proposal (2 pages following a template proposed in the guidelines). After review,
a short list is established by the IMC and shortlisted proposals are notified to the TTLs. During the
Stage 2, the recipients and the TTLs complete the Grant Funding Request (GFR) that is sent to the
IMC for review and decision taking. Decisions were taken by the IMC during a face-to-face
meeting. In 2013, there was only one non-NSDS Window due to limited financial availability. In
2014, the new funds received made it possible to open two “Non-NSDS Windows: a Spring
Window (IMC meeting held on July 16, 2014) and a Fall Window (IMC meeting on March 10,
2015).

       The proposals presented through the NSDS Window are not affected by these new
procedures. In 2014, three project proposals were submitted and accepted during virtual NSDS
Window meetings.

Results of the Stages 1

        Twenty-eight proposals were received by IMC through the Non-NSDS Spring Window and
twenty-three were shortlisted. Thirty-two were received by the IMC during the Non-NSDS Fall
Window and twenty-three (76.7 %) were shortlisted. For both windows, sixty were received and
forty-six were shortlisted, compared to thirteen proposals received in 2013 and nine (69 %)
shortlisted.

Results of the Stages 211

        Out of the twenty-three proposals received during the Spring Window and submitted to the
IMC, seven were accepted, ten conditionally approved, two deferred for further discussion and four
rejected. Out of the twenty-three proposals received during the Fall Window and submitted to the
IMC, eight were accepted, four conditionally approved, seven deferred and four rejected. In total,
out of the forty-six proposals received during the two Windows, fifteen (32.6 %) were approved,
fourteen (30.4 %) conditionally approved, nine (19.6 %) deferred or returned for a further virtual
meeting and eight (17.4 %) rejected.

     The geographical distribution of the sixty proposals presented during the stages 1 of both
Windows is as follows:
11
   In 2014, given the volume of proposals, the AU decided to add a new step to the process by circulating
recommendations on each proposal shortlisted and submitted to the IMC’s discussion: (i) proposals that should be
approved “as is”; (ii) proposals to be approved with modifications in the budget; (iii) proposals that requ ire a verbal
discussion of the IMC.
                                                                                                                     13
            Region                Number of      Number of        Number of   Number of
                                  proposals      shortlisted      accepted    conditionally
                                                 proposals        proposals   accepted
                                                                              proposals
            Africa (AFR)                14               12               5         3

            Latin America &             14               9                3         1
            Caribbean (LAC)

            Middle East &               2                1                -         1
            North Africa
            (MENA)

            South Asia (SAR)            3                3                1         2

            East Asia & Pacific         7                7                2         1
            (EAP)

            Eastern Europe &            6                5                2         2
            Central Asia
            (ECA)
            Global                      14               9                2         4

                        TOTAL           60               46              15         14


        If we include the three proposals presented through the NSDS Window, the geographical
distribution is as follows:

            Region          Number of        Number of        Number of       Distribution
                            proposals        accepted         accepted or     by region
                                             proposals        conditionally   (in percentage)
                                                              accepted
                                                              proposals
            AFR                   14              5                  8            25.0 %

            LAC                   14              3                  4            12.5 %

            MENA                  1               0                  1            3.1 %

            SAR                   4               2                  4            12.5 %

            EAP                   9               4                  5            15.6 %
            ECA                   6               2                  4            12.5 %

            Global                15              2                  6            18.8 %

            TOTAL                 63              18                 32          100.0 %

                                                                                                14
        The total requested for the 63 proposals sent to the AU was $ 17.922 million. The budget
allocated for the 32 approved or conditionally approved proposals was $ 10.024 million (compared
to $ 2.14 in 2013). The AU assumes a return of 50 % on the deferred proposals or the proposals
returned (with further virtual review); in this case, $ 2.063 million will have to be added, i.e. a total
allocated budget of $ 12.087 million12.

       It is proposed to classify the proposals shortlisted by the TFSCB Administration Unit for
discussion by the IMC into six categories13:
1.      NSDS proposals
2.      Implementation of NSDS
3.      Growth areas proposed by the donors and priorities resulting from the BAPS and MDGs
4.      Other emerging issues
5.      Sector specific activities
6.      Miscellaneous


        The assignment of a project to a particular category is sometimes a subjective choice. This
classification, however, sheds light on the choices that led the AP to make a particular
recommendation.


1. NSDS proposals (2 new proposals)
       Proposals presented in this section concern not only new NSDS proposals, but also updates
of former NSDS (or Statistical Master Plans), or NSDS replacing “first generation” NSDS that did
not comply with the guidelines proposed by PARIS21 after some years of experience.
NSDS Window
Approved:        EAP: Mongolia – Preparation of a NSDS                 $ 90,000
                 SAR: Bhutan – Updating the NSDS                       $ 90,000
                                                     Total             $ 180,000
 4.1 % of the shortlisted proposals
 6.7 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
 1.8 % of the budget allocated

       The limited number of new proposals is due to the fact that a very large majority of
developing or transition countries have now prepared SNDS or SMP. But this conclusion is

12
   The average funding was $ 2.77 million during the three years 2011 – 2012 - 2013, below the funding observed in
the previous periods that were over $5 million every year.
13
 These six categories are different from the six ones used in the previous AP reports. It is therefore not possible to
make comparisons with the previous years.
                                                                                                                   15
somewhat misleading insofar as it confuses NSDS of the first and second generations. Efforts
should continue to be made by PARIS21 and the WB to encourage the countries to prepare more
comprehensive NSDS really adapted to the situation of the statistical system and to update, or re-
draft the NSDSs of the first generation. The initiative NSDS Guidelines 2.0 recently prepared by
PARIS21 will certainly increase the proposals for new, revised or updated NSDS in the coming
years.


2. Implementation of NSDS and Statistical Capacity Building Programs (10 new proposals)
       Proposals presented in this section concern methods on implementing validated NSDS but
also focusing on the enhancement of NSDS through advocacy, evaluation, etc. The proposals
aiming at building statistical capacities have also been added in this section, even if they don’t
make any reference to NSDS.

Non NSDS Spring Window
Approved:  AFR: Somalia – Statistical Capacity Building Program          $ 500,000
              AFR: Gambia – Statistical Capacity Building Project        $ 435,000
Conditionally Approved:
              EAP: Philippines – Updating the Statistical
                     Development Program                                 $ 500,000
              Global : ISI Support for participation in conferences,
                       workshops and short courses                       $ 500,000

Non NSDS Fall Window
Approved:     EAP: Mongolia – NSO Capacity Enhancement                   $ 480,000
Conditionally Approved:
              LAC: Guatemala – Improving quality and accessibility
                    Of data for evidence based decision making           $ 397,500
              ECA: Moldova – SCB                                         $ 300,000

                                                   Total                 $ 3,112,500
20,4 % of the presented proposals
20,0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
31,1 % of the budget allocated

Returned and virtual meeting (Non NSDS Fall Window)
              AFR: SACU – SCB
              Kenya – Rwanda: TF for SCB
              Benin: TF for SCB




                                                                                               16
           The proposals concerning the implementation of NSDS and statistical capacity building
   programs constitute, with the preparation of NSDS, the core orientation of the TFSCB14 since it
   has been created. The budget allocated for those two categories of proposals represents almost one
   third of the total allocated for the proposals made in 2014.


            The proposal presented by the ISI aiming at supporting statisticians from developing
   countries to international conferences, workshops or seminars through the TFSCB has been
   included in that section. It was recognized by the AP during its previous sessions as an important
   contribution to international co-operation by encouraging the participation of developing countries
   in the dialogue on the development of policy, framework, standards and methodologies on
   statistics. There is merit in funding such participation provided there is an effective contribution by
   the sponsored participants in the development of standards, methodologies and innovations in
   statistics and they become vehicles for knowledge transfer to the developing countries. During its
   2010 Fall meeting, the IMC took decisions on the principles, the budget allocation, the event
   selection process and the administrative process. In 201415, the ISI presented a global plan covering
   the two calendar years 2015 – 2016.


   3. Growth areas proposed by the TFSCB donors and the priorities resulting from the BAPS
   and MDGs (14 new proposals)
           To address the imbalance between demand and supply of timely and quality data, the World
   Bank President suggested in a speech pronounced in October 2012 to (a) invest in data and
   analytical tools building on the success of the Open Data Initiative and, (b) work with partners in
   building statistical capacity to ensure virtually all developing countries have timely and accurate
   data. Taking into consideration, this broad mandate established by the World Bank President, the
   growth areas proposed by TFSCB donors and the priorities resulting from the Busan Action Plan
   for Statistics (BAPS) and from the future MDGs’ framework, the AU prepared a note for discussion
   for the IMC meeting held in February, 2014. According to this note, special emphasis should be
   placed on:
1. Making government data more accessible by participating actively in the Bank policy on Open
   Data Readiness Assessment (ODRA) and Action Plan;
2. Improving the production and use of Gender Statistics
3. Improving the data foundation for measuring sustainable development
4. Funding innovative approach
5. Improving TFSCB’s results focus.


   14
     See also the recommendation # 1 made by the AP during its 11th meeting in 2014. According to this recommendation,
   the TFSCB should focus its priorities on five growth areas. Preparation and implementation of NSDS were presented
   as the first growth area for the future of the TFSCB.

   15
     In 2012, the ISI presented also a global plan covering the two calendar years 2013 – 2014. No proposal was
   consequently proposed in 2013.

                                                                                                                   17
          The proposals meeting this emphasis have been classified in this third section.

Non NSDS Spring Window
Approved:     LAC: Dominican Rep. – Strengthening Gender
              Statistics                                                      $ 225,000
              Global: 3rd Global ODRA                                         $ 350,000
Conditionally Approved:
                  ECA: Kosovo – Better Statistics for Decision Making         $ 180,000
                  Global: Open Data e-Learning                                $ 274,50016
                  AFR: Mali – Improving the quality and access of data        $ 450,000
                  AFR: Burkina Faso – ODRA and drought risks                  $ 300,000

Non NSDS Fall Window:
Approved:     Global: Integrating gender into NSDS                 $ 400,000
              AFR: African Open Data Regional Conference           $ 200,000
Conditionally Approved:
              Global: UNSD – Implementation of 2020 Census Program
              for the post-2015 Development Agenda                 $ 300,000

                                                              Total           $ 2,679,500
28.6 % of the presented proposals
30.0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
26.7 % of the budget allocated

Returned and Virtual Meeting (Non NSDS Spring Window):
             ECA: Belarus – Broadening Data Provision through
             Comprehensive On line System
Returned and Virtual Meeting (Non NSDS Fall Window):
             EAP: China – Capacity Building and Supporting Program
             for Open Data        Initiatives
             LAC: Dominican Rep.- Reusability of open data produced
             by INDOTEL

Rejected:         Global: Improvement of survey data quality and timeliness
                  of the data by using CAPI technology
                  Global: Enabling developing countries’ participation
                  in the Global Open Data agenda

4. Other emerging issues (5 new proposals)
       Proposals presented in this section refer to issues emerging from discussions in global
summits or UN meetings at global or regional level (health, education, CRVS …). The number of
proposals classified in this fourth category will certainly increase in the next future.
NSDS Window:

16
     Requested $ 485,000
                                                                                            18
Approved:         EAP: Secretariat of the SCP – Pacific Regional Data
                  Repository for Sustainable Energy for All
                  (PRDP for SE4ALL)                                      $ 229,910

Non NSDS Spring Window:
Approved:  LAC: Nicaragua – Capacity Building in Health Statistics $ 212,000
           LAC: Panama – Integrated National Health Statistical
           System                                                  $ 290,000

Non NSDS Fall Window:
Approved:  ECA: Moldova – Strengthening capacity of the Ministry
           of Education, Rayon authorities and schools                   $ 365,000


                                                            Total        $ 1,096,910


10.2 % of the presented proposals
13.3 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
10.9 % of the budget allocated

Rejected:         LAC: OLADE – Energy Statistics in the Caribbean


5. Sector specific issues (15 new proposals)
       Proposals presented in this section relate to specific statistical topics complementing the
preparation or the implementation of NSDS. As during its previous meetings, the AP notes that
financing sector specific activities may be an interesting and valuable complement to the NSDS,
provided that such proposals have been made in countries having adopted and validated a NSDS
and may contribute to statistical capacity building, at least in some of their components.


Non NSDS Spring Window:
Approved:     AFR: Zambia – Strengthening Capacity for Poverty
              and Economic Statistics                                    $ 250,000
Conditionally Approved:
              AFR: Lesotho – Improvement of methodology of HBS           $ 195,00017
              SAR: Pakistan – Measuring Poverty and Living Standards     $ 140,000
              SAR: Sri Lanka – Improving Poverty Estimation              $ 160,000
              Global: Ensuring Rapid Response for TFSCB Special
              Areas of Emphasis                                          $ 500,000

Non NSDS Fall Window:
Approved:  SAR: Bangladesh – Support of the Bureau of Stat. in
           improving the quality, frequency, and use of two
           important household surveys                                   $ 383,000

17
     Requested 395,000
                                                                                               19
              EAP: Cambodia – Enhancement of Poverty Analysis
              Capacity                                                 $ 349,300
Conditionally Approved:
              EAP: CIS – Developing capacities in NA, price statistics
              and PPP in the region                                    $ 390,000
              MENA: Harmonization of price statistics, and production
              of biennial PPP estimates in Western Asia                $ 388,410


                                                                      Total            $ 2,955,710


30.6 % of the presented proposals
30.0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved
29.5 % of the budget allocated

Returned and virtual meeting (Non NSDS Spring Window):
              Global: Standardized EITI Reporting
Returned and virtual meeting (Non NSDS Fall Window):
              EAP : Vietnam – Mongolia: SCP in Public Procurement18
              LAC: Bolivia – Living Well Indicators

Rejected:          Cambodia - Enhancement of Poverty Analysis Capacity
                   WAEMU – Designing harmonized household survey instruments



6. Miscellaneous (3 new proposals)
Rejected:          LAC: Peru – Improving the quality, accessibility and relevance of
                   National Statistics
                   AFR: Analytics for Results
                   LAC: Afrodescendants inclusion in National statistical Systems

6.1 % of the presented proposals
0 % of the proposals approved or conditionally approved and of the budget allocated




18
     There were two proposals (for Vietnam and for Mongolia). The IMC has recommended to merge these two proposals.

                                                                                                                20
Additional remarks:
The proposals not shortlisted after the stage 1 might be classified as follows:
3. Growth areas: Global – Open Data Transport; Global – Mainstreaming Open Data in WB
financed projects; Global – Improving Gender Statistics from Surveys19; Global – Open Data for
Businesses; UNESCO (LAC) – Improved measurement of gender indicators on science,
technology, engineering and mathematics; Global – Feasibility Study for a Global Open Data
Cloud
4. Other emerging issues: Nicaragua – Strengthening Vital Statistics System; UNESCO – Strategy
for STI in Balkan Countries; Brazil – Big Data for Maternal Health;
5. Sector specific issues: Colombia – Extractive Industry Data; Palestine – Informal sector and
informal employment
6. Miscellaneous: Brazil & Lusophone Africa




19
  It was proposed by the AU to merge this project with the one aiming at Integrating Gender into NSSs (see section
3) that was finally accepted.
                                                                                                               21
