Report No. 96863




Kazakhstan Trade Report

Kazakhstan - Improving the Trade Policy Framework, its
Management and its Regulations


Executive Summary


January 2014



Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region




Document of the World Bank
                     KAZAKHSTAN - GOVERNMENT FISCAL YEAR
                             January 1 – December 31

                               CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                         (Exchange Rate Effective as of May 29, 2015)

                                     Currency Unit Tenge
                                     US$1 = 185.50 Tenge

                                 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
                                      Metric System

                           ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

ADR          Alternative Dispute Resolution
AFTA         Association of Southeast Asian Nations Free Trade Area
AFTA-CER     Association of Southeast Asian Nations Free Trade Area - Closer Economic Relations
AKTISA       Association of Southern Asian Nations - Korea Agreement on Trade in Services
ASEAN        Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BEC          Broad Economic Classification
BKR-CU       Belarus-Kazakhstan-Russia Customs Union
CEM          Country Economic Memorandum
CER          Closer Economic Relations (Trade Agreement Between Australia and New Zealand)
CES          Common Economic Space
CET          Common External Tariff
CGE          Computable General Equilibrium
CIS          Commonwealth of Independent States
CTPD         Center of Trade Policy Development
CU           Customs Union
DFTR         Department of Foreign Trade Regulations
DIEI         Department of International Economic Integration and Regulations
EAC          East African Community
ECA          Europe and Central Asia
EEC          Eurasian Economic Commission
EU           European Union
EU27         All EU member states except Croatia
FTA          Free Trade Agreement
GDP          Gross Domestic Product
GMO          Genetically Modified Organism
GOST         Gosudarstvennyy Standart (State Standard)
HS           Harmonized System
ITC          International Trade Center
MEBP         Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning
MES          Ministry of Education and Science
MFA          Ministry of Foreign Affairs
MINT         Ministry of Industry and New Technologies
MLT          Maximum Tolerance Limit
NACEK        National Center of Certification and Expertise
Non-CU CIS   Non-Customs Union Commonwealth of Independent States
NTM          Non-Tariff Measure
OECD         Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
PSI          Pre-Shipment Inspection
PTA          Preferential Trade Agreement
QC           Quantity Control
ROO      Rules of Origin
RTA      Regional Trade Agreement
SEZ      Special Economic Zone
SME      Small and Medium Enterprises
SPS      Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary
TBT      Technical Barriers to Trade
UNCTAD   United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
USTR     Office of the United States Trade Representative
WTO      World Trade Organization




                        Vice President:        Laura Tuck
                      Country Director:        Saroj Kumar Jha
                 Acting Sector Director:       Roumeen Islam
                       Sector Manager:         Ivailo Izvorski
                      Country Manager:         Sebnem Akkaya
                     Task Team Leader:         Dorsati Madani
                                                                          CONTENTS

Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................................................................i
Executive Summary ...................................................................................................................................................... ii
I.          The Trade Policy Framework .......................................................................................................................... ii
II.         Improving Trade Policy Management ........................................................................................................... vii
III.        Improving the Regulatory Environment For Non-Tariff Measures ..................................................................x



                                                                              TABLE

Table 1: Tariffs Will Fall Substantially With WTO Membership ................................................................................iv
Table 2: Short-Term Priority Actions .......................................................................................................................... xv


                                                                            FIGURES

Figure 1: Exports are Driven by Mining/Petroleum Products ..................................................................................... iii
Figure 2: In Imports EU Loses Market, China Gains and CU Moderates ................................................................... iii
Figure 3: NTM Coverage and Frequency Ratios ...........................................................................................................x
Figure 4: Non-Tariff Measures are Potentially Burdensome in Kazakhstan .................................................................x
Figure 5: Four Sectors Have the Highest Shares of Products Affected by Multiple NTMs .........................................xi


                                                                              BOXES

Box 1: The Early Impact of Joining the Belarus-Kazakhstan-Russia Customs Union ................................................ iii
Box 2: Status of Negotiations for WTO Accession .......................................................................................................v
Box 3: Kazakhstan’s Trade Policy Objectives ........................................................................................................... viii
Box 4: Good Regulatory Practices in Trade ...............................................................................................................xiv
                                         Acknowledgements

This report was prepared by a team led by Dorsati Madani, Senior Country Economist, Europe and
Central Asia Region at the World Bank.

The team is grateful to the Government of Kazakhstan for its support of this work since its early stages.
The team benefited from continued interactions and guidance received from Yerbol Orynbayev, Deputy
Prime Minister; Kairat Kalimbetov, former Deputy Prime Minister and current Governor of the National
Bank of Kazakhstan; Timur Zhaksylykov, Vice-Minister of Economy and Budget Planning; Madina
Abylkassymova, Vice-Minister of Economy and Budget Planning; Government officials responsible for
trade at the Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning, and the Director and staff of the Center for Trade
Policy Development. The team also met with the private sector and civil society organizations in Astana
and Almaty and thanks them for their time and thoughtful views. The report was discussed with
government officials from different ministries and agencies during July and November, 2013.

The work was carried out under the overall supervision of Ivailo Izvorski, Sector Manager, (ECSP1)
Roumeen Islam, Acting Sector Director, Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Sector Unit
(ECSPE). Saroj Kumar Jha, Country Director for Central Asia, and Sebnem Akkaya, Country Manager
for Kazakhstan provided guidance and supported the team. The team is grateful to the International Trade
Research Department of the World Bank for its outstanding support during the preparation of this report.

The first note benefitted from the analytical work of Thomas Farole, Miles Light and Oleksandr
Shepotylo. The second note benefitted from the analytical work and a background paper by of Sebastian
Saez and Robert Devlin. The third note benefitted from the analytical work and background papers by
Mariem Malouche, Madina Kukenova, Gaukhar Balykbayeva, Michael Jensen and Paolo Vergano.

Paul Brenton, Ekaterina Vashakmadze, Borko Handjiski and Elena Ianchovichina were peer reviewers
and provided useful guidance to the team. Ilyas Sarsenov and Evgenij Najdov provided support during the
missions and insightful advice on the content of the report. Francisco Carneiro provided useful comments
on the first draft to the report. Gulmira Akshatyrova and Xeniya Novozhilova, from the Astana country
office and Oxana Shmidt and Valeriya Marufi from the Almaty country office provided excellent support
for the team during the missions associated with this task. Gulmira Akshatyrova in Astana, Sarah Nankya
Babirye and Zakia Nekaien-Nowrouz in Washington DC provided high quality administrative support.
Sarah Nankya Babirye provided superb assistance in formatting the overall report.




                                                    i
Kazakhstan - Improving the Trade Policy Framework, its
Management and its Regulations

                                          Executive Summary

1.       The main message of this report is that if Kazakhstan wants to take advantage of global
integration and diversification opportunities, the government needs to improve its trade policy framework,
its management and its regulations. Kazakhstan’s economy is now integrating into the Belarus-
Kazakhstan-Russia Customs Union (BKR-CU) and the government is addressing an accelerated schedule
to integrate further into the Common Economic Space by 2015. It is also finalizing accession to the WTO
while its trade strategy includes a number of free trade agreements to be negotiated. It is an active
member of the Central Asia Region Economic Cooperation (CAREC). These agreements have the
potential to provide unprecedented opportunities for the Kazakhstani economy to benefit from regional
and global economic integration. In fact, with its expected accession to the WTO the country will be
finalizing its first generation trade reforms (tariff reforms) and should start focusing more on its second
generation trade reforms. These include trade facilitation, regulations and non-tariff measures,
competition policy, and other behind the border factors. These behind the border factors are strongly
affected by the quality of policy making, that is to say, the trade policy institutions, and in turn strongly
affect the competitiveness of the Kazakhstani producers.

2.    This report is composed of three policy notes that discuss how to improve the trade policy
framework, management and regulations:

3.       Note 1 is on the trade policy framework and recommends joining the WTO on a tariff schedule
that is more liberal than Russia’s. If the authorities are interested in joining a FTA, they should carefully
assess the costs and benefits of such agreements before negotiations. If negotiating an FTA, the
authorities should adopt a design that includes (i) low external MFN tariffs; (ii) few sectoral and product
exemptions; (iii) nonrestrictive rules of origin; and (iv) measures to facilitate trade.

4.       Note 2 postulates that to benefit more fully from the WTO membership and future regional or
bilateral agreements, the institutional framework for trade policy management will need a clearer strategic
vision, better coordination within the government and with private sector, and enhanced human capacity.

5.       Note 3 suggests that for the private sector to benefit from global integration and diversification,
the government should ease the burden of regulations that affect trade (non-tariff measures (NTMs)). This
can be achieved by reducing the number of NTMs, their restrictiveness and cost; and by building
institutional capacity to assess and properly regulate them.




        Join the WTO on a tariff schedule that is more liberal than Russia’s and carefully assess
        whether any new trade agreement would further enhance the country’s export and
        diversification opportunities.

6.      In helping assess the current trade policy framework, note one answers four specific policy
questions: How has trade performed since early 2011? What are the consequences for Kazakhstan if it
were to adopt the Russian WTO accession tariff schedule? Should there be concern in Kazakhstan about


                                                     ii
the source of its intermediate imports? Should Kazakhstan pursue new free trade agreements (FTAs) soon
after WTO accession?


Kazakhstan’s trade-weighted average tariff protection levels nearly doubling from 6.72 to 11.51 percent as a result
of implementing the Common External Tariff (CET). Tariff dispersion measured by standard deviation of the
average effective rate increased as well. A recent World Bank report (World Bank, 2012) predicted that the increase
in the external tariff level would lead to a 0.2 percent loss in welfare per year (as percent of consumption) as of mid-
2011. Besides the impact on tariffs, the CU had important effects on non-tariff measures (NTMs). Traditionally a
relatively open economy, Kazakhstan has now aligned its regulatory framework (procedures on declaring goods,
customs valuations, and import licensing as well as phyto-sanitary measures (SPS) and technical barriers to trade
(TBT) measures) to the more restrictive Russian standards and technical regulations. The key to offsetting the
negative net impact of the CU is to make substantial progress in the areas of trade facilitation and easing of non-
tariff barriers. If enough progress in reforming these NTMs is made, it could lead to 1.5 percent in welfare gains (as
percent of consumption) per year to Kazakhstan, while without reform Kazakhstan would continue to lose out.
Source: D. Tarr and J. Jensen, 2012. Assessment of Costs and Benefits of the Customs Union for Kazakhstan.

          Kazakhstan’s trade performance has experienced significant adjustments since 2010

7.       Kazakhstan experienced trade diversion upon joining the Customs Union in 2010, but this
initial impact may be abating. Overall Kazakhstani exports are still driven by demand from petroleum
products and by a rebound in the European Union (EU) demand and increased exports to the rest of
Europe and Central Asia (ECA), including Turkey (Figure 1). China remains a solid client. After a surge
in 2010, Kazakhstan’s exports to Customs Union (CU) partners were declining through most of 2012, a
trend likely reflecting the adjustments to new regional regulations. Data for January-August 2013 suggest
a slight recovery in exports to the CU partners, but it is preliminary and should be assessed with caution.



                                    (Percent of total)                                                                              (Percent of total)
                 Kazakhstan's Exports by Markets                                                                           Kazakhstan's Imports by Markets
                                EU27
     60                                                                                                            60
                                CU Partners
                                China
     50                                                                                                            50
                                Non-CU CIS
                                Rest of Europe and ECA incl Turkey                                                 40
     40
                                Rest of Asia
     30                         North America                                                                      30
     20                                                                                                            20
     10                                                                                                            10
      0                                                                                                             0
          2000
                  2001
                         2002
                                  2003
                                         2004
                                                2005
                                                       2006
                                                              2007
                                                                     2008
                                                                            2009
                                                                                   2010
                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                 2012




Source: Statistical Agency of Kazakhstan.                                                                     Source: Statistical Agency of Kazakhstan.

8.     On the import side, while Kazakhstan experienced trade diversion - an initial surge of
imports from the CU partners in 2010-11, other global partners will be driving Kazakhstan’s
imports over the longer term. First, much of the import surge from the CU appears to be thanks to a
doubling of transport equipment from 6 percent of total imports to 12 percent of total imports share (HS-
2 import category). Secondly, Figure 2 shows a rather pronounced shift of import partners from the EU to
China as far back as 2005. This shift was accentuated after the creation of the CU: it impacted negatively


                                                                                                        iii
the EU-27 exports to Kazakhstan in almost all HS-2 import categories, while China made inroads in
almost all the same sectoral markets. This shift is a reflection of how competitive China remained in view
of new CU tariffs affecting its imports compared to the EU. Finally, the role of suppliers that have a lower
market share in Kazakhstan, such as North America and the rest of Asia, remains steady in the import
structure.

9.      If Kazakhstan were to join the WTO by adopting a tariff schedule similar to that used by
Russia, tariff rates would decline substantially. The current un-weighted mean tariff rates would
decline from 10.6 percent at year-end 2012 to 7.9 percent by the end of the decade. Average trade-
weighted rates will fall from 8.9 percent back down to 5.5 percent by 2020, similar to the pre-CU rates of
5.3 percent in 2009. Most of the reductions will occur by the year 2016. This change of the tariff structure
is expected to lead to a rebalancing of trade away from the CU and towards global partners.


                                           (Percent unless otherwise noted)
                                                         Mean                  Standard Deviation
                                  Tariff
               Year                                            Trade                         Trade
                                  lines         Simple                        Simple
                                                              weighted                      weighted
               2009             10,853           6.72           5.33            9.8            8.3
               2012             11,313          10.64           8.93          13.80           8.77
               WTO-2020         11,557           7.89           5.48           9.26           5.01

               Source: Official data and World Bank calculations.
               Note: 2009 statistics are based on author’s computations performed for World Bank report
               (2012). They use the same methodology; therefore can be compared with the computations
               performed in this study. Trade weights are computed based on import statistics of
               Kazakhstan for 2009 (2009 rates) and 2012. (2012 and 2020 rates).

        Joining the WTO, based on a tariff schedule similar to that used by Russia, would lead to gains
        for the Kazakhstani economy

10.     Reducing tariffs would engender gains for the economy, and reducing trade facilitation
costs would enhance these gains. The analysis finds that tariff reductions will improve aggregate welfare
(as percent of GDP) by 0.1 percent per year. Aggregate trade grows by 0.5 percent by 2020 while tariff
revenues as percent of GDP will drop by 0.9 percent. If in addition to reducing tariffs, trade facilitation
costs are reduced by one-third, the welfare gains will increase to 0.9 percent of the GDP. Aggregate trade
will grow by 0.9 percent by 2020.

11.      Finalizing WTO negotiations in the disciplines other than market access (tariffs) will help
advance the accession process. Negotiations on a number of other important issues still need to be
finalized. Obtaining WTO members’ final agreement on the draft services agreement will be positive
outcome for the Government. Pushing ahead with the complex negotiations on the regulations and
practices governing sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures and technical regulations is also
necessary. Finally, the authorities still need to conclude negotiations on WTO-inconsistent trade-related
investment measures (TRIMS), including those related to state-owned enterprises, local content
requirements and discriminatory VAT preferences; and trading rights and treatment of natural persons.
Given that Kazakhstan is a CU member, it needs to address the added complexity of ensuring that these
agreements are compliant to the CU policy framework or take the necessary steps to adjust the CU
frameworks to these new agreements.


                                                         iv
Joining the WTO should reverse the initial trade diversion experienced in 2010-2011, including the
sourcing of intermediate inputs

12.      These tariff rate reductions make Kazakhstani market competitive for a more global pool of
intermediate inputs again. New analysis suggests that the tariff structure will revert back partially to the
2009 levels. Average trade weighted tariff rate on intermediate inputs in 2020 will be within 0.5 percent
of the 2009 rates, while that of 2020 capital goods rate will remain well above the 2009 rates. The tariff
schedule in 2020 is more conducive for developing of manufacturing industry, due to larger positive
impact on productivity. At the same time, the pre-CU tariff schedule of Kazakhstan had been even more
liberal for importers of capital and intermediate goods. Kazakhstan should consider acceding to the WTO
on more liberal tariff schedule than Russia did.

13.     Accession to the WTO has a strong rebalancing effect with imports from the EU or rest of
the world replacing Russia and the CIS countries. The base case results from the analysis show that in
general, total imports rise, but they rise significantly for non CIS, and non-CU trading partners. On the
other hand, total imports from Russia and other neighboring trade partners fall, sometimes significantly.
This shift in import patterns is particularly strong in sectors where barriers had been high, and where
potential trade volume shifts are large. Processed foods, basic metals, metal products, and tobacco
products are examples of such sectors.


Kazakhstan applied for WTO accession on January 29, 1996. A working party was created on February 6, 1996 to
help support the accession process. Negotiations moved ahead until 2008, when Kazakhstan focused on launching
the Russia-Belarus-Kazakhstan Custom Union by January 1, 2010. Since 2010, the authorities have intensified
their re-engagement in the WTO accession negotiations and are now expected to join the organization in 2014.
The country was considered to be at an advanced stage of negotiations in June 2013. The Working Party on
Kazakhstan’s Accession to the WTO consists of 43 members of the WTO, 30 of which have signed bilateral goods
market access negotiations with Kazakhstan. Of these 30, 14 have also reached a bilateral market access
agreement in Services. The authorities are said to have a consolidated draft services schedule and as well as a
consolidated draft goods tariff schedule, and have proposed a timeline for making their agricultural subsidies
WTO compatible (July 1, 2018) and binding export subsidies at zero upon accession.
As of December 2013, however, the authorities still need to negotiate a number of critical issues to finalize the
accession package. The principal hurdle in completing Kazakhstan’s market access negotiations is the tariff
schedule. The tariff negotiations involve resolving discrepancies between bilateral market access agreements
negotiated by Kazakhstan with WTO members prior to joining the Custom Union, Russia’s schedule o f
commitments and the common external tariff of the customs union of Belarus, Russia and Kazakhstan. WTO
members did not accept the methodology for adjustment proposed in July 2013 by Kazakhstan. Additionally, the
authorities need to finalize negotiations on the tariff rate quota volumes and administration and export duties; the
regulations and practices governing sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures and technical regulations; WTO-
inconsistent trade-related investment measures (TRIMS), including those embedded in state-owned enterprises, on
local content requirements and discriminatory VAT preferences; and trading rights and treatment of natural
persons.
Source: World Bank Staff.

         Kazakhstan should first accede to the WTO and prepare for the upcoming CES in 2015 before
         launching negotiations for new FTAs.

14.     Economic theory and practical considerations suggest launching new FTA negotiations may
be premature. First, numerous economic analyses suggest that joining WTO first and then a free trade
agreement is more welfare enhancing for a country. In the case of Kazakhstan, recent World Bank
analyses find results that are aligned with this conclusion. So Joining the WTO would be the first best

                                                         v
option for Kazakhstan. Also, implementation of the WTO commitments and the upcoming transformation
of the Custom Union into a common economic space will take time and human and financial resources. In
fact, substantial analytical work, policy and legal reforms and capacity building will be needed to
translate CU/CES and WTO commitments into national policies and regulations. Given this already
challenging agenda launching new FTA negotiations and agreeing to further commitments may not be an
optimal policy in the next few years.

15.      Furthermore, international experience suggests that integration is complex and prone to set
backs and even failures. The Mercado Común del Sur (also known as MERCOSUR) and South Asia
FTA (SAFTA) are two examples of FTAs that have not flourished. Even though regional integration in
the EU has spanned 50 years and is considered a success in many aspects, it still faces difficulties and
setbacks, as witnessed by the current multi-year financial crisis. ASEAN has decided to not try the full
integration scheme of the EU and is moving at an even slower, more differentiated pace it calls “The
ASEAN Way?.

16.     If the authorities decide to pursue an FTA, they should first undertake an economic
evaluation of the best markets for Kazakhstan to target. It would be useful to assess and prioritize the
proposed free trade agreements negotiations with Turkmenistan, the European Free Trade Agreement
(EFTA), and Serbia, and preferential trade agreements with Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Afghanistan, and the
Gulf countries based on their economic value to Kazakhstan. Generally, Kazakhstan should seek trade
with countries with which it has a high complementarity of products. Quite simply there is more
economic interest to trade as the export baskets of the countries are sufficiently different. For instance,
within ASEAN, a relatively successful FTA, product complementarity for Indonesia is 48, Malaysia 63,
Philippines 60, and Singapore 63. For Kazakhstan, analysis shows that product complementarity is below
20 with the Central Asian economies, Russia, and Mongolia. China and Belarus are the only country with
which Kazakhstan has a complementarity score over 30, which is low on a scale of zero to 100. So if
there is interest in new FTAs, it behooves the authorities to investigate options beyond this group of
countries, for instance, with East Asia or Middle East.

17.     Also, best practice suggests that before negotiating, Kazakhstan should undertake a
comprehensive analysis of the potential impacts of FTAs or other types of regional integration
agreements. This would include a thorough social, environmental and economic analysis to identify the
potential positive and negative impacts of such an agreement. Such an analysis should include qualitative
and quantitative analytical methods, economy wide as well as sectoral computable general equilibrium
models, use of partial equilibrium analysis such as gravity models to predict trade patterns and poverty
and environment assessments. Systematic public consultation is a key element of such an assessment.
This methodological approach is time consuming and expensive, but ultimately worthwhile as it provides
quantitative and qualitative assessments of the costs and benefits of joining an FTA. EU has undertaken a
number of such comprehensive analyses, including the 2009 EU-India FTA and the 2012 EU-Georgia
FTA analyses.

18.      In summary, before joining new FTAs, authorities should consider the following issues in
depth:

            What are the objectives in joining the FTA?
            Does the country have the institutional capacity to properly negotiate and implement new
             FTAs?
            Has there been an in-depth study of the potential impacts of joining new FTA?



                                                    vi
            Has there been extensive consultation with all parties who will be potentially affected by the
             FTA, including private sector and civil society?
19.      If negotiating an FTA, the authorities should adopt a design that includes (i) low external
MFN tariffs; (ii) few sectoral and product exemptions; (iii) nonrestrictive rules of origin; and
(iv) trade facilitation measures (including those related to non-tariff measures).




        To take better advantage of global opportunities would mean more a prioritized trade
        policy strategy, improved institutional capacity and more effective public-private
        consultation

        The trade policy strategy can benefit from further prioritization

20.      Kazakhstan has an ambitious trade policy strategy and needs strong supportive capacity
take advantage of its potential benefits. Trade policy is a central and well integrated instrument of
diversification for the economy as outlined in the vision ‘Kazakhstan-2050’. To implement the trade
strategy successfully, it would be useful to first fully analyze the implications of membership in the CU,
the WTO, and the creation of the Common Economic Space (CES) in rapid sequence. It is then important
to take the time to implement these agreements and monitor and evaluate their effects on the economy.
The different sectors of the economy will be impacted differentially, firms will need time to adjust to new
regulations and incentives, workers need to assess their skills and opportunities in the new economic
environment and households will be faced with new consumption choices. In the medium term, the
evaluation of these agreements will provide the authorities with lessons to help shape Kazakhstan’s future
trade policy strategy.

21.      The authorities should further prioritize the objectives of the trade strategy. For instance, is
there a strategy and related implementation approach to take advantage of CU membership and the future
WTO accession? Have the authorities assessed the economics of which FTA to negotiate first? Should
providing support to reimburse exporters have priority over enforcing treaty obligations to resolve trade
disputes (Box 2)? This priority setting should go hand in hand with realistic action plans and a clear
methodology to monitor and evaluate the progress of the different components of the action plan.

22.      International experience suggests there is no “best? practice model for trade policy making.
Successful trade policy outcomes seem not to be related to who is responsible for trade policy. Rather, the
quality of the trade policymaking process defines the successful outcome. This includes: how trade policy
is designed, implemented, and administered, together with human and infrastructure resources.1 A high
level of coordination at the different levels of design, implementation, and administration matters as well
as the willingness to adjust the policymaking process according to the challenges of the trade
environment.

23.      The institutional framework for trade policy is well developed but can be improved to help
implement CU/CES and WTO commitments. Trade policy is developed through a tiered process. At
the top level, a Deputy Prime Minister overseas the definition of broad policy objectives and mandates. It
would be beneficial to ensure the foreign policy dimension is taken into account early on in the

1
  There are no “pure? models. We classified the countries within one model on the basis of where the trade policy
“function? is located, including negotiations. The U.S. model limits the USTR function to negotiations. Policy
making is a shared responsibility of the Executive and the Congress.

                                                       vii
development and implementation of trade policy. Also, Kazakhstan should have a permanent Kazakhstani
representation in Moscow responsible for CU/CES affairs.


The Trade Policy of Kazakhstan is focused on promotion of export development and diversification and protection
of the country’s interests in global trade through:
     Completing accession to the WTO in order to ensure market access and attract foreign investment.
     Finalizing the Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan CES by 2015. This agreement along with the current CU is seen as a
      major platform for the development and diversification of exports as well as the attraction of foreign
      investment.
     The initiation of negotiations of free trade agreements with Turkmenistan, EFTA, and Serbia, and preferential
      trade agreements with Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Afghanistan, and the Gulf countries.
     Enforcing treaty obligations to resolve trade disputes or to undertake rules-based retaliatory measures as
      necessary.
     Undertaking research aimed at proposing to the Eurasian Economic Commission needed adjustments of the
      Common External Tariff to protect domestic industry or facilitate needed imports.
     Providing informational and support services to exporters, including analysis of world trade trends, reviews of
      countries’ economies, industries and products, develop trademarks, promote abroad enterprises and their
      products and provide specialist training in export management.
     Providing financial support to reimburse exporters for part of the costs of promotional activities aboard and the
      development of new products for foreign markets as well as provide export credit and insurance.
     Using diplomatic missions and the assignment of special counselors to those missions to develop new
      distribution channels for Kazakhstan exporters.
Source: Official documents.


24.      At the second level of trade policy development, the MEBP is responsible for coordinating
the overall negotiation process, and leading the CU/CES negotiations. There is a bifurcation of
responsibilities where negotiations are concerned. One of the Vice-Ministers at MEBP is in charge of
conducting and coordinating negotiations and other work in the CU/CES while the Minister of Economic
Integration oversees the WTO accession negotiations. At this level, the strategic alignment of the trade
negotiations process and the national development strategies should be emphasized. There is little
evidence of a tight correspondence between trade negotiation strategies and the strategies that focus on
development and diversification of goods/services for export and import substitutes.

25.      Trade policy coordination at the MEBP can be improved. The two departments supporting the
negotiations, the Department of Foreign Trade Regulations and the Department of International Economic
Integration are relatively small (approximately 25 persons each) for the heavy tasks of supporting the
parallel negotiations with CU and WTO. Furthermore, many of the topics in these and all trade
negotiations are thematically similar, covering agriculture, services, goods trade, competition,
government procurement, movement of labor and the like. Therefore, the authorities may wish to consider
consolidating the international trade department into one, organized around thematic areas. This would
help leverage knowledge and capacity across these different negotiations.

26.    The third level of decision making on trade issues takes place at other ministries or at the
agency level. Currently, although coordination among the relevant ministries is intense, it often seems to
be mainly in response to a specific request and therefore ad-hoc and irregular. The consultation and
coordination process among ministries and agencies can be strengthened in several ways. First, best


                                                          viii
practice suggests permanent working groups organized in a thematic approach to consult and coordinate
on trade related issues. Also, it communication among ministries can be improved by ensuring that
information flows both ways between the MEBP and sectoral ministries, with sectoral staff receiving
feedback about the outcome of their contributions and the status of the negotiations. This will also allow
these sectoral experts to be more effective in any follow-on contributions as the negotiations progress. It
is good practice to establish focal points for CU/CES issues to improve follow-through and coordination.
An option is to expand these focal points from one person to small dedicated institutionalized secretariats
with backup office support.

27.      To benefit from export and diversification opportunities presented by these integration
efforts, the authorities will need to build analytical, institutional and negotiations capacity within
the government. The MEBP would benefit from increased human resources to effectively perform its
responsibilities in the areas of trade negotiations. The number of staff should be increased, especially
specialists in the thematic areas under negotiations. The same can be said of the Center for Trade Policy
Development (CTPD), which provides extensive analytical and policy support to the authorities in trade
negotiations. As the Center is growing, it may wish to consider adjusting its organizational structure to
reflect better its responsibilities. This would involve creating a dedicated research department, a legal
department on trade law, a program evaluation department as well as re-organizing the other departments
around thematic and regional issues. There is need for world class trade lawyers and trade economists.
Aside from the number of experts needed, a skills audit will help determine the mix of current vs. needed
skills.

28.      More broadly training would be useful for all actors implicated in trade and trade policy
making and implementation. General and specialized technical training will help the authorities to take
better advantage of their rights and advantages in international and regional arena and ensure a
correspondingly advantageous institutional framework for private sector to do the same. Training/capacity
building can be more specifically structured as follows. In the short term the government could secure en
situ specialized and general training from international universities or institutes. For the medium term it is
essential to foster development of international trade-related curriculums/degrees in law and economics at
domestic universities. Finally, it is necessary to upgrade language skills. The dominant language of trade
and international business is English.

        Improving public-private consultations and capacity building within the private sector will help
        it take full advantage of the global and regional integration efforts.

29.      While the principle of public-private consultations is heeded in Kazakhstan, the nature of
the consultation can improve through better information sharing and more content-rich regular
consultations. The majority of the private sector has not been an active partner in the public-private
consultation up to now, and some have noted that when consulted the process has been ad-hoc and not
very informative. Looking forward, a number of actions can strengthen the consultative process around
the trade policy agenda. It would be useful to educate and train the private sector about the effects of trade
agreements to help it take advantage of new economic opportunities. To improve public outreach, the
authorities would benefit from a new communications program to disseminate the government’s trade
policy and strategy. The authorities should consider different types of consultation mechanism including
formal and informal networks, structured, time limited/permanent. In trade negotiations the private sector
should mirror the thematic nature of the trade agenda.

30.    If effectively operationalized, the new National Chamber of Entrepreneurs is expected to
help substantially reform and strengthen the consultation process in structure and content. A July
2013 law created the Chamber, which has replaced ATAMEKEN. In principle the new organization can
overcome some of the limitations of the previous set-up. The compulsory membership and dues of the

                                                     ix
National Chamber should help alleviate the financing bottleneck that the ATAMEKEN experienced and
which limited its ability to dialogue with the government on the issues facing national businesses and
provide collective services and analysis to the business community. The organizational links between the
National Chamber and regional entities also should enhance coordination of business positions in the
national dialogue and provide opportunities to strengthen the capacities of the regions to participate.
However, development of other operational details not set out in the law—e.g., transparency, mechanisms
for evaluation of the Chamber’s programs and performance, etc.—and the effectiveness of execution,
including socially responsible use of the government veto if and when needed, will determine the quality
of public-private consultation and policy outcomes.




            For the private sector to benefit fully from WTO membership and regional and bilateral
            agreements, the government should simplify the regulatory environment.

31.      While only about 55 percent of tariff lines are currently affected by non-tariff measures
(NTMs), the risk of duplication and burdensome administrative procedures are high. The tariff
lines affected by NTMs represent around 60 percent of overall import value in 2012.2 In Kazakhstan, half
of the products for which an NTM applies are affected by a single type of NTMs (Figure 4). By
comparison, in higher income economies such as the EU and Japan, more than 90 percent of the products
for which an NTM applies are affected by one to two NTMs, with more than 70 percent affected by only
one NTM. Agri-food products and chemicals have the highest shares of products subject to multiple
NTMs (Figure 5). In fact, Ninety-four percent of Kazakhstan’s current NTMs are concentrated under four
ministries: Ministry of Health (35 percent), Ministry of Agriculture (35 percent), Ministry of Economics
and Budget Planning (13 percent), and Ministry of Industry (10 percent).



                                 (Percent)                                                               (Percent)

                                                                               100%
             China
                                                                                90%
    European Union                                                              80%
             Brazil                                                             70%
            Mexico                                                              60%
        Kazakhstan                                                              50%
          Indonesia                                                             40%
         Venezuela                                                              30%
              Chile                                                             20%
                                                                                10%
              Japan
                                                                                 0%
                      0     20         40      60     80      100   120                 CHN    BRA     VEN    IDN     KAZ     JPN     EUN

                      coverage ratio        frequency ratio                               1 NTM      2 NTMs     3 NTMs      4+ NTMs


Source: Official data. World Bank staff calculations, 2013.                   Source: Official data. World Bank staff calculations, 2013.




2
  The data base was created in 2012 and updated in 2013 by the Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning, with the
assistance of the World Bank.
3
  The frequency ratio of NTMs captures the percentage of products that are subject to one or more NTMs..

                                                                          x
                                                     (Percent)

                                                ratio multiple NTMs
                                                                                                93%
                                                                                          87%
                                                                                67% 71%


                                                                      23% 23%
                                                     15% 16%
                         3%    8%    8%   8% 11% 13%
                   0%




      Source: Official data and World Bank staff calculations.

32.      Joining the CU has led to a large number of regulatory changes, among them five new NTM
challenges stand out. These are: (i) issuance of more stringent regulations; (ii) additional mandatory
certifications, (iii) new state product registration requirements; (iv) the new requirement of registering
third country suppliers; and (v) the prevalence of quantitative controls. Compliance with these
requirements may be very costly for both companies seeking to export and those that source their inputs
abroad, especially in emerging and developing countries. Kazakhstan may end up hurting its own
competitiveness by making it difficult for domestic producers and exporters to access critical inputs in a
timely fashion.

        Design and administer NTMs to support trade and economic diversification

33.      The authorities should carefully assess the effects of more stringent new regulations on the
private sector. When adopting a new regulation, policy motivation, international experience and WTO
commitments, local conditions, technical capacity, and economic impact – including addition cost to trade
trade- should be considered. Measures that are designed or administrated without adequate analysis,
education, lead-time or supporting quality infrastructure will likely increase unnecessarily the cost of
imports and may affect the structure of the national market. They may also deter imports and decrease the
variety of products available in the local market. This is particularly pertinent for Kazakhstan since it
relies heavily on imported goods not only for final consumption but also for production of final goods. In
this context, some new CU regulations are considered too stringent and badly adapted to the technical
capacity of Kazakhstani local producers. For examples, the draft CU regulation for milk and dairy
products appears not to take into account the realities of the Kazakhstani milk industry and its quality
infrastructure. Introduction of this regulation may lead to a restructuring of the Kazakhstani milk industry
and affect consumer food safety. Although the new requirements may be justified, existing laboratory
methods for detection of powdered milk in the liquid milk are rather expensive, and there are no
laboratories in Kazakhstan that possesses these technologies. So clearly, time, investment and training
will be needed to prepare the Kazakhstani industry for such a major change.




                                                        xi
           In the short to medium run, reducing the most restrictive NTMs and simplifying the procedural
           constraints for others will help the private sector.

34.     In the short to medium term, reducing the most restrictive NTMs and simplifying the
procedural constraints will help the private sector. According to the NTM survey, about 90 percent
of the burdensome NTMs applied to imports are accompanied by procedural obstacles.

           Reduce the number of the trade restrictive and costly NTMs prevalent in Kazakhstan.
35.     The government should review the justification and the cost and benefit of some of the
current quantitative restrictions and licenses, and the important number of export licenses. These
measures should be eliminated or replaced by more transparent and less discretionary alternative
measures such as tariffs. This effort could be led by the ministry issuing and administering these
measures, or by a more neutral structure such as the public-private consultation committee. The latter
would provide recommendations to the responsible ministry based on data analysis and consultations with
the private sector. If it is deemed that the regulations are necessary, the focus of the reform should be on
simplifying the processes and procedures to complete them.

           Limit the number of mandatory standards
36.     The adoption of mandatory standards and certification of conformity should be strictly
limited. Stringent technical measures can bring benefits to the consumers in terms of safety and quality of
products. However, they can have negative effect on local production if the capacity of local enterprises is
incompatible with new requirements and local technical quality infrastructure cannot support them.
Before a new technical regulation is adopted, its effects should be carefully analyzed and –if necessary,
mitigative measures identified. This will also allow the authorities to see whether these effects can be
addressed and solved at the national level or they require a solution at the CU level. The technical
solutions should be sought through careful analysis and negotiation with the CU partner countries.

           Simplify the conformity assessment requirements for SPS and TBT measures

37.     Kazakhstan uses multiple forms of conformity assessments requirements that translate in
increased cost and delays for the private sector, hurting their trade competiveness. The government
should rationalize the requirements, avoid duplicative procedures and controls. Conformity assessment
procedures can facilitate trade by increasing consumer confidence if done without excessive time and
cost. But conformity assessment procedures can raise barriers when there is a duplication of costs in
different markets for essentially identical tests against the same or equivalent standards. Options include
mutual recognition agreements, recognition of supplier’s declaration of conformity, unilateral recognition
of conformity assessment results from other countries, and voluntary agreements between conformity
assessment bodies in different countries.

      i)   Strengthen the capacity for analysis and management of NTMs, including the quality
           infrastructure.

38.     In the short to medium term, more resources should be directed to build up the capabilities
of the quality infrastructure to improve the administrative efficiency of the regulations. Coherence
with the newly established CU regulations and conformity assessment procedures. This includes
laboratories with the necessary technical equipment and better human capacity to implement the new
regulations efficiently. The capacity to undertake regulatory impact assessment will be especially
valuable to the national experts to help guide the regulatory environment towards less burdensome
formulations.


                                                     xii
39.      Given the government’s concern to ensure that the private sector complies with quality
standards, it should strengthen the market surveillance in the domestic market. This could be
achieved through the expert review of the Consumer Protection Law and the enforcement mechanisms in
place. In many developing countries the limited number of field inspectors across the country jeopardizes
the effectiveness of the law. The government could also review the legal environment and requirements
for certification agencies to become accredited and issue conformity assessment certificates.

      ii) Include private sector more fully in the NTMs development and implementation process

         Adopt a Decree to set-up a public-private committee to improve coordination and governance on
         trade regulations or NTMs
40.     Kazakhstan policy makers should set up a public-private committee to formally consult
with all concerned parties from the private sector and consumers. This committee should be
supported by a Secretariat staffed with technical staff that could lead the analysis of issues raised by the
private sector and adopt a work program to review the impact of new and existing regulations. Different
analytical approaches could be considered: for existing regulations, one it is easier to quantify the
impact of the measure; for new regulations, the analysis will need to weight the potential impact versus
potential benefits of the measure. The Review might lead to the non-adoption of the regulation).

41.      Inform and educate the private sector systematically on any new regulation being adopted
and implemented. Public information campaigns, availability of website information, and focused
training sessions are some of the tools that can help the private sector adjust more easily to the regulatory
changes. Launching a trade information portal can help with this effort.

42.     Finally, the NTM database, upon which the analysis in this note was based, can be of further
use to the authorities. Further update and further analysis can shed light on the impacts of regulatory measures
on the economy. A natural next step is to estimate the effects of NTMs on consumer prices and determine how this
varies across regions and different NTM chapters. For this analysis, firm or product level price data are
needed. The NTM analysis can also assess the poverty impact of streamlining NTMs. For this analysis,
information from the national household surveys will be necessary.




                                                      xiii
                                         : Good Regulatory Practices in Trade
Good regulatory practices encompass principles of transparency, efficiency and increased competition. These
good practices are recommended by the WTO and implemented by Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) countries. The WTO addresses the NTM agenda through both the transparency obligation
and the guidelines to reconcile governments’ policy objectives with the requirement that the regulations do not
restrict trade unnecessarily or are used purposely for protectionist measures. The OECD Efficient Regulation
Principles provide guidance to policy makers designing and implementing rules and regulations, including those
that may impact trade and firms’ competitiveness. In this perspective, regulatory impact analy sis is a key
instrument at the disposal of regulators. The OECD also recognizes the benefits of regulatory reform, which is
about improving regulation, not necessarily through less regulation. Increasing competition should be recognized
as a goal of regulatory reform such that there should be mechanisms to identify anticompetitive practices and to
address complaints from consumers and new or potential firm entrants.
The “Efficient Regulation Principles of the OECD? are summarized in nine points:
(1) Transparency and openness.
(2) Non-discrimination.
(3) Avoidance of unnecessary trade restrictiveness.
(4) Use of performance-based regulations (rather than design or descriptive characteristics). It is easier and less
    costly when firms have flexibility to meet requirements as this allows for innovation and improved efficiency;
(5) Use of regulatory impact analysis.
(6) Administrative simplification to minimize the administrative burdens on firms in complying with regulations.
(7) Use of internationally harmonized measures to minimize the burdens on firms that come from having to
    comply with different standards and regulations for like products in international trade.
(8) Appropriateness of the quality of conformity assessment procedures.
(9) Incorporation of competition principles into regulatory practices.
Source: OECD.

43.    In sum, improving the trade policy framework, its institutions and its regulations will
require analytically sound, well supported, prioritized actions.

            In trade policy, acceding to the WTO should remain a first priority, especially if this is
             achieved on a tariff schedule that is more liberal than that of Russia’s tariff schedule. If the
             authorities decide to pursue a new FTA, it is recommended that they first assess its effects on
             the economy before starting negotiations. If negotiating an FTA, they should adopt a design that
             includes (i) low external MFN tariffs; (ii) few sectoral and product exemptions; (iii) nonrestrictive
             rules of origin; and (iv) measures to facilitate trade.
            The trade policy institutions are well developed, so the focus should be more on prioritizing
             the country’s objectives, building analytical policy, and development and implementation
             capacity. The role of the private sector as an active partner in this process cannot be
             understated.
            Finally, as the country finalizes its tariff reforms, it needs to focus on simplifying the
             regulatory framework that affects non-tariff measures. Without such a simplification, the non-
             tariff measures will constrain opportunities for export growth and diversification, and
             ultimately Kazakhstan’s goal to integrate into the global economy.




                                                         xiv
PRIORITY ACTIONS                                                                POTENTIAL OUTCOMES
TRADE POLICY
WTO accession. The authorities should try to lock in a tariff schedule          More liberal policy trade regime; reversal of
more liberal than the one used by Russia at accession - especially as it        trade diversion experienced when the CU
relates to intermediate and capital goods - and implement their                 was created; more competitive imports
commitments quickly.                                                            environment.
WTO accession. Negotiations in other areas should be finalized,                  More liberal trade policy regime; gains
including the services agreement, SPS, TBTs, issues related to local            from NTM, TRIMS, TRIPS and services
content rules, state-owned enterprises, and subsidies.                          agreements in the longer run.

FTA negotiations. Assess the effects of joining an FTA before starting          Clearer negotiating positions and sectoral
negotiations                                                                    interests; the authorities better prepared to
                                                                                mitigate any negative effects.
FTA negotiations. If negotiating an FTA, adopt a design that includes (i)       FTAs with these characteristics are most
low external MFN tariffs; (ii) few sectoral and product exemptions; (iii)       likely to increase national welfare.
nonrestrictive rules of origin; and (iv) measures to facilitate trade.
TRADE INSTITUTIONS
Strategy. Prioritize trade policy strategy further. Ensure strategic            Negotiations outcomes more supportive of
alignment between trade policy negotiating positions and export/enterprise      export development and diversification
development policies.                                                           goals of the country.
Coordination. Establish a permanent technical and policy representation         More informed and coordinated policy
in Moscow for CU/CES affairs and strengthen Kazakhstan’s permanent              positions for all trade negotiations,
representation at the WTO.                                                      including future FTAs.
Coordination. Organize the coordination and consultation process for            More informed and coordinated approach to
negotiation along thematic themes, and with a closer involvement of the         all trade negotiations.
private sector in each thematic group.
Training. Use short term training on trade negotiations techniques and          Better understanding and preparation for the
policy issues for the technical staff at the MEBP and other ministries          negotiations issues.
involved.
Outreach. Launch outreach campaign for the civil society and private            Public is educated on the
sector on the objectives of the trade policy, benefits/costs of participation   benefits/costs/mitigation measures
in the WTO, the CU and FTAs                                                     associated with the trade agreements.
NON-TARIFF BARRIERS
Number and burden of regulations. Review and, when appropriate,                 Reduced cost of trade restrictive
reduce or replace regulations related to the pre-shipment inspection            instruments.
requirements, the quantity control measures, the state product registration
requirements and the number of standards.
Number and burden of compliance procedures. Simplify procedures                 Reduced costs associated with CU level
for compliance. Use mutual recognition of standards or voluntary                certifications.
conformity assessments.        Simplify the procedures for conformity
assessment requirements for SPS and TBT measures.
Coordination. Include private sector more fully in the regulatory process.       Easier compliance to newer and more
Inform and consult the private sector systematically during the process of      stringent regulations. Less costly for private
developing and implementing new regulations. Setting up a public-private        sector.
committee and a trade websites are good initial steps.
Quality infrastructure capacity. Train technical staff to undertake             Better manage NTMs. Easier compliance to
regulatory impact assessment before the regulation is adopted; build            newer and more stringent regulations.
laboratories and the technical capacity to run them properly.
Analysis. The NTM database should be kept updated and used for further          Shed light on the impacts of regulatory
analysis.                                                                       measures on the economy: effects on
                                                                                producers, consumer prices and poverty.




                                                             xv
