    96946




1
Preface


The Egypt Economic Monitor provides an update on key economic developments and policies over the past six
months. It also presents findings from recent World Bank work on Egypt. It places them in a longer-term and
global context, and assesses the implications of these developments and other changes in policy on the outlook
for Egypt, especially in the context of the recent political changes in the country.

Its coverage ranges from the macro-economy, to the monetary situation and to indicators of human welfare and
development. It is intended for a wide audience, including policy makers, business leaders, financial market
participants, and the community of analysts and professionals engaged in Egypt. The Egypt Economic Monitor
is a product of the World Bank’s Egypt Macroeconomic and Fiscal Management (MFM) team. It was prepared
by Ahmed Kouchouk (Senior Economist) and Sara Alnashar (Economist), under the general guidance of
George Anayiotos (Lead Economist) and Auguste Tano Kouame (Practice Manager). Mohab Hallouda (Senior
Energy Specialist) provided input on energy issues, Nur Nasser Eddin (Economist) contributed to the Money
and Banking section and Rana Fayez (Consultant) provided research assistance and general support to the team.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this Monitor are those of the World Bank staff and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Board oftThe World Bank or the governments they
represent. For information about the World Bank and its activities in Egypt, please visit
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/egypt.

To be included on an email distribution list for this Egypt Economic Monitor series and related publications,
please contact Iman Sadek (isadek@worldbank.org). For questions and comments on the content of this
publication, please contact Ahmed Kouchouk (akouchouk@worldbank.org) or Sara Alnashar
(salnashar@worldbank.org). Questions from the media can be addressed to Nehal El Kouesny
(nelkouesny@worldbank.org).




                                                       1
                                                                    Table of Contents

I-        E X E C U T I V E S U M M A R Y ............................................................................................................................. 3
II-       P O L I T I C A L & S O C I A L C O N T E X T .................................................................................................. 4
I I I - R E A L S E C T O R , P R I C E S & P O V E R T Y ........................................................................................ 5
I V - P U B L I C F I N A N C E & D E B T ..................................................................................................................... 7
V-        M O N E Y & B A N K I N G ..................................................................................................................................... 8
V I - E X T E R N A L S E C T O R ..................................................................................................................................... 9
V I I - O U T L O O K ...............................................................................................................................................................10
V I I I - R I S K S & C H A L L E N G E S .........................................................................................................................11


I X - S P E C I A L F O C U S ..............................................................................................................................................12
Topic 1: Macro-Fiscal Implications of Recent Tax Reforms & Investment Promotion
Measures

Topic 2: The Macroeconomic Implications of Developments in Egypt's Energy Sector



X-        A N N E X E S .................................................................................................................................................................26
Annex 1: Egypt’s Macroeconomic Projections (Baseline Scenario)

Annex 2: Egypt Summary Tables

Annex 3: Consumption of Energy Products by Sector

Annex 4: Energy Prices




                                                                                            2
                                     I-      E X E CU TI V E SUMMA RY

 i. Egypt’s economic activity is gaining momentum. Growth accelerated to 5.6% during the first half of FY15,
  compared to a dismal 1.2% in the same period last year. The recent spike in economic activity reflects favorable
  base effects, but more importantly broad-based sector recovery, especially in tourism and manufacturing. On the
  demand side, growth continues to benefit from resilient consumption and government stimulus, supported by
  large financial inflows from Gulf States. In March 2015, Egypt held a high level Economic Development
  Conference, which culminated with the signing of sizeable investment deals worth US$36 billion, securing
  external financing worth US$24 billion, and the announcement of a new Gulf support package worth US$12.5
  billion. This would boost the ongoing economic recovery and facilitate efforts to achieve macroeconomic
  stability. Annual growth is expected to double to 4.3% in FY15, and should increase further thereafter, compared
  to the muted growth of 2% during FY11-FY14. In tandem, unemployment reversed course and started to slowly
  inch downwards, averaging 13% in the first half of FY15 (still 4 percentage points higher than FY10). The latest
  available official poverty headcount indicated that more than 26% of Egypt’s population lived below the poverty
  line in FY13.

ii. Egypt’s underlying fiscal stance is improving, thanks to recently adopted measures. In July 2014, the
  government enacted bold reforms, most importantly the partial streamlining of energy subsidies, in addition to
  structural revenue enhancement measures including new taxes on real estate, capital gains and dividends as well
  as higher taxes on alcoholic beverages and cigarettes. Simultaneously, budget allocations to health and education
  increased to comply with the constitutional requirements and spending on social safety nets and infrastructure
  also increased. The deficit is expected to decline to 11.5% of GDP in FY15, compared to 12.8% in FY14 and
  13.7% of GDP in FY13. This would bring down government debt to 94% of GDP by end-FY15, from 95.5% of
  GDP at end-FY14.

iii. Inflation picked up in early-FY15 in light of the adopted fiscal consolidation measures. Inflation averaged
   10.6% during the first eight months of FY15, but core inflation was relatively contained at 8.4% due to a proactive
   monetary policy and favorable external conditions (a weaker Euro and lower international prices of oil and
   grains). Nevertheless, annual inflation is likely to remain in the low double-digits (around 10% through FY17),
   as further fuel price increases are likely to occur. Real interest rates are expected to hover around zero.

iv. Egypt’s external accounts are stabilizing due to a rebound in key foreign-income earning items and is
  expected to improve going forward after the successful economic conference in March 2015. Reserves had
  dropped during the second quarter of FY15, but will start recovering on the back of the support package pledged
  by the GCC during the March Economic Development Conference and the expected pick up in FDI and financing
  inflows. The balance of payments was in surplus during the first quarter of FY15, driven by strong remittances,
  rebounding tourism, and higher FDI. Recently, the repayment of US$3 billion of Qatari deposits and
  US$2.8 billion of oil companies’ arrears added pressures on reserves, which fell to US$15.5 billion by end-
  February 2015 (covering less than 3 months of merchandise imports). Reserves are expected to reach US$17-
  18 billion by end-FY15 as exceptional financing and investments start trickling in. The official exchange rate
  depreciated in January 2015 by 7%, after holding steady for six months. A weaker Pound and administrative
  measures strengthened the Pound in the black market and shrunk the parallel market premium from 8% to 2%
  since late January 2015.
                                                           3
v.      The IMF conducted its Article IV consultation in November 2014 and the final report generally
commended the authorities’ medium term plans while highlighting some risks including slippage in
implementing reforms and a large external financing gap. Egypt’s main risk is to sustain the ongoing economic
recovery which requires improved security. Notwithstanding the authorities’ ambitious fiscal consolidation plan,
the deficit and debt aggregates will remain high and unsustainable. Further, there are risks of policy slippage as
some details and the exact timing of policy measures are still missing and implementation capacity remains a
challenge. Further, sustaining the reform pace requires efficient and well-targeted safety nets, which might take
time to build. Finally, there is significant uncertainty regarding the financing of the announced mega-projects and
the potential contingent liabilities that may arise.

                            II-     POLITICAL & SOCIAL CONTEXT

1.       The political roadmap announced in July 2013 is progressing, but the final milestone, electing the
House of Representatives, was postponed leading to a protracted transition. The parliamentary elections were
scheduled to take place over two stages during March-May 2015, but were postponed in light of the Supreme
Constitutional Court’s (SCC) verdict that deemed some articles of the Parliamentary Elections Law s
unconstitutional. The SCC stated that the Election Constituency Division Law did not ensure fair and proportional
representation of all voters which violates Article 102 of the Constitution. The Court later ruled against the article
in the Electoral Law which banned dual nationality Egyptians from candidacy. The President requested
amendment of these laws in a month to allow for the elections to take place as soon as possible. However, it is
still unclear when they will be carried out.

2.      Recurrent bouts of terrorist attacks and violence in Sinai and across the country are worsening the
security situation. Small-scale protests continue to take place, occasionally resulting in violent confrontations
with security forces. Terrorist attacks are becoming recurrent, targeting mainly the army, police and government
entities. However, recently these incidents have increasingly been directed towards civilians, which escalated
with the build-up to the Economic Conference. In Sinai, two major terrorist attacks took place in October 2014
and January 2015 that claimed the lives of 77 soldiers and left more than a hundred injured. Both attacks were
carried out by Ansar Bait al-Maqdis, who had pledged allegiance to the Islamic State (IS). Accordingly, the state
of emergency in Sinai, introduced last October, was extended, and the government declared a state of war on
terrorism. On the external front, Egypt launched a series of aerial attacks on IS strongholds in Libya, following
the brutal killing of 21 Copts by IS in Libya in February 2015.

3.      In recent months, the President introduced key administrative changes in an attempt to enhance the
State’s ability to address public demands and aspirations, including a long-awaited change of Governors and
an unexpected partial Cabinet reshuffle. The President issued a decree founding four specialized councils to be
headed by him, consisting mainly of non-government experts with decent youth representation to help in planning
general state policies in the following areas: (1) education and scientific research; (2) community
service; (3) economic development; and (4) foreign policy and national security. In February 2015, 17 new
governors were sworn in, mostly young and with civilian backgrounds. Out of the 17 only three came from a
military background (appointed for Suez, Port Said, and Matrouh, the latter on the border with Libya) while the


                                                          4
    rest are university professors, former civil servants, and private sector CEOs.1 Four governor assistants were also
    elected, three of which are women. In March 2015, the President unexpectedly announced a Cabinet reshuffle,
    the first since his election in June 2014. Six ministers were changed and two new cabinet portfolios were added:
    a ministry of state for population and another for technical education. The ministries in which the changes took
    place are the ministry of interior, tourism, communication, education, agriculture, and culture.

                                        III- REAL SECTOR, PRICES & POVERTY

    4.      Egypt’s economy has been recovering since the second half of FY14, and more strongly in FY15.
    Annual GDP growth spiked to 6.8% in the first quarter of FY15,2 up from 3.7% in the previous quarter and a
    meager 1% in the same quarter a year earlier. Leading indicators point to an expected average growth rate of
    around 4.3% during FY15, double the pace of growth realized over the period FY11-14 as the economy muddled
    through the ramifications of the January 2011 revolution. The recent pickup in economic activity has partially
    benefited from favorable base effects but more importantly from a gradual restoration of confidence. Further,
    sectoral growth during the first quarter of FY15 has been broad-based. Notably, manufacturing and tourism
    have started to rebound and posted real growth in double digits, contributing to overall growth by 4 and
    1.3 percentage points, respectively. Oil and gas extraction remains a drag on the economy as outstanding arrears
    owed by the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation (EGPC) to international oil companies continue to crunch
    liquidity in the sector.



                   Figure-1a: Contributions to Growth,                                            Figure-1b: Contributions to Growth,
       15%
                               demand side                                                                    supply side
                                                                                                      Hotels and Restaurant
       10%
                                                                                6.8%                  Services (excluding hotels and restaurants)
                                                                                           12%        Extractions
                                                                      3.7%                            Industry (excluding extractions)
        5%   2.6%                                            2.5%                          10%
                    2.2%     2.2%
                                      1.5%   1.0%   1.4%                                    8%        Agriculture
                                                                                            6%
        0%
                                                                                            4%
              Q1


                     Q2


                                 Q3


                                       Q4


                                              Q1


                                                     Q2


                                                                 Q3


                                                                       Q4


                                                                                 Q1




                          FY13                            FY14                  FY15
                                                                                            2%
       -5%                                                                                  0%
                                                                                           -2%   Q1      Q2    Q3    Q4    Q1    Q2    Q3    Q4     Q1
      -10%                                                                                 -4%             FY13                    FY14             FY15
                           Priv. Cons.                           Public Cons.
                                                                                           -6%
                           Investment                            Net Exports
                           Total GDP Growth                                                -8%

      Source: Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform.




    5.      On the demand-side, all GDP components contributed positively to growth during the first quarter of
    FY15 (first time since FY11). Private consumption continued to be the principal driver of growth, backed by
    resilient remittances and an increase in the minimum wage of civil servants (key demand of January 2011

1
  The previous cohort of governors appointed in August 2013 included 19 military officers (the usual practice for years), out of 25
governors.
2
  Reported statements by the Minister of Planning, Monitoring, and Administrative Reform indicate that growth continued to be strong (at
4.3%) during the second quarter of FY15. Thus, growth reached 5.6% during first half of FY15, around 5 times higher than during the
same period last year.
                                                                                       5
revolution). More importantly, two third of the stimulus spending in FY14 was directed to public infrastructure
spending thus leading to strong positive contributions to growth by public investment for the first time in3 years.
That in turn started to crowd in private investment, as evidenced by the slow but sustained growth in credit to
private businesses (and to a lesser extent households as well as pick up in FDI inflows and private investments
spending (represents 70% of total investment spending in first quarter of FY15).Total investment spending has
contributed positively to growth since the third quarter of FY14, the first time in 3-years. The recovering foreign-
income earning sectors have also helped decrease Egypt’s chronically negative net exports balance of goods and
services with a positive contribution to growth during the first quarter of FY15.

6.      In tandem with the pick-up in economic activity, unemployment is starting to slowly inch downwards
though overall labor market conditions remain dismal. The unemployment rate reached 12.9% in the last quarter
of 2014, down from 13.4% a year earlier, but still almost four percentage points higher than prior to the economic
downturn since FY11. Further, labor participation rates are still depressed as new labor market entrants (mainly
the youth) as well as the currently unemployed are either traveling abroad in search of job opportunities, joining
the informal sector, or even exiting the labor force (mainly females). Out of the 3.6 million currently unemployed
persons, some 63% are between 15 and 29 years old, making youth unemployment the main challenge for
economic inclusion and stability. Unemployment rates among males and females recorded 9.2% and 24.8%,
respectively, during the second quarter of FY15 (Figure-1b), compared to 4.8% and 22.8% in the same quarter of
2011.



           Figure-2a: Unemployment Rate (%)                               Figure-2b: Unemployment Rate by
     16%                                                                               Gender
     14%                                                            30%
     12%                                                            25%
     10%                                                            20%
      8%                                                            15%
      6%
                                                                    10%
      4%
                                                                     5%
      2%
                                                                     0%
      0%
                                                                           Oct-Dec 2013     Oct-Dec 2014   Oct-Dec 2015
           Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1 Q3 Q1
             FY10     FY11     FY12      FY13     FY14 FY15                               Male   Female

       Source: Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics.




7.      Inflationary pressures continue to persist on the back of the fiscal consolation measures and a weaker
pound. Annual urban headline inflation averaged 10.6% during the first eight months of FY15, fueled by higher
energy prices and excises on alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and cigarettes, with the latter witnessing two
successive tax hikes since July 2014. Further, the depreciation of the official exchange, as well as supply
bottlenecks in distribution of butane gas cylinders and diesel oil, has also contributed to the recent inflation spike.
On the other hand, core inflation (which excludes regulated and volatile items) remained contained at 8.4 percent,
partially reflecting a proactive monetary policy by the CBE to preempt second round inflationary pressures but
also favorable external conditions, mainly lower oil and grains international prices and the weakening of the Euro.

                                                                6
    8.      Egypt suffers from high poverty rates. The most recently published official poverty headcounts for FY13
    indicate that some 26.3% of Egypt’s population is below the poverty line, most in rural Upper Egypt where
    poverty rates reach 50%. The Gini coefficient was estimated at 0.30 which points to low inequality by regional
    and international standards. However, this reflects low incomes across most income groups rather than reasonable
    living standards for the lowest income groups.

                                           IV-      PUBLIC FINANCE & DEBT

    9.      Egypt’s budget deficit inched up during the first seven months of FY15 though the underlying
    (structural) deficit improved by almost one percentage point. The overall budget deficit for the period July-
    January FY15 reached EGP159 billion (6.9% of projected FY15 GDP), compared to EGP120 billion (6% of GDP)
    during the same period last year. The higher deficit was mainly due to lower exceptional grants from the Gulf
    States. However, fiscal outturn for July-January of FY15 does not yet reflect the impact of streamlining fuel
    subsidies and lower oil prices as settlements between the treasury and the Ministry of Petroleum had not yet taken
    place. Also, it does not yet include the impact of higher taxes on dividends, capital gains, and real estate.
    Excluding exceptional receipts (mainly Gulf inflows), the budget deficit in July-January of FY15 would have
    been 1 percentage point lower than in the comparable period last year. The deficit continued to be financed
    largely by issuance of domestic debt (mostly held by domestic entities).

    10.     During the first seven months of FY15, total revenues decreased by 14% to EGP187 billion or the
    equivalent of 8% of FY15 projected GDP, some 2.8 percentage points lower than last year. The decline in total
    revenues reflected lower exceptional receipts of EGP7.8 billion compared to EGP41 billion a year earlier. It also
    reflected the delay in settling petroleum sector activities with the treasury.3 However, this seemingly poor
    performance masks an exceptionally robust performance by almost all economically determined tax items. For
    example, taxes on corporate profits and on wages and salaries recorded annual growth of 45% and 17%,
    respectively, on the backdrop of the ongoing economic recovery and taxing bonuses granted to government
    employees. In addition, taxes on goods and services increased by 33% due to higher consumption spending and
    higher taxes on cigarettes and alcoholic beverages.

    11.     Expenditures were contained during July-January of FY15 due to the delayed settlement of fuel
    subsidies and lower interest rates. Total expenditure stabilized in absolute terms but decreased as percent of GDP
    to reach 14.6%, compared to 16.7% during the same period the year before. Subsidies, Grants and Social Benefits
    declined by 33% compared to the previous year since the fuel subsidies settlement was not yet recorded. Interest
    payments posted a moderate annual growth of 11%. This was partially counterbalanced by higher wages and
    salaries4 and other expenditures (increase year-on-year by 17% and 23%, respectively). In addition, public
    investment spending accelerated sharply (33% annual increase) as the government is successfully pursuing an
    ambitious program to modernize the infrastructure base.




3
  This includes income taxes paid by EGPC on its operations and on behalf of foreign companies, sales taxes on fuel products, royalties and
dividends transferred to the government.
4
  The higher wage bill reflects mainly full implementation of the minimum wage scheme.
                                                                       7
                                       V-    MONEY & BANKING

12.     The CBE cut its key policy rates in January 2015 on the backdrop of declining inflation in the preceding
months and a favorable international price outlook. The CBE has been aiming to strike a balance between
curbing inflation expectations and boosting growth, and hence kept key policy rates fixed throughout the first half
of FY15. This followed a one-off hike in policy rates in July 2014 to preempt the second round impact of the
fiscal consolidation measures adopted. As inflation started to abate, the CBE cut key policy rates by 50 basis
points in January 2015; capitalizing on lower imported inflation with the sustained decline in international oil and
grain prices, and a depreciated euro against the US dollar. The CBE’s accommodative policy is aiming to
stimulate economic activity, amidst downside risks stemming from sluggish growth in the Euro area (Egypt’s
main trade partner). Interest rates on Treasury bills inched downwards following the key policy rates cut, and
have been stable since the beginning of 2015.

13.    Domestic liquidity continued to be driven by strong credit extended to the government, but private credit
has also been gradually picking up since the beginning of FY15. Liquidity grew steadily during the first seven
months of FY15 by around 16% y-o-y, though more than 2 percentage points lower than its pace a year earlier
due to slower growth in domestic assets (mainly reflecting deceleration in government lending ). On the other
hand, net foreign assets dropped sharply (-18%, y-o-y) during the same period in the absence of the windfall
support from the Gulf. Credit extended to the government (30%, y-o-y) continued to be the principal driver of
domestic assets, along with the gradually rising credit extended to the private sector (13.5%, y-o-y, up from an
average of 7% a year earlier), which was partially offset by the drop in net foreign assets.

                              Figure-3: Key Policy Rates and 3-Months T-Bill Rates
        16

        14
                                                                                            91-day T-Bill
        12                                                                                  Rate
                                                                                            Overnight
        10                                                                                  Lending Rate
         8                                                                                  CBE Discount
                                                                                            Rate
                May…
                Nov…




                Nov…




                Nov…




                Nov…
                May…




                May…




                May…




         6                                                                                  Overnight
             Jan-14
             Jan-11




             Jan-12




             Jan-13




             Jan-15
              Jul-11




              Jul-12




              Jul-13




              Jul-14
             Mar-11




             Mar-12




             Mar-13




             Mar-14
             Sep-11




             Sep-12




             Sep-13




             Sep-14




                                                                                            Deposit Rate


      Source: Central Bank of Egypt.




14.    The banking sector continues to post healthy financial soundness indicators, but its asset base is
becoming highly concentrated in light of perpetual government lending. The share of non-performing loans
stood at 9.1% of total loans by end-June 2014, with 98% of those well-provisioned for. Also, capital adequacy
remains sound as Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets recorded 10.9% (well above the 5% threshold). Loans-to-
deposits ratio declined to 41% by end-June 2014 an indication of ample liquidity, yet it signals banks risk aversion
and preference to lend to the government. This has led to excessive concentration of banks’ lending into the less

                                                         8
risky government securities (primarily short-term maturities) instead of financing more productive private sector
led investments.


                                     VI-     EXTERNAL SECTOR

15.    Egypt’s external accounts are stabilizing despite limited financial and in-kind Gulf aid. The balance of
payments achieved an overall surplus of US$0.4 billion (0.1% of projected GDP) in the first quarter of FY15,
down from a surplus of US$3.7 billion (1.3% of GDP) in the corresponding period of FY14. The smaller surplus
was mainly due to a decline in exceptional GCC inflows and an increasing import bill associated with the
economic uptick.

16.     The current account turned into deficit during the first quarter of FY15 as merchandise imports picked
up while official transfers dropped significantly. The current account registered a deficit of about US$1.4 billion
(-0.4% of FY15 projected GDP), against a surplus of US$0.6 billion in the first quarter of FY14 (0.2% of FY14
GDP). The deteriorated current account balance reflects a widening merchandise trade deficit (oil and non-oil) as
well as lower cash and commodity grants (mainly from the Gulf) that reached US$1.5 billion in the first quarter
of FY15, only a third of what was received during the same period last year. The current account deficit however
masks a surge in the net services surplus that reached US$2.1 billion (0.6% of FY15 GDP) compared to a deficit
of US$0.2 billion last year, mainly due to rebounding tourism revenues which more than doubled during the first
quarter of FY15.

17.    The capital and financial account also recorded lower net inflows of US$0.8 billion (0.2% of FY15
GDP), down from US$4.6 billion (1.6% of FY14 GDP) a year earlier. The lower inflows were mainly due to
lower Gulf deposits held at the CBE and higher accumulation of foreign assets abroad by the non-banking sector
(US$2.2 billion). This was partially balanced by a surge in net FDI inflows, which more than doubled to record
US$1.8 billion (0.5% of FY15 GDP) from US$0.7 billion last year. The strong FDI performance reflects resumed
inflows into the oil sector and higher Greenfield investments. Finally, net errors and omissions improved to record
a US$1 billion surplus compared to net outflows of US$1.5 billion a year earlier, signaling a reversal of
unrecorded capital flight and an improvement in investor sentiment.

18.     Net international reserves improved in early FY15 but declined recently due to sizeable debt
repayments. Reserves continued to inch upwards steadily through the first four months of FY15 reaching
US$16.8 billion by end-October 2014. However, the repayment of maturing Qatari deposits and of arrears to
foreign oil companies (totaling US$6 billion during the second quarter of FY15) led to a temporary drop in
reserves, which then stabilized at US$15.4 billion by end-February 2015, equivalent to 3-months cover of
merchandise imports. The official exchange rate depreciated during the second half of January 2015 by 7%,
after holding steady in the banking sector for 6 months. The CBE continues to hold regular foreign exchange
auctions to ration hard currency, and supply is still short of market demand. A more flexible exchange rate policy
by the CBE along with policies that limit the daily amount purchased outside the banking sector have narrowed
the black market premium to around 2% in February 2015, after widening to 8% in the previous months.



                                                        9
    19.     Egypt’s external debt continues to be mostly long-term, and declined throughout the first quarter of
    FY15. Egypt external debt stock (government and non-government) decreased to US$44.9 billion (13.8% of
    GDP) by end- September 2014, compared to US$47 billion (16.4% of GDP) a year earlier.5 External government
    debt (which constitutes just below two-thirds of gross debt) was mainly responsible for this decline reflecting
    repayment of due short-term debt obligations and the impact on the book value of the outstanding debt of the
    depreciation of other currencies against the US dollar. External government debt declined to US$27.9 billion
    (8.9% of GDP) at end-September 2014 from US$29.4 billion (10.1% of GDP) at the same time last year. The
    short-term portion continues to be around 8.7% of total external government debt.


                                                        VII- OUTLOOK

    20.     Real GDP growth is expected to almost double in FY15 to reach close to 4.3%, up from an average of
    2% in FY11-FY14. The projected recovery is expected to be driven by strong private consumption due to resilient
    remittances, higher wages to civil servants, and contained food inflation. Investments are expected to also
    contribute strongly to growth. Accelerated public infrastructure spending, the gradual restoration of confidence
    especially after the March 2015 Economic Conference, and an ambitious plan to pursue large projects and
    improve the business environment could all help crowd-in private investment. Economic activity is expected to
    be broad-based, with strong recovery by key sectors (tourism and manufacturing). The lower international oil
    prices provide an upside factor by lowering the cost of production and increasing energy supply. Beyond FY15,
    oil and gas extractives may also improve as outstanding arrears are paid and new exploration contracts may be
    agreed. Furthermore, the oil and gas deals that were signed during the Economic Development Conference in
    March 2015 are expected to ease the woes of the sector.6 Growth could continue to increase to around 5% by
    FY17, provided that Egypt’s long-standing structural problems (cumbersome business environment and rigid
    labor market conditions) are addressed. Thus, Egypt’s output gap will continue to narrow and may disappear by
    FY16. Meanwhile, a slow recovery in the euro zone (Egypt’s main trade partner) would limit Egypt’s economic
    recovery.

    21.     With the projected pickup in growth, the upward price adjustments of fuel products, and further likely
    deprecation of the pound, inflation is expected to remain in low double-digits (average around 10% through
    FY17). This assumes a proactive stance by the CBE in curbing inflationary pressures, a subdued international
    commodity price path, and sustained improvements in internal supply infrastructure and policies that ease supply
    bottlenecks. On the fiscal front, Egypt is expected to bring down the overall budget deficit to around 10% of
    GDP by FY17. This assumes gradual streamlining of energy subsidies as well as phasing-in of the VAT and a
    new mining law, while enhancing social spending and meeting the constitutional expenditure pledges. Finally,
    Egypt’s external accounts are likely to slightly improve in FY15 and would continue to recover in the following
    years. Nevertheless, the current account is expected to remain in deficit through FY17 due to the widening trade
    deficit as the economy recovers and imports increase. Prolonged low international oil prices may lead to lower
    remittances and FDI from the Gulf.

5
  This compares favorably to an average of 27% of GDP for the MENA region. The recently announced Gulf support packages as well as the recently
signed financing deals are likely to lead to higher external debt accumulation.
6
  Egypt signed deals with British Petroleum worth US$12 billion over 5 years (the biggest deal in Egypt’s history that should provide 25% of the
country’s natural gas needs by 2017). Egypt also signed a deal with British Gas worth US$4 billion over two years and with UAE’s Dana Gas
worth US$0.4 billion.
                                                                     10
                               VIII-          RISKS & CHALLENGES

22.     Egypt’s main risk and priority is to sustain and enhance the economic recovery, which requires
improved security conditions and steadfast reform implementation. Notwithstanding the Egyptian
government’s ambitious fiscal consolidation plan, the budget deficit and debt aggregates will remain high and
unsustainable. Further, there are risks of policy slippage, as some details and the exact timing of announced
policies are still missing and implementation capacity remains a concern. Further, sustaining the reform pace
requires efficient and well-targeted safety nets, which might take time to build. Finally, there is significant
uncertainty regarding the financing of the announced mega-projects, and the potential contingent liabilities that
may arise.




                                                       11
                                           IX-     SPECIAL FOCUS



         Topic-1: Macro-Fiscal Implications of Recent Tax Reforms and Investment
                                  Promotion Measures
                              Policy Measures and their Macro and Fiscal Implications

    This note takes stock of recent attempts by the government to stimulate private investments through reforming the
    tax system, enacting a new investment law, and hosting a high level economic conference. In addition to laying
    down the details of the recent developments and policy changes, the note highlights the likely macro and fiscal
    implications of these changes. Further, the note projects and presents a consistent medium-term macro
    framework with all the new changes and developments jointly playing out as planned (a high case Scenario), and
    benchmarks this to the situation where these reforms are gradually implemented and announcements are partially
    realized (a low case scenario that is consistent with the projection path assumed throughout the EEM).



    1.      Recent Measures and Developments


    In an attempt to facilitate higher growth and to accelerate private investments and job creation, the Egyptian
    Government announced important tax amendments and ratified a new investment law ahead of the Egypt
    Economic Conference held on March 13-15, 2015. On the taxation front, the Cabinet approved the following
    amendments that would become effective starting FY16 and/or with the submission of 2015 tax returns:



   Unify the highest income tax rate on individuals and corporates at one-single rate of 22.5%, down from 25% and
    30% for individuals and corporates, respectively. The previous top corporate tax rate of 30% included a 3-year
    temporary additional 5% that was introduced in July 2014 to finance the additional constitutional pledges for
    health, education and scientific research. This temporary tax hike was planned to expire by June 2017, yet the
    recent announcement fast-tracked the phasing out of this exceptional tax hike to June 2015 (Table-1).
   Maintain new tax rates for the coming 10 years to ensure a stable tax regime after 4 years of frequent changes.
   Reduce sales taxes on capital goods and machinery from 10% to 5%, and accelerate and simplify the process of
    refunding taxes paid on inputs and capital goods.
   Apply the new tax rate uniformly on all activities and establishments including new businesses to be established
    in special economic zones such as the Suez Canal Corridor mega-project. However, existing businesses
    established prior to enactment of the new tax changes will continue to benefit from any special tax treatment
    and/or reduced income tax rate(s) already granted.




                                                           12
 Table-1: Comparative assessment of Egypt’s corporate tax regime (before and after recent changes)

                Old Corporate tax regime                                 New Corporate Tax regime
         Net Profit    Tax rate                                   Net Profit    Tax rate
       0 - 1 Million                  25%                         0 - 1 Million             22.5%

       Above 1 Million                30%                         Above 1 Million           22.5%
       Net profit (EGP Tax Paid (EGP         Effective tax          Net profit      Tax Paid (EGP   Effective tax
          Million)        Million)              rate (%)          (EGP Million)        Million)        rate (%)
              0.5              0.13              25.0%                 0.5              0.11           22.5%
               1               0.25              25.0%                  1               0.23           22.5%
               2               0.55              27.5%                  2               0.45           22.5%
               5               1.45              29.0%                  5               1.13           22.5%
              10               2.95              29.5%                 10               2.25           22.5%
              20               5.95              29.8%                 20               4.50           22.5%
      Source: Income tax law and recent announcements by the Minister of Finance.



At the same time, a new investment law was ratified in March 2015 with the following key features: (1) the
General Authority for Investments (GAFI) affiliated to the Ministry of Investments has been authorized -in certain
sectors and activities- to go through all procedures and to obtain all needed licenses from other government
entities on behalf of the investor; (2) investment procedures and the time needed for issuing investment licenses,
procuring land, and obtaining utilities services have been simplified; (3) a new legal framework for dispute
resolution was introduced that sets standard and clear procedures for addressing future investments disputes.

The abovementioned reforms are expected to stimulate investments, to enhance attractiveness of the Egyptian
economy, and to improve tax buoyancy and transparency. In the short-term, these changes can also provide
additional stimulus to the ongoing economic recovery. Simplifying the investment procedures and bringing down
tax rates can reduce/maintain the cost of doing business in Egypt (Figure-4), a much needed buffer given the
recent and projected energy price adjustments, the higher pricing of land and utilities, and the weakening of the
Pound. Reducing the effective tax rate paid by companies would ease liquidity pressures and enhance their ability
to carry out new projects and increase their capital spending. In addition, the lower tax rates would make the
Egyptian economy more competitive relative to peers regionally and elsewhere (Figure-4). On the individual
level, the lower effective tax rate would imply higher disposable incomes that can support a more resilient and
robust private consumption (Egypt’s key driver of growth).




                                                             13
                           Figure-4: Highest Corporate Tax Rate (Egypt vs. Peers)
   40%
   35%
   30%
   25%
   20%
   15%
   10%




 Source: Egypt Ministry of Finance and KPMG-2014 report.




Equally important, the new policy changes would equalize the tax treatment on all corporates across Egypt
including those to be established in special economic zones. This would help to ensure fiscal optimization from
new projects to be established in special economic zones (to be taxed at 22.5% instead of 10%), and hence should
gradually enhance buoyancy of the income tax regime. This amendment was critical as the modality of
establishing new special economic zones is likely to be widely used over the coming years and hence is projected
to account for higher and growing share of Egypt’s GDP and economic activities. It is noteworthy that the
government estimates that around 30-40% of Egypt’s GDP over the next 10 years would come from activities
carried out in special economic zones, such as the Suez Canal region, in addition to potentially the North Coast
and Upper Egypt.

On the fiscal front, holding everything else constant, we expect these changes to generate positive long term
gains, yet the impact in the short-term is somewhat uncertain. In the short-term (FY16), the projected pickup in
economic activities and improved investment sentiment can partially counterbalance the lower effective tax rate.
This is more likely if the Ministry of Finance simplifies and eases the process of paying taxes and addresses some
of the current tax loopholes. Accordingly, tax receipts might increase in light of higher compliance and less tax
evasion and avoidance. This happened previously in 2004 when authorities slashed corporate tax rate by half
(from 40% to 20%) and at the same time simplified tax procedures and practices. These reforms stimulated
economic activities and instantly led to higher tax revenues, through increasing the number of active tax payers.

The private sector’s response to the recent policy reforms will largely be driven by how credible, deep, and
sustained this new window of reform opportunity is. In addition, other binding constraints would need to be
tackled and addressed in a timely manner to ensure that the projected higher investments and growth paths
would generate adequate productive jobs, especially for the youth. This requires scaling up support and spending
on enhancing human skills to nurture employment growth and to improve productivity and innovation. More
resources should be directed to skills development initiatives managed by the private sector that address the
current mismatch between supply and demand. In addition, other binding investments constraints should be
tackled including the cumbersome and costly bankruptcy regulations that are unfavorable to businesses, and
particularly SMEs as they criminalize bankruptcy by mandating jail sentences. This makes the price of failure
prohibitively high and promotes a culture of risk aversion.
                                                           14
    2.       Macro-Fiscal Implications

    This section estimates the macro-fiscal impact of the recently announced policy reforms and developments. It
    also compares the macro framework under a ‘high case’ scenario against the situation where planned and
    recently announced reforms are gradually implemented, with a lagged schedule and
    developments/announcements are not fully implemented (‘low case scenario’). The high case scenario assumes
    higher FDI inflows and private investments in light of a more conducive business environment, lower individual
    and corporate tax rates, and improved policy certainty and transparency. This scenario projects that FDI deals
    signed during the Egypt Economic Conference worth US$36 billion (EGP275 billion)7 would materialize over a
    6-years period, whereas the secured financing deals worth US$24 billion8 would gradually materialize over the
    next 5-years It is also assumed under both scenarios that the government would continue to pursue a higher public
    investments path to address the current infrastructure gap and to prepare the ground for a higher private investment
    path.

    Inter-linkages and implications: the higher projected investments spending and FDI inflows would lead to
    higher national investment ratio and capital stock and hence would provide an additional boost to real and
    potential growth. The lower effective tax rates would imply higher profitability at the corporate level and higher
    disposable income for individuals, which would jointly provide additional stimulus to private investments as well
    as to private consumption (Egypt’s key drivers of growth). The pick-up in private investments and consumption
    spending relative to the low case scenario would fuel higher imports payments bill over the medium-term, which
    would partially drag the higher projected growth path under this scenario. It is also assumed that the expected
    higher Gulf support as well as other foreign inflows (project financing, credit facilities, and FDI inflows) would
    improve the dynamics of Egypt’s balance of payments, ease current pressures on the pound, and more importantly
    avail adequate foreign currency supply to investors and the public. However, it is assumed that CBE would use
    most of the additional net foreign inflows over the medium-term to build up Net International Reserves (NIR)
    that had reached critically low levels of less than 3 months of imports by end of March 2015. Further, it is likely
    that the additional external investments and financing inflows would enhance domestic liquidity, hence availing
    more credit to the private sector at a lower cost.

    Outcomes: Real growth under the high case scenario is expected to gradually pick up to reach 5.4% in FY16 and
    5.7% in FY18. This higher growth path compared to the low case scenario (the scenario underpinning EEM
    forecast) reflects elevated investment spending and higher private consumption that outweigh a higher imports
    bill (oil and non-oil). These positive developments would imply accelerated job creation and hence a lower
    unemployment path with unemployment reaching 11.8% in June-2016 before declining further to reach 10% by
    end of FY18 (back to rates prevailing before the 2008 global financial crisis). Inflation would remain (similar to
    the low case scenario) at high single digits, since demand pressures from higher economic activities is likely to
    be offset by higher output (hence lower supply bottlenecks) and a more proactive monetary policy. The overall


7
  Key deals include British Petroleum signing an agreement to invest US$12 billion in Egypt (biggest deal in Egypt history) with the aim of
producing 3 billion barrels of oil equivalent, British Gas signing an agreement to invest US$ 4 billion over the next two years, Emirati
Swaidan company signing a logistics deal with the Ministry of Supply, Coca-Cola and PEPSI Co each announcing US$0.5 billion of
additional investments in the coming 12-18 months, and Saudi Beyti pledging additional investments worth US$4 billion in Egypt's food
industry that involves establishing a new juice factory in Beheira Governorate.
8
  The WBG announced doubling its annual fresh lending to the GOE to reach US$4-5 billion over the next 4-years and the Islamic
Development Bank signed government six agreements worth US$3.9 billion with the Egyptian.

                                                                      15
fiscal deficit is projected to remain quite similar to the path forecasted under the low case scenario, with only a
slight deterioration in the short term (due to the speedy implementation of the announced tax reforms). Thus,
overall deficit is projected to reach 10.6% of GDP in FY16 (slight worse than the deficit under the baseline
scenario due to slightly lower tax receipts) before reaching 9.4% of GDP in FY18. Thus, the projected deficit
would remain high and unsustainable, yet the buoyancy of the tax system would improve. Further, government
expenditure structure would improve (similar to the low case scenario), in light of the higher shares of investments
spending, purchase of goods and services, and spending on education and health to fulfill the constitutional
pledges. On the external front, the additional projected external inflows from the Gulf and private investors would
improve the overall balance of payments (BoP), which is likely to record a higher surplus worth 2.1% of GDP in
FY16 and 1.7% of GDP in FY18. However, the higher projected BoP surplus would mask a higher imports bill
and deteriorated trade deficit, as compared to the low case scenario.



 Figure-5: Egypt Key Macroeconomic Indicators under both the Baseline and Program Scenarios
           Real GDP growth rate (y/y)                       Unemployment Rate (%)
           Low case Scenario        High case Scenario                    Low case Scenario     High case Scenario
   6.0                                                            13.5
   5.0                                                            12.5
   4.0
                                                                  11.5
   3.0
   2.0                                                            10.5

   1.0                                                             9.5
          2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                        2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

           Balance of Payments (% of GDP)                                  NIR Commodity imports coverage
             Low case Scenario          High case Scenario                          (months)
   4.0                                                            7.0                    Low case Scenario
   2.0                                                                                   High case Scenario
                                                                  6.0

   0.0                                                            5.0

   -2.0                                                           4.0

   -4.0                                                           3.0

   -6.0                                                           2.0
          2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018                        2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

 Source: Authors’ calculations and projections.




                                                             16
Topic-2: Macroeconomic Implications of Developments in Egypt’s Energy Sector
                           Building on Domestic Reforms and Favorable International Conditions



 The energy sector in Egypt has been particularly sensitive to the political turmoil and bouts of unrest that the
 country has witnessed, most notably during the revolutions in 2011 and 2014. The instability has unveiled large
 structural and financial problems in the energy sector; thus kick-starting a vicious cycle of accumulating arrears
 by the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation (EGPC) that in turn halted new investments in the sector.
 Electricity is highly dependent on oil and gas in Egypt, and so blackouts increased consequently, especially during
 the summers.9 This has had dire economic implications, since Egypt’s prosperity depends to a large extent on the
 availability, security and stability of energy; a sector representing around 18% of GDP in FY14, and providing
 more than 300,000 direct jobs, and with inter-linkages across all other sectors in the economy.

 This note first shows and demonstrates (numerically) the deterioration in the energy sector, and its
 macroeconomic implications. It then covers the Government of Egypt's responses so far to address the energy
 crisis, and what other outstanding challenges continue to persist. It then illustrates how the drop in
 international oil prices provides a marginal upside factor that has an overall positive macroeconomic impact.
 The note finally concludes with the social dimension; reflecting on how the poor and vulnerable are affected by
 the developments in the energy sector, and what is needed to protect them from the impact of energy sector
 reform efforts.



 1.         Setting the Stage: The Deteriorating Energy Sector in Egypt

 Total investments declined significantly since 2011, and so did the energy sector's share in this smaller pool
 (Figure-6a). In FY14, the sector's share reached around 23% of total investments, some 10 percentage points
 lower than its levels prior to FY11. The drop in public and private investments mirrors the heightened instability
 during FY11 and FY14 (Figure-6b).




 9
     It is estimated that 91% of electricity generated is derived from oil and natural gas.
                                                                        17
   Figure-6a: Energy Investments and Total                   Figure-6b: Public and Private Energy
   Investments to GDP Ratios                                 Investments to Total Investments
     25%                                                      20%
                                                              18%
     20%                                                      16%
                                                              14%
     15%
                                                              12%
     10%                                                      10%
                                                               8%
      5%                                                       6%
                                                               4%
      0%                                                       2%
           FY07FY08FY09FY10FY11FY12FY13FY14                    0%
                  Total Investments as % of GDP                      FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14

                  Energy Investments as % of GDP                                   Public    Private

   Source: Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform.



Furthermore, in light of the economic and political uncertainty, no new exploration agreements were signed
during 2011-2013. Thus, with the ensuing liquidity crunch in the energy sector, EGPC started facing serious
financial difficulties; accumulating arrears to international oil companies operating in Egypt, which reached a
high of US$6.4 billion by end-FY14, before decreasing to US$3 billion as of end-March 2015, with the partial
repayments made by the government. In turn, the presence of arrears hampered private investments in the sector,
thus deepening the financial crunch borne by the sector (Figures 7a and 7b).



     Figure-7: Arrears to IOCs and Private Energy Investments Moving in Opposite Directions
             (7a) Arrears to International Oil                             (7b) Private Oil and Gas
                Companies (US$ billions)                                  Investments (US$ millions)
       7                     6.31            6.4                  8,000           7,179           7,109
       6                             5.4                          7,000   6,046
                                                                  6,000                   5,519           5,357
       5
                                                                  5,000
       4             3.17                           3.1           4,000                                           3,357
       3
                                                                  3,000
       2   1.33                                                   2,000
       1                                                          1,000
       0                                                             -
           FY10      FY11   FY12    FY13    FY14 Dec. 14                  FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14

     Source: Ministry of Petroleum and Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform.



These developments led to continuous energy supply bottlenecks. The pace of domestic energy production has
been slow and lower than resilient demand. Oil and gas production grew at a meager 2.5% during the period

                                                             18
FY11-FY14, part of which was not dedicated to domestic consumption, but rather to exports, in addition to some
process losses. Meanwhile, domestic consumption of oil and gas has increased at around 10% over the same
period; notwithstanding the sluggish economic activity in Egypt. This led to widening supply-demand gaps. The
oil products’ shortages were estimated at around 2.9 million tons in FY14 (Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and
Administrative Reform). Also, the electricity gap at peak hours is estimated at 4500 megawatts.

The energy shortages have had dire implications for Egypt’s macro economy, namely, limited production, a
rising fuel subsidy bill, and a widening oil trade balance. Those are taken up next.

2.         Macroeconomic Implications of the Energy Crisis

GDP has been negatively impacted by the energy shortages, both directly, as oil and gas extractions became a
drag on growth, as well as indirectly, through the negative effect on all industries that suffered from the outages
and blackouts (Figures 8a and 8b).10



         Figure-8a: Extractives' Contribution to                       Figure-8b: Real Growth of GDP and of
         Growth                                                        Extractives
            1.0%           0.8%                                           8.0%
            0.8%                                                          6.0%
            0.6%                                                          4.0%
                 0.3% 0.3%
            0.4%                                                          2.0%
            0.2%                0.1% 0.1%
                                          0.0%                            0.0%
            0.0%                                                          -2.0%
           -0.2% FY07FY08FY09FY10FY11FY12FY13FY14                         -4.0%
           -0.4%
                                               -0.4%                      -6.0%
           -0.6%
                                                                          -8.0%
           -0.8%
           -1.0%                                                                   Extractions   Real GDP Growth
                                                    -0.9%
         Source: Ministry of Planning, Monitoring and Administrative Reform.



In light of the sluggish performance of the domestic oil and gas extractives, the sector started to become a
rising burden on the government budget, especially with the increasing reliance on importation since FY11, at
a time when international oil prices were on the rise. (Figure-9) shows the effect of the deteriorating oil and gas
production levels on Egypt’s fiscal accounts. Prior to FY11, the settlements between the Ministry of Petroleum
and the budget yielded on average a balanced fiscal relation, such that the revenues from the oil sector were
counterbalanced by the subsidies received by the sector from the budget. However, the energy sector's
deteriorating conditions have resulted in a rising burden on the budget (Figure-9a). As such, the e fuel subsidy
took up around a third of government revenues, represented a fifth of government expenditures and some 7% of
GDP in FY14 (Figure-9b).




10
     See Annex 3 for the distribution of fuel and electricity consumption by sector.
                                                                     19
  Figure-9a: Oil Sector Contribution to Fiscal                                                      Figure-9b: Fuel Subsidies and Total
  Deficit                                                                                           Expenditures
                    10,000                            3,845 2,069                                       25%
                                           671                                                                      21.3%                           20.4%
                                   -                                                                    20%    18.1%     17.8%                           18.0%
                                              (2,064)                  (1,751)
   in Million LE




                   (10,000)                                                                             15%

                   (20,000)                                                                             10%           6.7% 6.0%                 6.8% 6.3%
                                                                                                               5.4%                   4.9% 6.1%
                   (30,000)                                                                             5%
                                                                             (33,245)
                   (40,000)                                                                             0%
                                                                                  (38,778)                     FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14
                   (50,000)                                                             (42,948)
                                                                                                                       Fuel Subsidies as % of GDP
                                                                                                                       Gov. Expenditure as % of GDP

  Source: Authors' calculations based on Ministry of Finance.


Similarly, the oil trade balance has widened, due to the conditions in the sector. Egypt switched to become a
net importer of oil since FY12, as the energy supply shortages were increasingly met through higher imports
(Figure 10a). On top of that, the value added component in Egypt’s oil exports continued to drop, as Egypt’s oil
exports became predominantly crude oil (Figure-10b).



   Figure-10a: Net Petroleum Balance                                                                    Figure-10b: Share of Crude Oil in Fuel
                                                                                                        Exports
                                 7,000                                                                   80%
                                           5,980                                                                69.1%
                                 6,000                                                                   70%         66.1%
                                                                   5,098                                                  63.6%                            61.9%
                                                   4,912
                                 5,000                                                                   60%                                          56.1%
                                                           3,973
                                 4,000                                                                   50%                              46.7%46.4%
                                                                                                                                  43.6%
                   Million US$




                                                                           2,874
                                 3,000                                                                   40%
                                 2,000
                                                                                                         30%
                                                                                     899
                                 1,000
                                                                                                         20%
                                       0
                                           FY07FY08FY09FY10FY11FY12FY13FY14                              10%
                                 -1,000                        -550    -795                              0%
                                 -2,000                                                                         FY07 FY08 FY09 FY10 FY11 FY12 FY13 FY14

   Source: Central Bank of Egypt.



3.   Measures Undertaken by the Egyptian Government to Address the Energy Crisis: a Comprehensive
Approach

The government took bold steps towards streamlining energy subsidies. In July 2014, the government raised the
prices of all fuel products, with the exception of butane gas cylinders (LPG), as well as the natural gas used by
households and public bakeries, in addition to fuel oil for the electricity sector. The price hikes generally ranged
                                                                                                   20
between 12 and 8%, but were the highest for electricity and natural gas, which increased more than 140 and 170%
(See tables in Annex 2). This step is expected to generate fiscal savings worth EGP44 billion (almost 2% of GDP)
in FY15, and is aimed to incentivize individuals and firms to rationalize their excessive consumption and
importation of fuel products, promote energy efficiency, and inhibit capital intensive industries, in addition to
improve the financial position of the EGPC. This reform effort is also complemented with a plan to extend natural
gas grids to households who currently depend on the costly LPG. The latter represents a win-win reform where
all parties benefit from using a cheaper a more reliable, economically feasible, and cleaner source of energy.

Further, the government increased electricity tariffs for residents (all consumption brackets, except the first one)
and for commercial use by 25%. The government also consolidated the tariffs structure, with prices adjusting
according to peak consumption hours. The fiscal savings from this step are expected to be EGP7 billion (0.3% of
GDP) in FY15. Further, the government issued a decree to detail the annual electricity tariffs for various users
and different blocks over 5-years; planning to reach cost-recovery by FY19. And in order to enhance efficiency
and incentivize the private sector to invest in electricity generation, the government announced the feed-in tariffs
of electricity generated from renewables (solar and wind power). These reform measures should help industries
better plan for their investment prospects, given the announced future prices of electricity and renewables.

In addition to the steps taken towards streamlining energy subsidies, the government is also attempting to
increase access to adequate energy, through the importation of natural gas, and through signing new exploration
agreements, which have been halted between 2011 and 2013. As such, around 38 agreements were signed since
the beginning of 2014. Also, during the Economic Development Conference that was held in March 2015, Egypt
signed investment deals worth US$36 billion, predominantly in the energy sector.

On the governance and regulations front, the government is in the process of approving a new ‘electricity law’
which will lead to a spin-off of the transmission company, from the electricity holding company, thus setting it
up as a transmission system operator (TSO). This in turn requires an executive, capacity building and restructuring
effort by the sector. For the gas sector, a ‘regulator’ and a ‘gas law’ are being prepared, and a shadow regulator
has been established. This should allow opening the market for gas trade. These steps will require continuing
reforms in both the electricity and gas/petroleum sectors.

Notwithstanding the ongoing reforms in the energy sector, one of the most pressing challenges is the need to
resolve financial inter-linkages, debts and payments between different entities; mainly amongst the Ministry of
Electricity and Renewable Energy, the Ministry of Petroleum and the Ministry of Finance. The figures for the
internal outstanding debts amongst these entities are not exactly known. This will require a collective internal
effort in each sector as well as integrated work between them.

Furthermore, one emerging risk is the accumulation of contingent liabilities towards the energy sector by the
Ministry of Finance, as a result of guarantees provided to Independent Power Producers. Egypt signed three
projects with Independent Power Producers, that the Ministry of Finance later backed by sovereign guarantees,
amounting to US$3.5 billion that could potentially be called upon if any of these projects were to run into financial
difficulties. In addition, there is a growing number of Memorandums of Understanding that are being signed with
a wide range of foreign power developers that are also supported by government guarantees and are leading to
the accumulation of further contingent liabilities.


                                                         21
Besides the recent efforts to contain the energy crisis, international developments, especially the decline in oil
prices, have provided favorable conditions, as well. Thus, the following section attempts to capture the distinctive
effect of the oil price drop on Egypt’s macroeconomic indicators.

4.       Oil Price Drop: Implications for Egypt

The drop in the price of oil in the international markets occurred at such a critical time, when Egypt has been
suffering from acute energy shortages, a soaring subsidy bill, and a widening oil trade balance. While the
government has adopted initial key reform measures in the beginning of FY15 – as discussed above, including
the partial streamlining of energy subsidies; projected to save around 2% of GDP, and improve energy availability
– the lower oil prices are expected to give an additional boost towards addressing the above challenges.

We expect the impact of the lower international oil prices to be favorable for Egypt’s growth, inflation and fiscal
accounts in the short-term, but possibly unfavorable for the external accounts. Figure-11 demonstrates the direct
impact of a US$10 decline in the international price of oil in FY15, holding all else constant.



           Figure-11: Ceteris Paribus Change in Macro-Indicators due to a US$10 Drop in Oil Price.




      Source: Authors’ calculations.


GDP growth is expected to be boosted (by about 0.2 percentage points)11, as production accelerates with
availability of more adequate access to energy, and the easing of the existing supply bottlenecks. This will come
about through lower international transportation costs, as well as the ability to afford larger amounts of imported
oil by the government and the private sector. While non-oil exports are also expected to benefit, this may be
counterbalanced by the rising non-oil merchandise import bill, in tandem with the economic uptick. The demand-
side of GDP may be positively affected by the lower prices, mainly through the second round effects as incomes
and profits start increasing, and as the political and social conditions improve especially if the coming summer
witnessed fewer blackouts and outages.



11
  In this part, we try to capture the additional change in the respective macro-indicators, due to the impact of the oil price drop. For
example, GDP growth was expected to be around 4% in FY15. But due to the lower international oil prices, GDP growth is expected
to be at least 4.2%.
                                                                   22
Inflation should be contained on the back of the declining oil prices (likely to decline by 0.4 percentage points);
an upside factor to relative food security. The lower international oil prices are expected to be reflected into a
lower oil import bill, which will further benefit from the lower international shipping and transportation costs.
The latter is also expected to curb food prices, which constitute more than 40% of consumer prices. Additionally,
since firms will be operating at a better capacity, thus domestic prices may fall, as supply is enhanced.

Egypt’s fiscal accounts are also expected to benefit from the decline in the international oil prices, although
meagerly (by around 0.12% of the FY15 GDP).12 On the one hand, a US$10/barrel decline in the international
oil prices will lead to a decrease in the imported portion of the fuel subsidy bill (that is around 50%); with fiscal
savings estimated at some 0.2% of the FY15 GDP. This however will be watered-down by the decline in the
revenues to the budget in the form of taxes and dividends, resulting from the non-subsidized activities of EGPC.

The external accounts are expected to suffer slightly negative consequences (with a widening overall deficit by
around 0.3% of FY15 projected GDP). Egypt has become a net oil importer since 2012. The upshot of the decline
in international oil prices thus is a lower oil trade deficit (especially that crude oil represents 22% of Egypt’s total
petroleum imports). The downside however, is that Egypt may receive less remittances, mainly as the Gulf
countries (the source of around 75% of Egypt’s remittances) bears the negative consequences of the oil price
shock. A 5% decline in remittance inflows from Gulf countries implies foregone receipts worth US$0.7-
0.8 billion; 0.25% of FY15 projected GDP. This might not fully materialize in the short term, but if prices prevail
at lower levels over the medium-term, companies in the Gulf may start adjusting their cost structure, including
cuts to employment and wages. Furthermore, tourism may well be negatively affected, as Russian and Gulf
tourists start decreasing their spending on such arguably dispensable expenditures. Moreover, FDI into the oil and
gas sector (representing around 50% of total FDI inflows) might be also adversely impacted. However, we project
this channel to be contained, in the short term, unless the oil price decline is sustained over the medium term.

5.      The Social Implications of Developments in the Oil Sector

The energy shortages since 2011 have created disruptions in economic activity, which in turn have had
negative social implications, notably due to the rising unemployment rates. This negative effect may start
abating following the recent energy sector reforms. The government’s decision to reform the energy price
structure, and gradually phase out fuel and electricity subsidies are expected to avail some fiscal space and can
pave the way for the government to adopt a more efficient and better targeted social safety net, and allocate
resources towards more productive public spending, including on infrastructure. The reforms may also help
rationalize excessive energy consumption, and can stimulate labor-intensive activities, and promote more efficient
use of energy. This in turn is expected to have spillover effects on overall production levels, with the more
adequate access to energy, and will help create employment.

But while these reforms are necessary to bring Egypt back on a fiscally sustainable path, they will undoubtedly
affect people both directly (through fuel and electricity consumption) as well as indirectly (through second
round effects of higher energy prices, and economy-wide inter-linkages). The lion’s share of the energy
subsidies accrue to the non-poor in Egypt. About 56% of the energy subsidies (fuels and electricity) went to the
top 40% of the population in FY13. 13 Also, energy consumption patterns differ across the various income
segments: Electricity is almost equally important for all quintiles, but fuel products’ consumption varies.

12
 The fiscal outturns of the first seven months of FY15 show a decline in the fuel subsidy bill by around 30%.
13
 World Bank. 2014. Policy Brief: Energy Subsidy Reforms in Egypt. Mimeo.
                                                                 23
Households in the richest quintile spend a larger proportion of their energy budget on transportation fuels
compared to households in poorer quintiles. By contrast, households in poorer quintiles spend more on LPG



                             Figure-12: Energy Consumption Patterns across Quintiles




                Source: World Bank, based on Household Income, Expenditure and Consumption Survey 2012/13. Mimeo.



So far, given that the recent reforms did not touch LPG prices, as well as natural gas for households and
bakeries, the direct poverty impact is expected to be relatively contained, but not totally negligible. Holding all
else constant, it is estimated that the upward adjustments to energy prices in July 2014 may have pushed some
400,000 people below the poverty line.14 However, the effect of the price increases cannot be unambiguously
determined in separation from other developments, such as the recently moderating inflation rates, and the
government stimulus that involved raising employees’ compensations. Further, the collapse in the international
oil prices also provides a downside factor that has curbed imported inflation in Egypt. Therefore, the overall
impact on the poor and vulnerable is unclear.

The fiscal savings from the energy subsidy reforms will be partly used to restructure public expenditures to
benefit the needy, and to meet the new constitution’s pledges. The government is allocating around
EGP22 billion (around 43%) of the fiscal savings from the energy subsidy reform to health and education.
Budget allocations to health, as well as pre-university and university education are expected to increase to 3%,
and 6% of GDP, respectively by FY17. In addition, another EGP5 billion (around 10%) of the fiscal savings
will be directed to scale up social protection. The government is developing well-targeted cash transfers; a
conditional program (Takafol or solidarity) and an unconditional one (Karama or dignity); seeking to cover 1.5
million beneficiaries by end-2017. The first phase of these cash transfer programs are currently being rolled out;
targeting the governorates with poverty rates higher than 60%. In addition to the geographical targeting, a proxy
means testing method is used to ensure selecting the neediest.


 This estimation relies on the World Bank staff’s calculations based on a Computable General Equilibrium Model, and the
14

Household Income, Expenditure and Consumption Survey 2012/13 data.
                                                               24
For the medium term, Egypt needs to continue developing a “national” cash transfer, supported by a unified
national registry, prior to aggressive subsidy reform. This is needed to ensure appropriate identification for the
protection of the poor and vulnerable from the direct and indirect effects of price increases. At this time,
Egypt’s ration card system has robust baseline information on 19 million households, benefiting from the food
subsidy program, but the program is largely untargeted. The ration card system database (known as the family
smart card database) offers an opportunity to identify the largest possible segment of the poor and vulnerable
population from this comprehensive database and to dispense cash transfers more readily. Furthermore, to
ensure energy conservation and adequacy, more diversity and efficiency in the use of energy is needed, notably
in transport, energy-intensive industries and households.




                                                        25
                                                                      X-           ANNEXES



Annex 1: Egypt’s Macroeconomic Projections (Baseline Scenario)
                                                  Annex-1: Egypt Macroeconomic Projections (Baseline Scenario)
                                                                         2010       2011       2012      2013          2014      2015          2016        2017
       MARCH 15 2015
                                                                        Actual     Actual     Actual    Actual     Preliminary Forecast      Forecast    Forecast
       Real Sector and Prices
       GDP at market prices (EGP bn)                                      1,207      1,371      1,575      1,753         1,996      2,318       2,683       3,098
       GDP at market prices (USD bn)                                      218.9      236.0      257.3      271.8         286.4      310.8       344.2       382.2
       Real GDP Growth Rate (y/y)                                           5.1        1.8        2.2        2.1           2.2        4.3         4.7         5.0
       Deflator ( y/y)                                                    10.11      11.74      12.60        9.1          11.5       11.8        11.0        10.5
       National Investment ratio (% of GDP)                               17.80      17.10      16.40      14.20         14.05      15.31       15.85       16.54
       Unemployment Rate (End of period)                                    9.2       11.8       12.6      13.34          13.3       12.7        12.1        11.4
       CPI Annual Inflation Rate, (Period Average, y/y)                    11.7       11.0        8.6        6.9          10.1       11.0        10.5         9.9
       364-day T-bill interest rate (period average)                       10.5       11.5       14.8       14.4          12.0       12.2        11.9        11.7
       91-day T-bill interest rate (period average)                         9.9       11.5       13.1       13.3          10.9       11.5        11.2          11

       Public Finance
       Total Revenues (% of GDP)                                            22.2      19.3       19.3       19.7          22.9        21.8        21.7        21.5
       Total Expenditures (% of GDP)                                        30.3      29.3       29.9       33.2          35.1        33.1        32.2        31.5
       Overall budget deficit (% of GDP) 1/                                  8.1       9.8       10.6       13.7          12.8        11.3        10.5        10.1
       Primary deficit (% of GDP)                                            2.1       3.6        4.0        5.3           4.1         0.9         2.8         2.2
       Gross Domestic Budget Sector debt (% of GDP)                           67      70.5       74.9       82.4          86.9        87.8        87.7        87.2
       Underlying budget deficit after excluding exceptional
       receipts (% of GDP)                                                   8.1       9.8       10.6       13.7          17.2        12.3        11.4        10.9
       Government Saving Ratio = Revenues less current
       Expenditure (% of GDP)                                               -4.1       -7.1      -8.3      -11.4          -9.6        -5.6        -7.3        -6.6

       Energy Sector
       Fuel Subsidies (EGP bn)                                             66.5       67.7       95.5      120.0         126.2        80.2        86.0        84.0
       Fuel Subsidies (% of GDP)                                            5.5        4.9        6.1        6.8           6.3        3.46        3.09        2.71
       Fuel subsidies (% of total Expenditures)                            18.2       16.8       20.3       20.6          18.0        10.5        10.0         8.6
       Arrears due on EGPC (USD bn)                                        N.A.       N.A.       N.A.        5.4           5.9         2.0         0.0         0.0
       Petroleum Trade Balance (USD bn)                                    5.10       2.87      -0.55       -0.5          -0.8        -0.9        -1.2        -1.4
        Total Petroleum Imports (USD bn)                                   5.16       9.26      11.77       12.5          13.2        13.6        14.0        14.5
        Total Petroleum Exports (USD bn)                                   10.3       12.1       11.2       12.0          12.5        12.6        12.8        13.1
       Price of crude oil (Brent , USD) 2/                                  79.6     111.3      111.7      105.8         101.8         80          80          85

       External Sector
       Trade Balance (% of GDP)                                            -11.5     -11.5      -13.3      -11.6         -11.8       -11.4       -10.9       -10.5
       Current Account Balance (% of GDP)                                   -2.0      -2.6       -3.1       -2.1          -0.8        -3.4        -3.2        -2.6
       Net Foreign Direct Investment inflows (% of GDP)                      3.1       0.9        1.5        1.1           1.5         1.9         2.3         2.5
       Capital and Financial Account Balance (% of GDP)
       (does not include errors & omissions)                                 4.1       -1.8       0.4        3.6           1.7         3.8         4.3         3.3
       Overall Balance of Payments (% of GDP)                                1.5       -4.1      -4.4        0.1           0.5         0.3         1.0         0.6
       NIR liquid Coverage (End of period, months of merchandise
       imports)                                                              8.6       6.3        3.2        3.1           3.3         3.3         3.9         4.1
       External Debt (% of GDP)                                             15.4      14.8       13.4       15.9          16.1        16.3        17.0        15.3
       External Government Debt (% of GDP)                                  12.0      11.5        9.9       10.5          10.1         9.3         8.8         8.5

       Monetary Sector
       Broad Money Annual growth rate (period average)                       10.4         10       8.4       18.4          17.0         21.7       23.6      24.6
       Private Sector Credit Annual growth rate (period average)              7.7        0.8       7.3        9.8            7.4         9.3       13.0      14.5
       Private Sector Credit Annual real growth rate (period average)        -4.0      -10.2      -1.3        2.9           -2.7        -1.8        2.5       4.6
N.A.   Data is not available.
       Projected deficit figures assume that the constitutional pledges will be realized by end FY17. This entails additional fiscal burden of around 1-1.5% of
  1/   GDP assuming that the government will (a) use 3-years average GDP to calculate spending targets/ceilings and (b) will redefine government total
       spending on heath and education sectors to capture current spending by other entities (Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Interior, Al-Azhar University,
  2/   US. Energy Information Administration
  3/   Drop in NIR despite BoP surplus due to Gold Revaluation losses


                                                                                      26
Annex 2: Egypt Summary Tables

      Egypt, Arab Rep. at a glance                                                                                                                                              2/22/15

                                                                                            M . East       Lo wer
      Ke y D e v e lo pm e nt Indic a t o rs                                                & No rth      middle
                                                                               Egypt         A frica     inco me              Age distribution, 2012
      ( 2 0 13 )
                                                                                                                                                 Male (..)                       Female (..)

      P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)                                         82.1            340      2,507              75- 79
      Surface area (tho usand sq. km)                                            1,001          8,775     20,742
                                                                                                                              60- 64
      P o pulatio n gro wth (%)                                                     1.7            1.7        1.5
      Urban po pulatio n (% o f to tal po pulatio n)                                44             60         39              45- 49

                                                                                                                              30- 34
      GNI (A tlas metho d, US$ billio ns)                                      259.0           1,113        4,745
                                                                                                                              15- 19
      GNI per capita (A tlas metho d, US$ )                                     3,160        3,450          1,893
      GNI per capita (P P P , internatio nal $ )                              6,450          7,062          3,877                  0-4
                                                                                                                                         10             5            0             5           10

      GDP gro wth (%)                                                             2.1             1.9         4.7                                     percent of total population
      GDP per capita gro wth (%)                                                  0.4             0.2         3.2

      ( m o s t re c e nt e s t im a t e , 2 0 0 5 – 2 0 12 )

      P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1 .25 a day (P P P , %)                      <2               2        27.1
                                                                                                                          Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000)
      P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 2.00 a day (P P P , %)                       15              12        56.3
      Life expectancy at birth (years)                                             71              71         66
                                                                                                                              90
      Infant mo rtality (per 1,000 live births)                                    18              21         46
                                                                                                                              80
      Child malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)                                  7               6         24
                                                                                                                              70
                                                                                                                              60
      A dult literacy, male (% o f ages 15 and o lder)                             82              85          80             50
      A dult literacy, female (% o f ages 15 and o lder)                           66              70          62             40
      Gro ss primary enro llment, male (% o f age gro up)                          116            109         107             30
      Gro ss primary enro llment, female (% o f age gro up)                        1 11           101         104             20
                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                               0
      A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)                   99              90          88                             1990          1995         2000      2012
      A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)             96              87          47

                                                                                                                                    Egypt, Arab R ep.          Middle East & N orth Afr ica


                                                                                                                     a
      N e t A id F lo ws                                          19 8 0       19 9 0          2000        2 0 13

      (US$ millio ns)
      Net ODA and o fficial aid                                    1,386       6,057             1,371      1,807         Growth of GDP and GDP per capita (%)
      To p 3 do no rs (in 2012):
       Euro pean Unio n Institutio ns                                 32          48              73         769         8
       France                                                         33         140             242         140
                                                                                                                         6
       Germany                                                       107         347              65         103
                                                                                                                         4
      A id (% o f GNI)                                               6.5         14.4              1.4        0.7
                                                                                                                         2
      A id per capita (US$ )                                          31         108               21         22
                                                                                                                         0

      Lo ng- T e rm E c o no m ic T re nds                                                                               -2
                                                                                                                                                 95                         05

      Co nsumer prices (annual % change)                               ..        21.2             2.8         9.4
      GDP implicit deflato r (annual % change)                      18.0         18.4             4.9         9.0                                GDP                       GDP per capita

      Exchange rate (annual average, lo cal per US$ )                0.7          2.2             3.4         6.4
      Terms o f trade index (2000 = 100)                               ..         108             100         96
                                                                                                                              19 8 0 – 9 0 19 9 0 – 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 – 13
                                                                                                                                      (average annual gro wth %)
      P o pulatio n, mid-year (millio ns)                          44.9          56.3           66.1         82.1                         2.3                      1.6                 1.7
      GDP (US$ millio ns)                                        22,912        43,130        99,839      271,973                          5.4                      4.4                 4.7
                                                                                 (% o f GDP )
      A griculture                                                  18.3         19.4            16.7        14.5                         2.7                      3.1                 3.3
      Industry                                                      36.8         28.7            33.1        39.2                         3.3                      5.1                 5.1
        M anufacturing                                              12.2         17.8            19.4        14.5                           ..                     6.3                 4.4
      Services                                                      45.0         52.0            50.1        46.3                         7.8                      4.1                 5.0

      Ho useho ld final co nsumptio n expenditure                   69.2         72.6            75.9        81.2                         3.6                      3.8                 4.4
      General go v't final co nsumptio n expenditure                15.7          11.3            11.2       11.7                         3.1                      4.4                 3.0
      Gro ss capital fo rmatio n                                    27.5         28.8            19.6        14.2                         0.0                      5.8                 6.0

      Expo rts o f go o ds and services                             30.5         20.0            16.2        17.6                          5.2                     3.5              11.0
      Impo rts o f go o ds and services                             42.9         32.7            22.8        24.7                         -2.0                     3.0              10.5
      Gro ss savings                                                   ..           ..              ..          ..


      No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.
      a. A id data are fo r 2012.

      Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).




                                                                                          27
                                                                                                                                                                   Egypt, Arab Rep.

B a la nc e o f P a ym e nt s a nd T ra de                        2000          2 0 13
                                                                                                        Governance indicators, 2000 and 2012
(US$ millio ns)
To tal merchandise expo rts (fo b)                                 6,388        28,151
                                                                                                          Voice and accountability
To tal merchandise impo rts (cif)                                 17,860       50,503
Net trade in go o ds and services                                 -6,774       -7,552
                                                                                                                  Polit ical stability

Current acco unt balance                                           -1,163       -3,843
                                                                                                                Regulat ory quality
 as a % o f GDP                                                       -1.2         -1.4
                                                                                                                        Rule of law
Wo rkers' remittances and
 co mpensatio n o f emplo yees (receipts)                          2,852       19,236                        Control of corruption

Reserves, including go ld                                          15,161      22,638                                                    0.0        25.0        50.0         75.0       100.0


                                                                                                                 2012                          Country's percentile rank (0-100)
C e nt ra l G o v e rnm e nt F ina nc e                                                                                                          higher values imply better ratings
                                                                                                                 2000

(% o f GDP )
                                                                                                       Source: Worldw ide Governance Indicators (w w w .govindicators.org)
Current revenue (including grants)                                  21.6             21.4
 Tax revenue                                                        14.6             14.3
Current expenditure                                                 20.5             19.2
                                                                                                     T e c hno lo gy a nd Inf ra s t ruc t ure                            2000          2 0 12
Overall surplus/deficit                                              -3.9             -9.1
                                                                                                     P aved ro ads (% o f to tal)                                            78.0       92.2
Highest marginal tax rate (%)                                                                        Fixed line and mo bile pho ne
 Individual                                                          34              20               subscribers (per 1  00 peo ple)                                           10         131
 Co rpo rate                                                              ..         20              High techno lo gy expo rts
                                                                                                      (% o f manufactured expo rts)                                           0.3          0.6
E xt e rna l D e bt a nd R e s o urc e F lo ws
                                                                                                     E nv iro nm e nt
(US$ millio ns)
To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed                            29,178       38,338                A gricultural land (% o f land area)                                       3          4
To tal debt service                                                1,837        5,765                Fo rest area (% o f land area)                                           0.1         0.1
Debt relief (HIP C, M DRI)                                             –            –                Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)                           4.3         11.2

To tal debt (% o f GDP )                                            29.2              14.1           Freshwater reso urces per capita (cu. meters)                         26             23
To tal debt service (% o f expo rts)                                 8.9              9.2            Freshwater withdrawal (% o f internal reso urces)                 3,794.4        3,794.4

Fo reign direct investment (net inflo ws)                          1,235                   ..        CO2 emissio ns per capita (mt)                                            2.1        2.6
P o rtfo lio equity (net inflo ws)                                   269                   ..
                                                                                                     GDP per unit o f energy use
                                                                                                      (2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)                               6.9         5.9
  Composition of total external debt, 2012
                                                                                                     Energy use per capita (kg o f o il equivalent)                           615        978
                                  IBRD, 3,109
                                                   IDA, 1,230
                    Short-term,                              IMF, 1,381
                      6,657                                                                          Wo rld B a nk G ro up po rt f o lio                                  2000          2 0 12


   Private, 3,273                                                                                    (US$ millio ns)
                                                                    Other multi-
                                                                   lateral, 6,102
                                                                                                     IB RD
                                                                                                      To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed                                 639         3,109
                                                                                                      Disbursements                                                            6          392
                                                                                                      P rincipal repayments                                                   87            74
                                          Bilateral,
                                                                                                      Interest payments                                                       41            45
                                           18,248
  US$ millions                                                                                       IDA
                                                                                                      To tal debt o utstanding and disbursed                                1,266        1,230
                                                                                                      Disbursements                                                            49            7
P riv a t e S e c t o r D e v e lo pm e nt                        2000          2 0 12                To tal debt service                                                      32           70

Time required to start a business (days)                                  –             8            IFC (fiscal year)
Co st to start a business (% o f GNI per capita)                          –          10.2             To tal disbursed and o utstanding po rtfo lio                           163         883
Time required to register pro perty (days)                                –           73               o f which IFC o wn acco unt                                            163         771
                                                                                                      Disbursements fo r IFC o wn acco unt                                     25         303
Ranked as a majo r co nstraint to business                        2000          2 0 12                P o rtfo lio sales, prepayments and
 (% o f managers surveyed who agreed)                                                                  repayments fo r IFC o wn acco unt                                        14          35
  n.a.                                                                    ..        80.0
  n.a.                                                                    ..        63.8             M IGA
                                                                                                      Gro ss expo sure                                                           0         150
Sto ck market capitalizatio n (% o f GDP )                          28.8             22.1             New guarantees                                                             0         150
B ank capital to asset ratio (%)                                     5.6              6.3


No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified.                                                                                                                 2/22/15
.. indicates data are no t available. – indicates o bservatio n is no t applicable.

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).




                                                                                                28
Millennium Development Goals                                                                                                                                       Egypt, Arab Rep.


With selected targets to achieve b etween 1990 and 2015
(estimate clo sest to date sho wn, +/- 2 years)                                                                                             E gypt , A ra b R e p.


G o a l 1: ha lv e t he ra t e s f o r e xt re m e po v e rt y a nd m a lnut rit io n                                      19 9 0               19 9 5              2000                 2 0 12
 P o verty headco unt ratio at $ 1   .25 a day (P P P , % o f po pulatio n)                                                  4.5                 2.5                   <2                  <2
 P o verty headco unt ratio at natio nal po verty line (% o f po pulatio n)                                                      ..                   ..              16.7               25.2
 Share o f inco me o r co nsumptio n to the po o rest qunitile (%)                                                           8.7                 9.5                   9.0                 9.2
 P revalence o f malnutritio n (% o f children under 5)                                                                     10.5                  10.8                 4.3                 6.8


G o a l 2 : e ns ure t ha t c hildre n a re a ble t o c o m ple t e prim a ry s c ho o ling
 P rimary scho o l enro llment (net, %)                                                                                         ..                   91                   94               95
 P rimary co mpletio n rate (% o f relevant age gro up)                                                                         ..                   93                   97               107
 Seco ndary scho o l enro llment (gro ss, %)                                                                                   73                     74                  86                86
 Yo uth literacy rate (% o f peo ple ages 1 5-24)                                                                               ..                   73                    ..               89


G o a l 3 : e lim ina t e ge nde r dis pa rit y in e duc a t io n a nd e m po we r wo m e n
 Ratio o f girls to bo ys in primary and seco ndary educatio n (%)                                                              81                   88                   92                 97
 Wo men emplo yed in the no nagricultural secto r (% o f no nagricultural emplo yment)                                          21                   1 9                  19                18
 P ro po rtio n o f seats held by wo men in natio nal parliament (%)                                                             4                   2                     2                   2


G o a l 4 : re duc e unde r- 5 m o rt a lit y by t wo - t hirds
 Under-5 mo rtality rate (per 1 ,000)                                                                                          86                    64                   45                 21
 Infant mo rtality rate (per 1,000 live births)                                                                                63                    49                   36                 18
 M easles immunizatio n (pro po rtio n o f o ne-year o lds immunized, %)                                                       86                    89                   98                 93


G o a l 5 : re duc e m a t e rna l m o rt a lit y by t hre e - f o urt hs
 M aternal mo rtality ratio (mo deled estimate, per 1     00,000 live births)                                                120                     96                   75               50
 B irths attended by skilled health staff (% o f to tal)                                                                     37                      46                   61               79
 Co ntraceptive prevalence (% o f wo men ages 1         5-49)                                                                48                      48                   56               60


G o a l 6 : ha lt a nd be gin t o re v e rs e t he s pre a d o f H IV / A ID S a nd o t he r m a jo r dis e a s e s
 P revalence o f HIV (% o f po pulatio n ages 1  5-49)                                                            0.1                                0.1                  0.1                0.1
 Incidence o f tuberculo sis (per 100,000 peo ple)                                                                34                                 32                   26                 17
 Tuberculo sis case detectio n rate (%, all fo rms)                                                                 11                               58                   63                 62


G o a l 7 : ha lv e t he pro po rt io n o f pe o ple wit ho ut s us t a ina ble a c c e s s t o ba s ic ne e ds
 A ccess to an impro ved water so urce (% o f po pulatio n)                                                     93                                   95                   96                 99
 A ccess to impro ved sanitatio n facilities (% o f po pulatio n)                                               72                                   79                   86                 96
 Fo rest area (% o f land area)                                                                                 0.0                                  0.1                  0.1              0.1
 Terrestrial pro tected areas (% o f land area)                                                                 0.4                                  2.0                  4.3               11.2
 CO2 emissio ns (metric to ns per capita)                                                                       1.3                                  1.6                  2.1              2.6
 GDP per unit o f energy use (co nstant 2005 P P P $ per kg o f o il equivalent)                                5.7                                  6.2                  6.9              5.9


G o a l 8 : de v e lo p a glo ba l pa rt ne rs hip f o r de v e lo pm e nt
 Telepho ne mainlines (per 1   00 peo ple)                                                                                    2.8                    4.4                  8.3               10.6
 M o bile pho ne subscribers (per 1  00 peo ple)                                                                              0.0                    0.0                  2.1              119.9
 Internet users (per 1  00 peo ple)                                                                                           0.0                    0.0                  0.6               44.1
 Ho useho lds with a co mputer (%)                                                                                              ..                     ..                   ..             37.9



   Education indicators (%)                                       Measles immunization (% of 1-year                                    ICT indicators (per 100 people)
                                                                  olds)
  125                                                             100                                                                 140

  100                                                                                                                                 120
                                                                   75                                                                 100
   75
                                                                                                                                       80
   50                                                              50
                                                                                                                                       60
   25
                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                   25
    0                                                                                                                                  20
        2000                2005                2010
                                                                    0                                                                   0
                                                                               1990     1995     2000      2012                               2000               2005               2010

               Primar y net enrollm ent ratio
                                                                                                                                                        Fixed + mob ile subscr iber s
               Ratio of girls to boys in pr ima ry & secondar y         Egypt, Arab R ep.   Middle East & N orth Afr ica
               education                                                                                                                                Inter net users




No te: Figures in italics are fo r years o ther than tho se specified. .. indicates data are no t available.                                                                            2/22/15

Develo pment Eco no mics, Develo pment Data Gro up (DECDG).




                                                                                            29
Annex 3: Consumption of Energy Products by Sector.




Source: Ministry of Petroleum.




Source: Ministry of Petroleum.




Source: Ministry of Electricity and Renewable Energy.


                                                        30
Annex 4: Energy Prices
                                            Table A: Petroleum Prices

              Product                                                                                     New
                              Unit                          Sector                        Old price
                                                                                                          Price
                                       Iron - Copper - Aluminum - Glass – Ceramics             4             7.00
                                       Fertilizer - Petrochemicals                             4             4.50
                                       Cement                                                  6             8.00
                          $/mmbtu
                                       Brick - Engineering - Chemicals - Food -
                                                                                               4
                                       Medicines – Fabric                                                    5.00
        Natural Gas                    Electricity – BOOT                                     1.1            3.00
                                       Cars                                                   0.45           1.10
                                       Residential 1                                          0.4            0.40
                          EGP / M3     Residential 2                                           1             1.00
                                       Residential 3                                          1.5            1.50
                                       Bakeries                                               0.14           0.14
                                       80                                                     0.9            1.60
        Gasoline         EGP / Liter   92                                                     1.85           2.60
                                       95                                                     5.75           6.25
                                       Food Industry                                          1000        1400
                                       Cement                                                 1600        2250
        Fuel Oil         EGP / Ton
                                       Electricity                                            2300        2300
                                       Others                                              1,500          1950
                                       All Sectors                                            1.1            1.80
        Diesel           EGP / Liter
                                       66% of Tourism Sector                                  1.1            1.80
                                       Residential 1                                           8              8
        LPG               EGP / C
                                       Commercial                                              16             16

                                              Table B: Electricity Prices
       Residential (PT/kWh)                                                       Old Price          New price
       up to 50                                                                      5                  7.5
       51-100                                                                        12                14.5

       0-200                                                                                            16
       201-350                                                                       19                 24
       351-650                                                                       29                 34
       651-1000                                                                      53                 60
       above 1000                                                                    67                 74
       Commercial (PT/kWh)                                                        Old Price          New price
       0-100                                                                         27                 30
       0-250                                                                         41                 44
       251-600                                                                       53                 59
       601-1000                                                                      67                 78
       above 1000                                                                    72                 83


                                                          31
