                             97114




Corporate
Governance
Success Stories
in Europe and Central Asia

In Partnership with
           IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, creates opportunity for people to escape poverty and improve their
           lives. We foster sustainable economic growth in developing countries by supporting private sector development,
           mobilizing private capital, and providing advisory and risk mitigation services to businesses and governments.
           This report was commissioned by IFC through its Corporate Governance Group. The Group brings together
           staff from investment support and advisory operations into a single, global team. This unified team advises
           on all aspects of corporate governance and offers targeted client services in areas such as increasing board
           effectiveness, improving the control environment, and family businesses governance. The Group also helps
           support corporate governance improvements and reform efforts in emerging markets and developing countries,
           while leveraging and integrating knowledge tools, expertise, and networks at the global and regional levels.

           The conclusions and judgments contained in this report should not be attributed to, and do not
           necessarily represent the views of, IFC or its Board of Directors or the World Bank or its Executive
           Directors, or the countries they represent. IFC and the World Bank do not guarantee the accuracy of the
           accuracy of the data in this publication and accept no responsibility for any consequences of their use.

           The material in this work is protected by copyright. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work
           may be a violation of applicable law. The International Finance Corporation encourages dissemination
           of its work and hereby grants permission to users of this work to copy portions for their personal,
           noncommercial use, without any right to resell, redistribute, or create derivative works there from. Any
           other copying or use of this work requires the express written permission of the International Finance
           Corporation. For permission to photocopy or reprint, please send a request with complete information to:


           The International Finance Corporation                All queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary
           c/o the World Bank Permissions Desk                  rights, should be addressed to:
           Office of the Publisher                              The International Finance Corporation
           1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433               c/o the Office of the Publisher
                                                                World Bank
                                                                1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
                                                                Fax: (202) 522-2422




© Copyright 2015, All rights reserved.
International Finance Corporation
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW,
Washington, DC 20433

      2	
Introduction




               3
Foreword


This publication, Corporate Governance Success Stories in               The companies and banks highlighted in this publication
Europe and Central Asia, captures the experiences of seven              operate in the transition economies of Europe and Central
firms in Europe and Central Asia as they have implemented               Asia—Albania, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Kyrgyz Republic,
corporate governance improvement initiatives with the help              Serbia, and Tajikistan—where private sector participation in
of IFC. It is part of a series of regional profiles produced by         the economy continues to grow and where foreign investment
IFC that offer in-depth and first-hand insight on how emerging          has become increasingly important. IFC has long focused on
market companies and banks are addressing their business                corporate governance in this region as part of its broader
challenges through strengthened corporate governance.                   efforts to promote private sector investment, strengthen capital
                                                                        markets, and foster inclusive economic development and growth.
 Among the important findings from these case studies is that
there is no one-size-fits-all approach to company-level corporate       Through this publication, the profiled companies and banks share
governance improvement initiatives. The companies and                   their journeys and their challenges with an eye toward demonstrating
banks profiled here pursued their own paths, each taking an             to other firms the positive impacts that can result from corporate
incremental approach and implementing solutions appropriate             governance initiatives. Their commitment to going beyond the
for their size, unique circumstances, and market situation.             minimum levels of compliance provides real world evidence that
                                                                        good governance makes a difference, regardless of company
While the specific experiences differ, the positive impacts resulting
                                                                        size, ownership structure, industry, or operating environment.
from the governance changes are remarkably similar: expanded
access to capital, enhanced reputation, improved strategic decision     On behalf of IFC, I would like to express my appreciation to the
making and operational efficiency, and reduced business risk.           companies and banks whose stories are presented here: Altyn
A clear message gleaned from these results—as reported by               Ajydaar, Bank Republic, Galenika Fitofarmacija, KazMicroFinance,
the companies and banks themselves—is that investors place              Sharrcem Titan, Tajero, and Union Bank. Their willingness to
significant value on a demonstrated commitment to corporate             offer candid insights and the business perspective represents
governance best practices. In turn, this increased investor             a valuable addition to the corporate governance knowledge base.
confidence leads to strengthened financial sustainability and
market positioning. We also learn from their experiences that
internal champions and management support are critical factors                                                          Darrin Hartzler
in ensuring the success of a corporate governance initiative.
                                                                                                                                  Manager

                                                                                                       IFC Corporate Governance Group

                                                                                               Transactional Risk Solutions Department

                                                                                                   Environment, Social and Governance




         4	
Acknowledgements

This publication could not have moved forward without the participation of our clients, who
graciously agreed to share their first-hand corporate governance experiences. Our sincere thanks
go to them: Altyn Ajydaar, Bank Republic, Galenika Fitofarmacija, KazMicroFinance, Sharrcem
Titan, Tajero, and Union Bank.

We gratefully acknowledge Darrin Hartzler, Manager, IFC Corporate Governance Group, for his
institutional support and valuable insight.

Our appreciation extends to Oliver Orton, Olga Koldasova, Merima Zupcevic, Tahmina Nurova,
Yulia Holodkova, Kiril Nejkov, Boris Janjalia, and Adalyat Abdumanapova of the IFC Corporate
Governance Group for their contributions and to James Christopher Razook and Khawar Saeed
Ansari, also with the IFC Corporate Governance Group, for providing review and feedback.

Thanks also go to Loty Salazar for her guidance during the production, editing, design, and printing
stages, to Ann Moline for her editing work, and to Assel Choibekova for designing the publication.



                                                                                 Sergii Tryputen

                                        Europe and Central Asia Corporate Governance Program

                                                                IFC Corporate Governance Group

                                                         Transactional Risk Solutions Department

                                                            Environment, Social and Governance




                                                                                         5
Table of Contents


INTRODUCTION	10

ALTYN-AJYDAAR 	                                    14

BANK REPUBLIC	                                     18

GALENIKA FITOFARMACIJA	                            22

KAZMICROFINANCE	26

SHARRCEM TITAN/LABORATORY FOR BUSINESS ACTIVITY	   31

TAJERO	36

UNION BANK	                                        40

GLOSSARY OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE TERMS	            45




  6	
                           k
             n i o n Ban ices
           U            erv
              nancial s
                          ia
                    Alban

                                             R e p ublic
                      e m Titan          Bank services
                                                  ial
                    rc                        nanc rgia
               Shar
                                                 Geo
                            ing
       ika             build als
 Galen cija                  ri
      rma              mate o
Fitofa cals              Koso
                                v                           ar
   chemi                                            n -Ajyda
                                               Alty      er
     Serbia                                          pap
                                                       and ard
                                         ce              erbo
                                   Finan             pap public
     Tajero              azMi
                              c ro
                                      nce                Re
      food           K        na                    rgyz
                       micro hstan               Ky
        and             Kaza
                             k
              g e
       bevera
                   n
         Tajikista




                                                                  7
Executive Summary
This publication, Corporate Governance Success Stories in Europe and Central Asia, details
the experiences of seven companies and banks operating in the transition economies
of Europe and Central Asia that implemented corporate governance initiatives. It makes
a strong business case for good corporate governance as these firms—representing
a cross-section of industries, ownership structures, and operating environments—all
reported significant positive impacts resulting from their governance improvement efforts.

Companies and banks addressed gaps at various levels of their organizations
while building on already firm foundations to enable better strategic decision
making, more efficient day-to-day operations, and reduced business risk. Despite
differences in size, structure, and national origin, some common themes emerged.

Board-level improvements
Differentiating board roles from management roles was a challenge across
the industry spectrum. Several of the profiled companies addressed this
issue by separating roles and clarifying responsibilities. Firms also focused on
diversifying the composition of their boards, adding independent members
and women directors with complementary experience and knowledge.

Most of the companies and banks featured in the report took steps to improve the
effectiveness of their boards. Many made changes in board processes and procedures.
Some set up a board of directors for the first time. Others created committees to handle
detailed analysis and streamline board discussions. Several created a board secretary
position to enable a more organized approach to meetings and communication.

Management control and other improvements
Among the most common targets of companies’ specific governance efforts
was the internal control function. Some firms took action to formalize internal
control policies and procedures while others enhanced existing policies. Most
of the profiled companies and banks strengthened their internal audit function
for improved independent oversight and a better early warning system for
risk-related problems. Several took steps to enhance their risk management
practices, improving monitoring and mitigation at all levels of their organization.

Another common issue across the industry and ownership spectrum was management
succession. Several of the profiled firms focused on succession planning and reducing
key person risk by mitigating their overdependence on one or two key people.

For the family-owned companies in this group, family governance was a
priority. A number of them took steps to formalize their policies on family
participation in the firm, including training and development of future leadership.

Some of the profiled companies and banks implemented processes to provide a more
timely flow of information and a greater degree of non-financial detail to shareholders and
the public. In addition, firms focused on ways to improve compliance. Several appointed
compliance officers to ensure proper alignment with legal and regulatory requirements.

         8	
Positive impacts

All seven firms profiled in this report benefited from their governance initiatives. Among the most
commonly cited benefits:


• Expanded access to finance: Nearly all noted a significant uptick in their ability to access finance as
a result of their corporate governance efforts. They cited the positive impact of governance changes on
instilling market confidence and providing added assurance to investors, creditors, or other debtors. The
governance changes have enabled new financing for these firms in the past few years, ranging from $4
million to nearly $200 million.


• Reduced organizational inefficiencies and improved strategic decision making: Again, virtually all
of the companies and banks profiled here reported marked improvements both in day-to-day-operations
and in strategy. Many said that this was due to increased clarity in management and board roles, as well
as improved oversight.


• Enhanced brand and better shareholder/stakeholder relationships: Most experienced a strong
positive impact on their reputation as well as an increased ability to differentiate from other competitors
in the marketplace. The non-profits in the group also reported significant improvement in some of the
intangible—but critically important—measures of effectiveness, such as trust.


• Reduced risk, improved growth outlook, and increased potential for long-term business sustain-
ability: By attending to organizational structural improvements such as planning for future leadership
and separating board roles from management responsibilities, while tightening internal controls and risk
management, all of the profiled companies reported increased confidence in their ability to sustain them-
selves over the long term.


While each of the seven firms profiled here has a different story to tell, it is clear that their collective results
highlight the positive impact of good corporate governance for companies and banks operating in the
transition economies of Europe and Central Asia.




                                                                                                                9
INTRODUCTION
Emerging markets are becoming important engines of global growth. These markets, such as                  Good corporate
the transition economies in Europe and Central Asia, are viewed with increasing interest by
                                                                                                          governance, defined
foreign investors as private sector participation grows, as regulatory reforms take effect, and as
individual firms focus on elevating their business practices to align with international standards.
                                                                                                          as the structures and
In fact, foreign direct investment inflows to transition economies increased by 28 percent to reach       processes by which
$108 billion in 2013, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. *              companies and banks

Sound corporate governance is a critical element in helping these emerging markets meet their
                                                                                                          are directed and c
full economic potential. Good corporate governance, defined as the structures and processes by            ontrolled, helps firms
which companies and banks are directed and controlled, helps firms operate more efficiently,              operate more efficiently,
improves access to capital, mitigates risk, and safeguards against mismanagement. Good
                                                                                                          improves access to
governance also facilitates appropriate consideration of other critical issues for enterprises,
including environmental and social responsibility. It is the foundation for long-term business growth     capital, mitigates risk,
and sustainability, adding value for investors and contributing lasting dividends for economies.          and safeguards against
                                                                                                          mismanagement.
Companies and banks—particularly those in emerging markets—that are focused on
improving their corporate governance can look to a growing body of evidence that such
efforts matter, yielding bottom line benefits, reputational enhancements, and competitive
differentiation. In one study of note, the Emerging Market Investor Survey, 100 percent of
                                                                                                         _______________________
the investors interviewed said they would pay a higher premium for good governance in an
emerging market firm than what they would pay for a similar firm in a developed market. **               *World Investment Report 2014:
                                                                                                         Investing in the SDGs, an Action
As companies and banks in Europe and Central Asia find their place on the world’s economic stage,
                                                                                                         Plan. United Nations Conference on
efforts to enhance governance practices are helping them reduce their business risks, improve
                                                                                                         Trade and Development, June 2014.
performance, and set the course for long-term success and profitability. Among the specific changes
that are making a difference: improving the functionality of boards of directors, clarifying board and   **Khanna, Vikramaditya and Zyla,
management roles and responsibilities, increasing audit independence, enhancing transparency             Roman. The Emerging Market
and shareholder relations, and strengthening succession plans for family-owned businesses.               Investor Survey. IFC, 2012




         10	
Corporate governance is critical to IFC’s development mission
For nearly two decades, IFC’s corporate governance advisory teams have been
active in Europe and Central Asia, providing guidance to firms that want to
improve their governance practices. IFC’s approach involves partnering with local
institutions to engage with companies in a variety of ways, including thematic
training, customized diagnostic reviews, consultations on specific corporate
governance matters, and in-depth assessments with implementation plans.

The reason for this focus is simple. In addition to yielding benefits to the firms
themselves, good corporate governance also contributes to development. Increased
access to capital encourages new investments, boosts economic growth, and provides
employment opportunities. Businesses that operate more efficiently tend to allocate and
manage resources more sustainably. Better stakeholder relationships help firms address
environmental protection, social, and labor issues. Thus, the emphasis on corporate
governance is a fundamental aspect of IFC’s mission to build environmentally, socially,
and financially sustainable businesses in emerging markets, creating jobs and expanding
economic opportunity so that people can escape poverty and improve their lives.



      IFC’s corporate governance methodology:
      global best practices tailored to local markets and company needs
      Through its years of experience working with firms of all sizes, ownership structures, and industries in emerging
      markets all over the world, IFC has developed a leading-edge methodology*** for evaluating the corporate governance
      practices of businesses, identifying risks and opportunities, and proposing recommendations for improvements.

      IFC’s corporate governance methodology features an assessment that involves taking a detailed look inside the client
      firm’s processes, practices, and controls to uncover weaknesses, gaps, and potential risks. The team works with the
      client to develop a series of suggestions and proposals aimed at addressing these governance issues. The IFC team also
      assists in creating an implementation plan. Workshops, training, and follow-up consultations on specific governance
      topics are part of this work as well.

      Because of the personalized, hands-on nature of the work, the approach is easily customized to business needs and
      tailored to suit the specific client’s unique circumstances, market, and operating environment. The approach is relevant
      for all business types, ranging from banks and publicly listed companies to family-owned firms, from recently privatized
      companies to state-owned enterprises, from non-profits to for-profit businesses across the industry spectrum.

      Today, this proven methodology is an accepted global standard for corporate governance advisory work. In fact,
      it is woven into the Corporate Governance Development Framework, a common approach adopted in 2011 by 33
      development finance institutions.****

______________________________
***For more on this methodology, please see www.ifc.org/corporategovernance
****For more on the Corporate Governance Development Framework, please see www.cgdevelopmentframework.org.

                                                                                                                         11
Track record of results in Europe and Central Asia

Since the inception of its governance work, IFC has provided tailored corporate governance advice and support to hundreds of
clients in Europe and Central Asia alone, a portion of the many companies and banks around the world that have benefited from
this guidance and have succeeded in attracting millions in new investment from IFC and other sources.


This publication offers a snapshot of these successes, showcasing a diverse group of seven companies and banks in the region as
they undertook governance improvement initiatives. All of the profiled firms are current or former IFC clients that implemented
governance changes following an IFC assessment. Each profile details the rationale behind the governance initiative along
with key corporate governance practices adopted and the positive impacts reported, including improved performance and
profitability, solidified business partnerships, and stronger flows of capital to fund their growing businesses. The information
provided by the clients was gathered through telephone and face-to-face interviews conducted during 2013 and the early
months of 2014.


As IFC’s corporate governance work in Europe and Central Asia continues, with a focus on a future of ever-increasing engagement
in the world economy, it is hoped that the sharing of these experiences will inspire other firms in the region to undertake similar
governance initiatives. In turn, this will create a broader base of healthy enterprises that are more resilient to business cycle and
market volatilities and that can contribute to widespread and sustainable economic development.




        12	
Success Stories
in Europe and Central Asia




                             13
Altyn-Ajydaar
Kyrgyz Republic                                                                         Business: corrugated cardboard
                                                                                        packaging manufacturer
Altyn-Ajydaar is an award-winning regional leader in the corrugated packaging
industry. Founded in 1995 by the Terehov family in what was then Kyrgyzstan,
                                                                                        Location: Kyrgyz Republic
Altyn-Ajydaar got its start at a time of political and social upheaval, following the   Sector: paper and paperboard
breakup of the Soviet Union. With the nation’s economy in decline, millions of
                                                                                        Type: privately held, family
people were left without work or means of subsistence. Manufacturing operations
                                                                                        business
had virtually ceased as business owners focused on less-expensive ventures that
offered a more rapid return, such as reselling food products.                           2013 revenue: $0.9 million
Pavlik Terehov, the company’s co-founder and CEO, saw in that environment               # employees: about 500
a unique business opportunity. He predicted growing demand for corrugated               IFC assessment date:
packaging materials, initially from food merchants and later from other business
                                                                                                           May 2011
sectors as well. The gamble has paid off: since that time, the company has grown
and expanded, with offices and production facilities in the Kyrgyz Republic and         Website: www.altynbox.kg
Kazakhstan and a range of high-quality product offerings including corrugated
cardboard, paper products, and packing and building materials. With a current
paper manufacturing capacity of 600 tons per month and a corrugated cardboard
manufacturing capacity of 1.5 million square meters per month, the company is
planning further expansion into Uzbekistan.




         14	
Company structure

Altyn-Ajydaar, which means Golden Dragon in Kyrgyz, is a family business, co-owned
by the original generation of founders, including three brothers and one sister.
Woven into the company’s culture is an emphasis on family values and positive
relationships. “The great Chinese philosopher Confucius said that strong family
loyalties, respect of elders by their children and of husbands by their wives are
what form the backbone of ideal governance,” said Lilia Terehova, co-founder and
the company’s chief financial officer. “We adhere to this teaching in our company
and we firmly believe that this laid the foundation for our future success.




Why change?                                                                               “The project helped us address our
                                                                                          company’s family business corporate
                                                                                          governance dilemmas, thus ensuring
With growing domestic sales and exports, the company has prospered, supported             the continuity and further prosperity
                                                                                          of our business. Now we know very
by a series of IFC loans through the years. The first, in 1996, represented IFC’s first
                                                                                          well where and how to draw lines
investment project in the country. Since that time IFC has provided three more            between business and family matters.
loans to the company to finance its production and expansion.                             We also set a goal to carefully nurture
                                                                                          and groom the second generation
As the company grew and expanded, the complexity of operations increased
                                                                                          of the company.”
as well. The owners recognized that the company had outgrown its original
governance framework and management infrastructure. They wanted to revise
                                                                                                             Pavlik Terehov
the company’s strategy and introduce more sophisticated management, along                            co-founder and CEO of
with an effective corporate governance system that could be replicated in other                              Altyn-Ajydaar
countries where they have operations. The owners also realized the importance
of creating a process to ensure that the company remained family owned as it
passed to the next generation of leadership.




                                                                                                                        15
    What did they change?
    As part of its 2011 appraisal process, IFC conducted a corporate governance assessment for Altyn-Ajydaar. The assessment
    team uncovered several key challenges related to CEO succession planning and internal controls and proposed various
    recommendations for changes to help address these important issues.


    Prior to the assessment, the owners had not thought much about succession-related issues, in part because they were all
    relatively young themselves. While the owners agreed in principle about the importance of retaining family ownership,
    they did not have structures in place to address the transition, nor did they have a process to train their children for their
    eventual leadership. Among the key concerns: loss of interest in the family business by the next generation. In addition,
    Altyn-Ajydaar faced some significant key-person risks. With the departure of the current CEO—clearly the heart and soul
    of the company—and without proper succession planning, the company was in danger of losing its cohesiveness and
    focus.


    With corporate governance studies showing that family-owned businesses sometimes struggle to survive the transition
    to the second generation, the owners understood the importance of implementing changes proposed by IFC. They
    formalized their approach to succession planning by creating a family constitution along with appropriate processes and
    protocols. They reduced key-person risk by identifying members of the next generation who were interested in being part
    of the family business and developing a process to train them for future management roles.


    In addition, Altyn- Ajydaar took several critical steps to improve its internal control system. The company implemented
    a code of ethics, formalized processes and controls, clarified roles and responsibilities, and introduced internal control
    policies. A new position for an internal auditor was created.




How did it help?

Improved corporate governance has enhanced Altyn-Ajydaar’s capacity to access capital, providing additional assurances to
investors and the market as well as enabled a lower cost of financing. In early 2015, IFC rewarded Altyn-Ajydar’s corporate governance
improvements by reducing the relevant spread on the existing loan of Altyn-Ajydaar’s subsidiary in Kazakhstan (Intermultiservice
Ltd.) from 6 percent to 5.2 percent.


Altyn-Ajydaar’s actions have streamlined governance within the company, with clear rules for involvement of family members that
are helping to lay the groundwork for eventual handover to the next generation. By introducing corporate governance-related
covenants, the company has implemented a best practice approach that extends to its subsidiary, thereby mitigating risks. The
changes have fundamentally altered family members’ perceptions of how to run a successful family-owned company.




        16	
Summary of Key Changes: Altyn-Ajydaar

               Key Challenges                                  Key Changes
Internal
Audit          Internal audit: Altyn-Ajydaar did not                •	   Created internal auditor position
               have a separate internal audit unit. The
               owners handled CFO and chief accoun-                 •	   Engaged in search (on-going) for qualified internal
               tant duties.                                              auditor candidates


                                                                    •	   Implemented a code of ethics
               Internal controls: The company had a
               rudimentary internal control system                  •	   Introduced internal control policy
Internal
               that lacked written policies. Manage-
Controls       ment orders were delivered verbally                  •	   Formalized and codified processes and controls
               without written follow up.
                                                                    •	   Clarified roles and responsibilities

           Succession planning and key person
                                                                    •	   Developed family constitution and protocols
           risk: There were no formalized succes-
           sion plans. Some – but not all – of the                  •	   Formalized approach to succession planning
           children of the founders were involved                   •	   Identified interested members of second generation for
Succession in the company, but no formal man-                            management training
Planning   agement training program existed.
           The CEO was the heart and soul of the                    •	   Adopted family employment policy
           company but no process was in place
                                                                    •	   Established professional requirements for family
           to prepare the next generation of
                                                                         member employment
           leadership.



		
   Impact Report

   Altyn-Ajydaar reported the following positive impacts after implementing governance changes as recommended by the
   IFC assessment:


   •	   Improved access to capital: Strengthened governance has given investors and the market added assurance about the
        health and stability of the company into the next generation, enabling a lower cost of capital.
   •	   Increased potential for successful succession: With an improved understanding of succession processes by the
        founders, a heightened focus on educating the next generation, and a detailing of the professional criteria for family
        member employment, the company is better positioned for a successful transition to the next generation.
   •	   Reduced risk: Reorganizing and standardizing the company’s internal control system provided an unbiased and
        objective view of the entire organization, revealing strengths and weaknesses, helping to mitigate risks, and ensuring
        replication of effective business processes as the company expands.




                                                                                                                        17
Bank Republic
Georgia                                                                                  Business: retail and corporate
                                                                                         banking
                                                                                         Location: Georgia
Established in 1991, Bank Republic is one of Georgia’s oldest and most successful        Sector: financial services
financial institutions. With a range of financial services offerings, Bank Republic’s    Type: privately held
goal is to deliver solutions that meet client needs while adhering to high corporate     2013 revenue: $47 million
governance and corporate social responsibility standards.                                # employees: 900
                                                                                         IFC assessment date:
Today, the bank is in rapid expansion mode, with a focus on increasing revenue,                      September 2004
investing in the organic development of its business, and building up its network        Website: www.br.ge
of branches.



Company structure
In 2006, following implementation of IFC’s recommendations, Société Générale,
one of Europe’s leading banks, acquired a 60 percent share in Bank Republic.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) became a
shareholder as well, with a 10 percent stake. Currently, Société Générale owns
about 94 percent of Bank Republic’s stock and EBRD holds the remaining 6 percent.


Why change?

In 2004, Georgia’s financial regulatory and legal structure was not aligned with international corporate governance standards.
Without national governance guidelines to follow, Georgian banks that wanted to put in place their own robust corporate
governance systems had to rely on their own internal resources to do so. Adding to the challenge: the local governance consulting
market was in its early stages of development, so the pool of local experts who could offer guidance was limited.


During this time, Bank Republic’s management recognized the need for fundamental changes in its structures and practices. They
understood that aligning the bank with international best practices would help improve operational performance and enhance the
bank’s attractiveness to investors.


The bank’s management decided to take action. They engaged with IFC’s Georgia Business Development Project—a step that
represented a unique opportunity to benchmark the bank’s corporate governance practices against internationally recognized
standards and to benefit from IFC’s international experience.


By implementing recommended corporate governance reforms, the bank would be able differentiate itself as a reliable and dynamic
financial institution and corporate governance leader, reflecting deep knowledge of Georgian market characteristics while adhering
to international best-practice standards.

         18	
What did they change?
The IFC assessment, conducted in 2004, revealed several issues relating to
board composition, roles and responsibilities, and decision making.                 “With the cooperation of IFC
                                                                                     and the implementation of
Traditionally, the bank’s supervisory board and management played a part in          corporate governance best
promoting corporate governance, but without clearly defined roles, the board         practices, Bank Republic was
sometimes assumed day-to-day management responsibilities. This limited the           able to introduce the position
board’s ability to set strategy because of the conflict between supervisory and      of corporate secretary, improve
managerial functions. In addition, some board members lacked the requisite           its operational activities,
skills and knowledge to provide effective strategic guidance. Concerns also          enhance the efficiency of
arose over the potential for a clash between a board member’s private interests      decision making process, and
and the interests of the bank, making it more difficult to achieve impartial and     increase communication flow.
effective decision making.                                                           Through this, Bank Republic has
                                                                                     become a reputable partner for
Another factor contributing to the board’s challenges was the lack of a corporate    international investors.”
secretary. Without a corporate secretary to draw up and distribute agendas and
related background information prior to meetings, board members were not
as well prepared as they could have been. No records were kept of discussions
that took place, and most decisions were reached by unanimous consent—not
                                                                                           Christian Carmagnolle
necessarily because everyone agreed after thorough discussion, but because
                                                                                      CEO, Bank Republic Société
the discussions themselves were limited.
                                                                                                  Générale Group

To address these issues, the bank implemented changes to its board structure
and composition, including clarifying board and management roles and
responsibilities, codifying by-laws for both groups, adding new board members
with the appropriate skills and expertise, creating separate audit and strategic
development committees to advise the board, and establishing a new position
for board secretary.




                                                                                                               19
How did it help?

Ultimately, the governance reforms led to a more efficient division of responsibilities between board and management, improved
decision-making processes, better communications, and enhanced protection of shareholders’ rights.


More broadly, the implementation of sound corporate governance practices is a key reason for the bank’s continued success. The
governance enhancements have helped attract significant new investment in the bank, influencing Société Générale’s decision
to become a majority shareholder and contributing to the bank’s improved relationships with international financial institutions.
Since 2005, Bank Republic has attracted nearly $200 million in investment from such institutions.


Today, Bank Republic is considered a leader in good corporate governance practices in Georgia. The bank affiliated with the
Georgian Association of Banks’ Corporate Governance Code for Banks in 2009. A re-branding resulted from the bank’s governance
initiative, expressed in the slogan “Each of Us Matters.” The new approach emphasizes long-term, trust-based relationships and the
notion that the bank’s clients, partners, stakeholders, and employees are part of one team. Everyone makes a difference and overall
success depends on team members.




        20	
Summary of Key Changes: Bank Republic
                  Key Challenges                                        Key Changes

                                                                           •	    Developed clear division of power along
                  Board and management roles: Without clearly                    functional lines
Board and         defined roles or separation of power the board           •	    Formalized and regulated board and
Management        sometimes took on day-to-day operational                       management roles and responsibilities with
Roles             responsibilities. The board was less focused on                by-laws
                  strategy. Management oversight was limited.              •	    Established lines of communication and
                                                                                 dialogue between board and management

                  Board composition: Only one member of the
                  seven-member board had an academic back-                 •	    Added board members with relevant expertise

Board             ground in finance and economics. The remain-
                                                                           •	    Introduced guidelines to reduce conflict-of-
                  ing board members lacked financial skills
Composition                                                                      interest risks
                  and experience, limiting the board’s ability to
                  address and identify key risks or to provide
                  professional strategic guidance to the bank.


                  Board effectiveness: The bank did not have
                  board committees or a board secretary. Board
                  members often were unprepared for meetings.               •	   Created audit and strategic development
Board             Discussions were not as robust or as detailed as               committees to advise the board
Effectiveness     they might have been, leading to less-effective
                  decision making. Without recorded notes of                •	   Introduced the corporate secretary position
                  discussions, communication with shareholders
                  was challenging.




  Impact Report
  Bank Republic reported the following positive impacts after implementing governance changes as recommended by the IFC
  assessment:
  •	   Increased access to capital: Improved governance was a factor that influenced Société Générale’s decision to invest in
       the bank. Since implementing the reforms, Bank Republic has attracted nearly $200 million from international financial
       institutions.
  •	   Enhanced operational effectiveness: With reduced board interference in day-to-day operational issues, management
       can be more effective and operations can run more smoothly.
  •	   Better decision making: Changes in board structure and composition have enabled thoughtful discussion, detailed
       analysis, and strong strategic guidance.
  •	   Improved relationships with partners and shareholders: The alignment with international corporate governance
       standards has given investors more confidence in the bank’s sustainability over the long term.
  •	   Enhanced reputation: The bank’s visibility in the market has increased as it has become known as a leader in corporate
       governance reforms.

                                                                                                                        21
Galenika Fitofarmacija
Serbia
                                                                                           Business: agricultural chemical
Founded in 1955 as a state-owned manufacturer of plant protection chemicals,               manufacturer
Galenika Fitofarmacija went through a re-organization in 1997 and again in 1999,           Location: Serbia
when the company was privatized and transformed into a joint stock company.                Sector: chemicals
                                                                                           Type: publicly traded, listed on
Today, Galenika Fitofarmacija is a successful company that emphasizes responsible
                                                                                           Belgrade Stock Exchange
business practices and use of modern technology as well as a careful investment
                                                                                           2013 revenues: €30.6 million
strategy that has helped create a sustainable business portfolio. Galenika Fitofarmacija
                                                                                           # employees: 144
also pays attention to what customers are looking for: the company develops
                                                                                           IFC assessment date:
new products designed to meet specific market needs. Galenika Fitofarmacija
                                                                                                    January-February 2011
carries no debt obligations and has succeeded in financing the modernization
of production and laboratory equipment almost exclusively from its own asset               Website: www.fitofarmacija.rs
base. The company prides itself on strong quality control, occupational health and
safety, and environmental management systems, which meet ISO 9001:2008, BSI
OHSAS 18001, and ISO 14001:2004 standards.

Clearly, the approach has paid off: Galenika Fitofarmacija currently controls about
25 percent the Serbian plant protection product market—the largest of any single
company.

With annual net profit of €6.7 million, €29 million in sales, and €30 million in market
capitalization, the company is well positioned for the future.




         22	
Company structure

Galenika Fitofarmacija is a joint stock company that is listed on the Belgrade
Stock Exchange. Through the privatization of the original state-owned enterprise,
the company’s employees and managers acquired shares of the company and
became its shareholders. Over time, others, including institutional investors such
as investment funds, became shareholders as well.



Why change?

Because of its origins as a state-owned enterprise, the company had limited experience
                                                                                         “Galenika Fitofarmacija is committed
with the corporate governance systems that characterize joint stock companies
                                                                                         to business accountability in all
in countries with more developed capital markets. The company’s understanding            aspects of our work. We have a
about the value of corporate governance emerged as the result of practical, day-         responsibility to shareholders and
                                                                                         potential investors and we prioritize
to-day operational experience. From the start, the company’s shareholders—also
                                                                                         these relationships. This was the
its employees and managers—understood that responsible business practices and            driving force behind our decision
sound financial management would be key to business sustainability. A critical           to bring our corporate governance
aspect of this, they realized, was a robust corporate governance system.                 system in line with best corporate
                                                                                         governance practices.”
In addition, better governance was linked to strategic goal: for the company to
succeed in its plans to expand internationally and enter the European market, it
would need to upgrade its governance.
                                                                                                            Slavica Pekovic
By initiating systematic governance improvements, Galenika Fitofarmacija would                 Executive Director, Galenika
achieve another important objective as well—to serve as a model for other Serbian                             Fitofarmacija
companies.




                                                                                                                     23
    What did they change?
    IFC conducted a corporate governance assessment for Galenika Fitofarmacija in early 2011 that highlighted some gov-
    ernance issues and proposed several changes. For instance, the company did not have a process for timely and accurate
    disclosure of important information. Without key information, shareholders and investors had a hard time making sound
    economic decisions for the company. In addition, the lack of transparency increased the risk that shareholders’ rights
    would not be protected.


    As it happened, at the time of the assessment Galenika Fitofarmacija was in the midst of a website redesign. The IFC corpo-
    rate governance assessment team suggested designating a separate section of the newly redesigned site for investor rela-
    tions and corporate governance. In this section, the company could include key management and corporate documents
    so that shareholders, potential investors, and the general public could readily access the information.


    By the company’s own admission, it took some time to overcome concerns about enabling public access to a full range of
    corporate information. Ultimately, the company’s leaders realized that the benefits outweighed the disadvantages. “Now
    we are very proud that our company took this recommendation seriously,” said Slavica Pekovic, the company’s executive
    director. In fact, since the initial round of changes, the company has added to the site, uploading information on dividend
    policies, she noted.


    The assessment also highlighted issues related to board composition and effectiveness. The five-member board included
    no women or independent members. Although it was focused on company performance, the board lacked the range of
    skills and experience to represent the best interests of the company and its shareholders.


    The company took several steps to address these problems, including expanding the number of members, appointing
    two women directors, adding an independent member, and appointing a corporate secretary.



How did it help?
The specific actions taken by Galenika Fitofarmacija to improve its governance have yielded strong results. The website evolved
from serving as a source of basic information to an effective tool for enhanced investor and stakeholder relations. The board has
become more efficient and more effective, with deeper and more detailed discussion, a broader range of viewpoints, and better
decision making.


Galenika Fitofarmacija’s reputation in the Serbian market has been enhanced as well. Since 2012, the company has been listed on
the blue-chip BELEX15 index of the Belgrade Stock Exchange—a direct result of improved disclosure, according to company
leaders.


           24	
Summary of Key Changes: Galenika Fitofarmacija
                  Key Challenges                                  Key Changes

                                                                      •	   Increased to seven the number of board members
                  Board composition: The five-member board
                  did not include any women or independent            •	   Identified new directors based on skills, knowledge,
                  directors. Together, board members                       and expertise
Board             controlled 48.14 percent of the company.            •	   Appointed two female directors
                  Directors were continually re-elected, with
Composition       terms extending up to 12 years. The lack            •	   Appointed independent director with expertise in
                  of diversity in gender, skills, experience,              internal audit
                  and viewpoint limited discussion and                •	   Altered mix of executive and non-executive directors
                  negatively impacted decision making.


                  Board effectiveness: Without a corporate            •	   Created a full-time corporate secretary position

Board             secretary to coordinate, communicate, and
                                                                      •	   Hired a qualified individual for the corporate
                  track board processes and activities, the
Effectiveness                                                              secretary role
                  board was not as efficient or as effective as
                  it could have been.


                  Transparency and disclosure: Galenika
                  Fitofarmacija did not share information             •	   Redesigned website to include section for investor
                  about its policies and procedures. This                  relations and corporate governance
Transparency      posed risks to shareholder protections—a
                                                                      •	   Uploaded relevant information to site for easy
and               core value for the company. The lack of
                                                                           access by shareholders, investors, and the public
Disclosure        disclosure also meant that the company
                  was not in line with international corporate        •	   Added new information as it became available;
                  governance standards, making expansion                   updates continue in timely manner
                  into new markets difficult.




   Impact Report
   Galenika Fitofarmacija reported the following positive impacts after implementing governance changes as recommended
   by the IFC assessment:


   •	   Expanded access to new markets: Strengthened governance and improved decision contributed to strategy
        development and plans for future expansion into the EU market.
   •	   Enhanced shareholder value and market visibility: The addition of a standardized approach to disclosure led to
        Galenika Fitofarmacija’s 2012 listing on the blue-chip BELEX15 index of the Belgrade Stock Exchange.
   •	   Strengthened reputation as a business leader: By appointing a diverse board that includes women directors, Galenika
        Fitofarmacija is a model for other Serbian companies, sending a message to the business community about the
        importance of representation from varying backgrounds, experiences, and perspectives.
   •	   Improved long-term outlook: With a stronger corporate governance system, the company has laid a robust foundation
        for future prosperity and sustainability.


                                                                                                                       25
KazMicroFinance
Kazakhstan

KazMicroFinance LLC was established in 2006 as the for-profit subsidiary of                       Business: microloans for
Kazakhstan Loan Fund, a microlending initiative created in 1997 by ACDI/VOCA.                     business, agriculture, and social
This private United States-based nonprofit fosters development and economic                       welfare
opportunity in Kazakhstan.                                                                        Location: Kazakhstan
                                                                                                  Sector: microfinance
Today, KMF is a fully independent and self-sustaining firm, providing a range of microfinancial
                                                                                                  Type: privately held
services to Kazakhstani households. Individual and group loans are available, with a focus
                                                                                                  2013 revenue: $4.6 million
on small incremental loans. This strategy—backed by cooperative working relationships
                                                                                                  # employees: 1,146
with local credit bureaus—helps measure client creditworthiness over a period of time and
                                                                                                  IFC assessment date:
increases the likelihood of repayment.***** KMF’s network includes 17 branches in the
                                                                                                         April-September 2009
country’s main urban centers as well as 68 rural outlets that extend the company’s
reach to 3,500 remote villages. The company’s individualized approach, flexibility                Website: www. kmf.kz
on credit assessments, and nationwide footprint across city centers and rural
communities alike have enabled access to finance for more than 250 thousand
Kazakhstanis to date, including many women entrepreneurs. Since its inception,
the company has disbursed more than 826,000 loans, with an aggregate value of
over $913 million.
A highly regarded microfinance leader in Central Asia and beyond,****** KMF
has become one of Kazakhstan’s largest microfinance institutions, contributing to
improved working conditions, business expansion, women’s economic empowerment,
and agricultural development throughout the country.




          26	
Company structure

Currently, ACDI/VOCA owns 86 percent of the company; KMF employees hold
the remaining 14 percent. Employees received these partnership stakes as part
of a company co-ownership policy designed to incentivize performance, improve
workers’ loyalty, and attract additional funding.



Why change?
                                                                                     “Improving corporate governance
                                                                                     has never been a one-time action
As the company grew and demand for its services increased, KMF’s management          for us. It is a continuous process,
became aware that its rudimentary governance system was not keeping pace             which began with our participation
                                                                                     in the IFC corporate governance
with its growth. As a result, decision making was not as effective or as strategic
                                                                                     assessment.
as it should be. There was concern that the situation could pose obstacles to
                                                                                     The most important result of our
future growth, possibly leading to weaker financial performance and a dissatisfied
                                                                                     participation in the IFC program was
customer base, particularly given the complex and competitive environment in         that people at KazMicroFinance now
which the firm operated. Ultimately, the management team realized that bringing      have a clear understanding of the
the company’s governance system into line with best international practices would
                                                                                     new corporate governance structure
                                                                                     and where we should be heading to
enhance strategic decision making and support long-term growth.
                                                                                     improve our corporate governance.”


                                                                                                       Almira Abenova
                                                                                                 Chief Financial Officer,
                                                                                                      KazMicroFinance




__________________________________________
*****“Kazakhstan – KazMicroFinance LLC (KMF), Developing microcredit institutions
to provide rural credit,” accessed August 18,2014, http://www.acdivoca.org/site/
ID/kazakhstanKLF
******Matthew Swibel, “The Top 50 MicroFinance Institutions,” last modified March
20, 2007, http://www.forbes.com/2007/12/20/microfinance-philanthropy-credit-
biz-cz_ms_1220microfinance_table.html

                                                                                                                 27
Creating Opportunity,
Empowering Women

As a company, KMF is committed              What did they change?
to diversity and equal access to
opportunity. The company purposely
                                            IFC conducted a corporate governance assessment for KMF in 2009,
reaches out to women customers,             which highlighted specific corporate governance challenges and
many of whom demonstrate more fiscal        proposed changes to address the issues. Among the challenges
discipline than men in repaying loans.      facing KMF: the company did not have a board of directors or
                                            similar governing body, which left the company without strategic
The company has set several ambitious
                                            guidance or management oversight.
diversity goals, including a portfolio
comprised of 70 percent female clients      KMF’s internal controls were insufficient as well. The internal audit
and 50 percent rural clients. Ultimately,   department’s work program was set by the management team,
KMF aims to generate 60 percent of          leading to difficulty in retaining the department’s independence. In

its revenue from women-owned small          addition, the company did not have qualified staff who could handle
                                            the risk management function, leaving the company exposed to
businesses.
                                            some significant risk—a serious problem given the challenges
                                            associated with the microfinance industry.
A look inside the company reveals
that KMF’s emphasis on women’s              Since the assessment, KMF has altered its governance structure
empowerment extends upward into             based on the recommendations proposed by IFC.

its own boardroom. The chair of the
                                            For example, the company now has in place a supervisory board
supervisory board is a woman, as are
                                            comprised of qualified and experienced professionals, which takes
three of the management board’s four        the lead on strategy development and company stewardship.
members. This makes good business
sense for a company increasingly            A new board audit committee includes independent members to
                                            advise the board on risk-related issues. This committee has oversight
focused on women. In addition to their
                                            for the internal audit department, a change that has enhanced the
professional skills and expertise, KMF’s
                                            department’s independence and impartiality.
female directors can offer valuable
insight on the development of new           KMF also strengthened the risk-management function. To ensure
products and services that meet the         appropriate coverage of the full range of the company’s risks, KMF

needs of a mostly female client base.       set up a risk management department with separate divisions for
                                            credit, operational, and financial risks.




   28	
How did it help?
The creation of an effective board has improved the company’s overall strategic approach, leading to marked bottom line
improvements. Of note: in the three year period 2010-2013, KMF experienced a 284 percent expansion in the value of its loan
portfolio, a 303 percent increase in the number of clients, and a 227 percent increase in the number of loans issued. Productivity
and profitability improved as well.


With a strengthened control environment, the company is better positioned to weather market difficulties. The changes here led
to several additional steps, including the introduction of more robust client protection practices. For its efforts, KMF was honored
by the Smart Campaign,******* a global initiative that promotes the integration of stronger client protection practices in the
microfinance industry. In 2010, the Smart Campaign certified KMF as a microfinance institution that complies with the principles
of staff ethical conduct and prevention of over-indebtedness. KMF continues to work toward meeting all seven client protection
principles as defined by the Smart Campaign initiative.


The recognition achieved as a result of KMF’s drive toward the highest standards of corporate governance and client protection has
helped it differentiate from other microfinance institutions, creating a strong brand based on this clearly demonstrated commitment
to ethical and consumer-oriented values.


The hard work has paid off. In November 2014, KMF succeeded in attracting $16.6 million in equity investment, from Triodos
Investment Management (Netherlands) and responsAbility Investments AG (Switzerland). Representing 27.4 percent of the
company’s shares, the investment will help to ensure KMF’s sustainable growth as well as the implementation of plans for a more
diversified range of service offerings.
______________________________________________
*******“About the Campaign,” http://www.smartcampaign.org/about



                                                                                                                        29
Summary of Key Changes: KazMicroFinance

                   Key Challenges                            Key Changes

                                                                •	    Established a supervisory board, fully functional since 2011
                                                                •	    Appointed qualified professional directors who have
                                                                      complementary skill sets
Board and          Board and board committees: There
                   was no supervisory board. The                •	    Set regular meeting schedule
Board
                   company lacked strategic direction
Committees                                                      •	    Appointed corporate secretary who sets agendas and facili-
                   and focus.
                                                                      tates communication with management
                                                                •	    Created audit committee with independent members to
                                                                      advise board on risk-related matters

                   Internal controls: The internal control
                   system was insufficient to meet              •	    Separated internal control and internal audit functions
                   the needs of a growing company,
Internal                                                        •	    Strengthened independence of internal audit, which now
                   with little distinction between
                                                                      reports to the board audit committee
Controls           internal control and internal audit.
                   Management was overly involved in            •	    Introduced systematic approach to internal controls, with
                   the internal audit department, limiting            standardized policies and processes
                   its impartiality.

                                                                 •	   Created separate departments for credit,
                   Risk management: KMF did not have                  operational, and financial risk management
                   professionally trained staff to handle
Risk                                                             •	   Hired risk managers who handle credit and operational
                   risk management responsibilities,
                                                                      risks at each of KMF’s branches; managers are members of
Management         raising doubts about the department’s
                                                                      their branch office credit committee
                   effectiveness and its ability to flag
                   potential problems.                           •	   Developed plans for soon-to-be launched security
                                                                      department




Impact Report
 KazMicroFinance reported the following positive impacts after implementing governance changes as recommended by the
 IFC assessment:
 •	   Expanded loan portfolio, client base, and reach: Improved decision making and stronger internal controls have
      strengthened governance and enabled significant growth.
 •	   Improved profitability: Better risk management has increased client retention, reduced the number of non-performing
      loans, and helped the bottom line.
 •	   Enhanced brand and competitive differentiation: KMF’s governance changes have been recognized by prestigious groups
      such as the Smart Campaign for client protection and MIX Market, an MFI ratings agency, which awarded the company
      Four Diamonds, the agency’s second-highest score.
 •	   Increased capital: KMF has become an organization with international participation by attracting investment from well-
      known financial institutions, taking the company to the next level of its institutional development.


       30	
                                                                                       Business (Sharrcem Titan): raw ma-
Sharrcem Titan/                                                                        terials and cement manufacturer
                                                                                       Location: Kosovo
Laboratory for Business Activity                                                       Sector: building materials
                                                                                       Type: privately held
Kosovo                                                                                 2013 revenues: €39.2 million
                                                                                       # employees: 503
                                                                                       IFC assessment date:
                                                                                       		               April-May 2013
Sharrcem Titan is a leading raw materials and cement producer in Kosovo. Found-
                                                                                       Website: www.sharrcem.com
ed in 1936 as a state-owned company, Sharrcem was acquired by the Titan Group
in 2010 after the company was privatized. Since that time, Sharrcem has signifi-
cantly upgraded equipment and technical processes, introducing advanced stan-
dards, which ultimately will be integrated into all operations.


As part of the Titan Group, Sharrcem shares the overall company commitment to
corporate social responsibility, built on the notion that successful businesses have
an obligation to give back to the local communities in which they operate. The
company supports an active community outreach agenda, funding social service
projects throughout the region.


Sharrcem is the largest employer in Hani Elezit, a municipality that struggles with
high unemployment, widespread poverty, and a lack of structured support for
entrepreneurs. As the business leader in the region, Sharrcem is expected to meet
up to a strong standard of corporate citizenship. The company’s management has
long understood that the successful continuation of its business activities could
not be possible without developing the community and creating opportunities
for independence and self-sufficiency.


In 2012, Sharrcem decided to pull together several of its community-oriented ac-
tivities under a single umbrella, called the Laboratory for Business Activities—LAB.




                                                                                                                  31
LAB’s structure
                                                                               “Addressing the challenges
Set up as a nonprofit community development foundation, LAB became an           of unemployment, poverty,
official entity in February 2014.                                               and lack of support to enable
                                                                                enterprise development in our
                                                                                community has been at the
LAB provides vocational training, equipment, and seed capital for small
                                                                                core of Titan Group’s strategy in
agribusinesses in the region. The goal is to create jobs and foster economic    Kosovo. We consider our own
development in a struggling community that has few educational or               growth sustainable only when it
employment opportunities and where access to grant funding or other             is accompanied by proportional
                                                                                growth in our broader community.
financial assistance is limited.
                                                                                IFC has helped us make progress
                                                                                toward achieving these sustainable
As the program develops, LAB plans to expand its operations into other          growth goals.”
parts of the country that are facing similar challenges. Future plans also
include replicating the foundation in other countries where the Titan                       Emmanuel Mitsou
Group operates.                                                                   Managing Director, Sharrcem
                                                                                                         Titan

Why focus on governance for a nonprofit foundation?

From the outset, Sharrcem’s leaders realized that strong governance
policies and practices—in line with international governance standards for
foundations—was an essential starting point for a trust-based community-
oriented organization that would have credibility and legitimacy. The
foundation needed to operate with openness and transparency to
encourage a sense of ownership among local community members and to
ensure long-term positive impact.


Achieving optimal operational efficiency was critically important as well.
With an efficient and well-governed organization, LAB could enhance
the effectiveness of its proposed youth education and leadership
programs, enabling small and medium business development, personal
empowerment, and deeper ties to the local community.




         32	
   What did they change?
   As they started up the foundation, Sharrcem’s leaders requested IFC’s assistance in identifying key governance challenges
   and in proposing solutions to address the challenges. IFC conducted its analysis in the spring of 2013.


   The first challenge the company faced was a lack of trust. Local residents had tired of donor-funded initiatives that may
   have sounded good on paper but in reality made no real difference in the quality of their lives.


   To address this, the company and IFC agreed on an approach built on the principles of transparency and openness, which
   Sharrcem has implemented. Today, LAB engages regularly with key community stakeholders and government officials.
   Equally important, LAB communicates openly with international donors, non-governmental associations, and the media
   as part of its overall strategy for the foundation.


   Board structure was another challenge. LAB needed a board-level governance body to set strategy and make decisions.
   But community interests also had to be appropriately represented, along with the interests of state and local governments,
   international donors, and relevant financial institutions—a complicated task.


   Based on recommendations proposed by IFC, Sharrcem decided to separate the responsibilities usually performed by a
   single board of a nonprofit organization. The company set up two governing entities: the Council of Stakeholders and the
   Board of Directors. The two-board system gave LAB an inclusive board-level governance body—the council—that would
   be involved in all decision making as well as a smaller entity—the board—that would implement council decisions and
   ensure compliance with legal and regulatory requirements.


   Already, the two-board system is functioning well. The first council and board meetings were held in February 2014—
   even before LAB became an officially registered organization. The primary focus of the two meetings was to identify key
   selection criteria and launch the hiring process of LAB’s CEO.



How did it help?

LAB’s founding is a unique corporate social responsibility initiative in Kosovo—the most structured, comprehensive,
and strategically planned effort to date, in a country that has experienced a variety of well-meaning but less-than-
successful donor-supported initiatives.


While still in the early days, Sharrcem’s focus on embedding robust corporate governance practices into the fundamental
structure of the new nonprofit has helped to restore confidence and earn buy-in from the local community. The two-
board approach will ensure diverse representation, as well as effective decision making and efficient use of funds.

                                                                                                                       33
Summary of Key Governance Initiatives: Sharrcem Titan/
Laboratory for Business Activity

                 Key Challenges                                 Key Initiatives

                                                                   •	   Set up a two-board structure; council of
                 Board composition: With multiple                       stakeholders and board of directors
                 stakeholders and multiple interests
                 involved, a single board might have               •	   Appointed eleven-member council of
                 been too large to be effective or efficient,           stakeholders including community members,
                                                                        state and local government officials, and
                 which could impede LAB’s job creation
                                                                        international donor representatives to serve as
Board            and business development goals. Or,
                                                                        principal decision-making body
                 it might have been too small to ensure
Composition      representation from all parties, increasing       •	   Appointed members of board with
                 the risk that the community would not                  complementary and diverse educational and
                 support the program. The structure also                professional backgrounds
                 had to conform with Kosovo’s regulatory           •	   Identified a pay structure for board of directors as
                 requirements for non-governmental                      a performance incentive
                 organizations.



                 Board effectiveness: Sharrcem had to
                 develop board policies, practices, and            •	   Created position for foundation secretary
                 approaches for the nonprofit from
                 scratch—a massive and time consuming              •	   Hired a qualified individual for the corporate
Board            effort. Once operational, it would have been           secretary role
Effectiveness    difficult to keep both boards functioning         •	   Set regular meeting schedules for both groups;
                 effectively without a corporate secretary              initially at least once a month
                 to coordinate and document activities,
                 facilitate communication between the two
                 entities, and monitor governance.

                                                                   •	   Identified key influencers in local community
                 Transparency and disclosure: There
                 was considerable distrust within the              •	   Opened regular lines of communication with
                 local community about donor-funded                     these community leaders, including one-on-one
                 development initiatives that promised more             meetings
                 than they delivered. A lack of transparency
Transparency                                                       •	   Organized public forums and round table
                 may have contributed to these negative
                                                                        discussions
and Disclosure   impressions. To overcome the skepticism,
                 Sharrcem needed to convey a sense                 •	   Established pattern of engagement with all
                 of openness about the activities and                   stakeholders including international donors,
                 motivations of the new foundation. Robust              government officials, and representatives of
                 disclosure was equally important for the               relevant financial institutions
                 international donor community.




        34	
Impact Report

Sharrcem Titan reported the following positive impacts after incorporating robust governance into the structure of LAB,
its new community development foundation, as recommended by the IFC assessment:


•	   Improved community relations: The focus on transparency, engagement, and representation as it set up the
     community development foundation has strengthened the company’s relationship with the local community.
•	   Increased potential to achieve economic development and job creation goals: In general, a well-governed, efficiently
     run, and professionally led non-profit—such as LAB—will be better positioned to fulfill its mission, making a lasting
     difference in the community it seeks to benefit.
•	   Reduced reputational risks: The positive interactions with the community through LAB have helped mitigate risks
     and ensured a more sustainable future for the company.
•	   Enhanced brand: Sharrcem has achieved national and international recognition as a leader in corporate social
     responsibility—the company received the European Award for Corporate Social Responsibility in 2013.




                                                                                                                   35
Tajero                                                                               Business: food and beverage
                                                                                     importer and distributor
Tajikistan                                                                           Location: Tajikistan
                                                                                     Sector: food and beverage
                                                                                     Type: privately held, family
                                                                                     business
Founded in 2002 by Abdurahmon Gaibulozoda and his uncle, Abduhalim                   2013 revenues: $62 million
Toshiev, Tajero today is Tajikistan’s leading food and beverage importer and         # employees: 400
distributor. As the exclusive distributor for 16 consumer packaged goods             IFC assessment date:
companies, Tajero supplies markets and grocery stores throughout Tajikistan.                      April-June 2011
The company also has cooperative agreements with more than 20 food and
beverage manufacturers based in countries such as Finland, Germany, Russia,          Website: www.tajero.tj
Turkey, and Ukraine.



Company structure

Tajero is wholly owned by company CEO Abdurahmon Gaibulozoda and his
family.



Why change?
In the past, family-owned companies in Tajikistan were not held in the highest
regard—a legacy from the Soviet era when many family-owned firms were poorly
managed. The company wanted to overcome this negative public perception
and turned to IFC for assistance.

Meanwhile, Tajero had grown steadily since its founding. With growth comes
increased business complexity. This required stronger and more standardized
internal processes, a more efficient approach to decision making, and higher-
level skill sets for top management. To ensure continued business success as
the company evolved, Tajero’s owner recognized a need to focus on such issues
and attend to related corporate governance challenges.

In addition, although its roots were as a family-owned firm, Tajero set its future
sights on transformation into a joint stock company. For this transformation to
happen, the company would need to meet up to higher standards, including
upgrading its corporate governance system.




         36	
What did they change?
In spring 2011, IFC conducted a partial assessment of Tajero’s corporate governance
system. The assessment focused on several key governance challenges facing the           “We live in a fast paced world,
company: issues related to family control and governance, CEO succession planning,       and our customers’ habits,
and key person risk—of critical concern given the central role played by the company’s   interests, and appetites change
owner and CEO.                                                                           every day. To stay on top of what
Tajero implemented changes to address these issues, as proposed by the IFC assessment    our customers want, we have to
team. For example, the company formalized an advisory process so that the CEO—           be at our operational best. Good
who had been the sole company decision maker—would have the benefit of input             corporate governance is the key
from key employees as he made strategic decisions. These employees could provide         to ensuring that we continue
informed opinions based on their experience and professionalism. Tajero also took        to do so over the long term.”
steps to plan a succession path for the current CEO and for other members of the
senior management team.
                                                                                            Abdurahmon Gaibulozoda
The assessment uncovered some gaps in the company’s internal operations as well.                        CEO, Tajero
For example, the company lacked a systematic way to identify risk management,
corporate governance, or control problems. Tajero also faced high turnover among
its senior executive ranks, creating inconsistencies in the transfer of knowledge and
expertise.

To resolve these issues, Tajero implemented several recommendations proposed by
IFC. The company set up an internal audit unit for better oversight of key activities
and established management training and coaching programs to enable professional
skills development for company executives. The training and coaching programs
also create a mechanism to provide positive feedback and support for increased
job satisfaction.




                                                                                                                    37
      How did it help?

      According to company leaders, better corporate governance played a significant role in helping
      Tajero access the capital it needed to grow: $3 million in new financing to expand group
      operations. With the new funding, Tajero set up three new divisions: Amiri confectionary,
      Amal Industry, and Tajero-Sugd.


      In addition, the company is functioning with greater efficiency and effectiveness as a result of
      a stronger internal control environment and more informed decision making.


      Tajero’s reputation in the market has improved as well. Today, the company is considered the
      country’s leader in corporate governance and a role model for other family-owned companies,
      which look to Tajero for guidance and advice on how to enhance their own governance
      systems.




38	
Summary of Key Changes: Tajero
                 Key Challenges                                           Key Changes

                 Family governance: The owner/CEO made all                  •	   Established a “consultative council” comprised of
Family           decisions without formal input from manage-                     senior managers with advisory responsibilities
Governance       ment or other advisors. This made informed                 •	   Adopted several family governance regulations,
                 decision making more difficult.                                 including delegation of authority


                 Internal audit: Tajero did not have a dedicated            •	   Hired an internal auditor
                 internal audit unit. This left the company
                 without independent oversight and without                  •	   Set up in-house internal audit function to focus
Internal Audit   an early warning system to flag problems.                       on financial, operational, and project risks
                 It also meant lost opportunities to identify
                 process efficiencies and cost savings that                 •	   Identified reporting lines to ensure
                 could help the bottom line.                                     independence


                                                                            •	   Appointed senior managers to the company’s
                                                                                 consultative council
                 Management roles: Although the owner/
                 CEO held meetings and discussions with top                 •	   Set quarterly schedule of meetings, averaging
Management       executives, the meetings were informal and                      five-to-six meetings per quarter
Roles            proceedings were not recorded. There was                   •	   Encouraged deeper discussion of business and
                 considerable turnover from among the senior                     operational issues
                 executive ranks.
                                                                            •	   Initiated management training and coaching
                                                                                 program
                 Succession planning: There were no formal-                 •	   Adopted succession plans for owner/CEO and
                 ized succession plans for the CEO/owner or for                  senior executive team
Succession       other members of the senior executive team,
Planning         creating significant business continuity risks if          •	   Adopted emergency succession plans
                 any of these individuals were to leave the com-
                 pany suddenly.


		
Impact Report
Tajero reported the following positive impacts after implementing changes as recommended by the IFC assessment:
•	   Improved access to capital: Strengthened governance led to overall improvement in both strategic decision making and
     day-to-day operational approach, giving investors added assurance about the sustainability of the company.
•	   Strengthened business continuity: Formalized succession planning reduces the risk of operational disruption if a key
     person leaves and increases the likelihood of long-term viability.
•	   Reduced management turnover: Giving senior executives more say in company decisions—as well as coaching to
     improve their skills—has improved morale, increased job satisfaction, and dramatically transformed the company’s
     corporate culture.
•	   Enhanced reputation: Tajero has received honors and awards for its business accomplishments, including a prize from
     the Rudaki district Executive Regulatory Agency. The company is considered a corporate governance role model for
     other family-owned companies in Tajikistan.

                                                                                                                        39
Union Bank
Albania
                                                                                          Business: commercial, corporate,
Registered as a joint stock company in 2006, Union Bank operates a network of             retail, private, and investment
30 branches and agencies throughout Albania, offering a diverse portfolio of              banking
products and services for retail and corporate customers.                                 Location: Albania
High quality of service is a competitive differentiator for Union Bank, which maintains   Sector: financial services
a strong position in Albania’s financial marketplace. The bank is focused on continued
                                                                                          Type: publicly traded
expansion and cooperates closely with international financial institutions.
                                                                                          2013 revenue:
In 2013, Union Bank became only the second Albanian bank to join IFC’s Global
                                                                                          €16.7 million (preliminary);
Trade Finance Program, an initiative that promotes trade in emerging markets by
                                                                                          up from €14.2 million in 2012
providing partial or full guarantees for individual trade transactions and expanding
the range of trade services offered.                                                      # employees: 301
                                                                                          IFC assessment date:
                                                                                                   July-September 2011
Company structure
                                                                                          Website: www.unionbank.al
Union Bank is a joint stock company. At the time of the IFC assessment, the bank was
considered a small bank under Albanian financial regulations. The improvements
in overall efficiency resulting from the corporate governance initiative enabled
the bank to implement its growth strategy based on organic growth. This led to
a change in status. Today, the bank’s designation is “G2”, a medium-sized bank for
Albanian regulatory purposes.




         40	
   Why change?
   Union Bank’s leaders have long appreciated the value of good corporate governance. They set the tone from the top, with an
   emphasis on embedding good governance practices into all of the banks’ processes, operations, and strategy.


   Well before IFC’s engagement with Union Bank, the bank’s corporate governance system had exceeded the minimum legal
   requirements under Albanian regulations. There was a clear separation between ownership and management functions, the board
   of directors played an active role in strategy formulation and management oversight, and a corporate secretary helped organize
   board processes and communications.


   Still, the bank’s leadership understood that corporate governance represented a process of continuous improvement, requiring on-
   going effort—particularly for a growth-oriented institution. Expansion can lead to new, unforeseen risks and increasingly complex
   operational challenges. The bank’s management realized that such issues called for new governance approaches and solutions.


   “We undertook the corporate governance exercise with IFC not because we needed it for external investors or creditors. Our current
   shareholders provide us with the capital we need for our organic growth and our branches provide us with sufficient core deposits
   to fund our credit growth,” says Union Bank CEO Gazmend Kadriu. “However, when we decided to enter the trade finance business,
   we found the corporate governance report to be very useful in helping us close the deal with IFC and establish a credit line in
   support of this new business.” The bank’s management also believed that implementation of best corporate governance practices
   would serve as a key asset as they sought to achieve strategic growth goals and looked toward long-term sustainability, he notes.


   Other reasons for the bank’s engagement with IFC included uncovering hidden weaknesses and identifying potential areas for
   improvement as well as a desire to benchmark the bank’s corporate governance system against the best international standards.




Source: “Albanian Daily News” Newspaper, August 31 - September 1, 2013




                                                                                                                            41
                                   What did they change?
“After the IFC corporate           IFC conducted a three-month corporate governance assessment for Union Bank
governance assessment, we          beginning in July 2011. The assessment confirmed that the bank already had in
gained confidence in our
                                   place a number of sound corporate governance practices. It also revealed some
core corporate governance
fundamentals and received          gaps in the bank’s governance system and proposed changes to close these gaps,
clear directions for further       which the bank has implemented.
improvements.
Now, we are well-equipped to
                                   For example, the bank employed a part-time consultant as its corporate board
implement our strategy, which
includes acquiring smaller local   secretary. While the individual was well-qualified for the job, the lack of day-to-
banks, with possible changes in    day engagement as a full-time bank employee meant that the consultant was
our future ownership structure.
                                   not as effective in the role. This was negatively impacting board effectiveness and
An important result of our         efficiency. To address this issue, Union Bank hired a separate in-house corporate
governance work has been our
                                   secretary and formalized the secretary’s role and responsibilities.
ability to grow with confidence.
In fact, we recently succeeded
in moving from the “G3” small      Compliance was another concern. While the compliance function existed, the bank
bank category under Albanian
                                   did not have a unified approach or a single individual with ultimate responsibility
regulations and into the “G2”
category of medium-sized           for ensuring compliance. The situation was made more challenging by the
banks. This is a considerable      complexity of Albania’s legal and regulatory requirements and the need to align
accomplishment.”
                                   with international standards in addition to the bank’s own internal regulations.
                                   The IFC assessment team proposed a change in approach: merging all compliance-
              Gazmend Kadriu       related functions into a single unit that would have oversight across all aspects of
              CEO, Union Bank      the bank’s regulatory environment.


                                   Initially, the bank’s management resisted this idea because they were unconvinced
                                   of the benefits. They believed that the entire organization should have a degree
                                   of responsibility for compliance and that each team within every division should
                                   do its part to ensure compliance. Despite their initial hesitation, the bank’s leaders
                                   decided to implement the IFC team’s compliance plan. After the implementation,
                                   they noted clear and immediate benefits resulting from a centralized and
                                   coordinated function. Among the benefits: ensuring that compliance issues are
                                   comprehensively addressed and that no compliance obligation gets overlooked.




   42	
How did it help?
Today, board meetings are more productive, supported by a structured and streamlined agenda and good documentation.
The bank also has greater assurance that it remains in compliance with relevant laws and regulations.


More broadly, despite a difficult economic climate in Albania, the bank is stable and strong, actively pursuing a growth
strategy that includes acquisition of smaller Albanian banks and expansion into new business lines. According to bank CEO
Gazmend Kadriu, the implementation of governance improvements played a critical role in the bank’s ability to secure a $4
million IFC credit line in support of its new trade finance business.


He also says that the successful attainment of medium-sized bank status under Albanian regulations has given the bank’s
management confidence to pursue a continued climb in the rankings. “We are now targeting acquisitions in Albania to
propel us into the top tier of Albanian medium banks,” Kadriu says. “Our current shareholders may wish to invite other
shareholders to help fund this growth. As usual, our annual reports would be our calling card regarding our historical
financials, and our business plan for our future prospects. However, we believe interested investors will draw strong
assurance about our corporate governance foundation and the ‘base color’ of our bank from the IFC report. We expect this
report to be very useful when talking to them.”




                                                                                                                  43
Summary of Key Changes: Union Bank

                   Key Challenges                                 Key Changes


                   Board effectiveness: While the board
                   functioned well, there was room for                •	      Hired a qualified, full-time, in-house corporate secretary

Board              improvement. Without a full-time in-
                                                                      •	      Established more formal board working procedures
                   house corporate secretary to organize
Effectiveness      processes, procedures, and commu-                  •	      Amended bank by-laws to include detailed description of
                   nication flow, the board was not as                        secretary’s roles and responsibilities
                   efficient or as effective as it could be.


                   Compliance: The bank did not have a                •	      Created a new centralized compliance unit to ensure
                   coordinated and centralized compli-                        external and internal adherence to laws and regulations
                   ance function. This increased the risk
                   that compliance-related obligations                •	      Hired full-time compliance officer as a focal point to
                                                                              coordinate all compliance-related activities in the bank
Compliance         could be overlooked and that the bank
                   might not be in compliance with all                •	      Specified compliance role for corporate secretary at the
                   relevant laws and regulations, which                       board level
                   could reflect poorly on its reputation
                   and possibly lead to fines.




  Impact Report
   Union Bank reported the following positive impacts after implementing governance changes as recommended by the IFC
   assessment:


   •	   Increased access to capital: Improved governance played a critical role in Union Bank’s ability to secure a                $4
        million IFC credit line in support of its new trade finance business.
   •	   Better decision making: Changes in board operations have enabled a more organized approach to issues, deeper
        discussion, and more thoughtful analysis.
   •	   Stronger market positioning: The alignment with international corporate governance standards is a competitive
        differentiator for a bank that has built its reputation on quality.
   •	   Improved growth outlook: Investors interested in supporting the bank’s growth strategy—including the acquisition
        of smaller banks—will have greater assurance because of Union Bank’s solid corporate governance foundation.




        44	
 Glossary of
 Corporate Governance Terms
Glossary
of Corporate Governance Terms




                                45
 A
Accountability: In corporate governance terms, it is the responsibility of a board of directors to shareholders and stakeholders
for corporate performance and actions of the corporation. It is the concept of being responsible for all actions performed by the
company’s management and reporting this information to stakeholders. It also refers to the accountability of management to the
board for its actions in running the business.


Acquisition: Gaining control of another corporation by share purchase or exchange. An acquisition can be hostile or friendly.


Agency Conflicts: Problems that can arise when a principal hires an agent to act on his behalf, giving the agent authority and
decision- making power.


Agency Costs: Costs incurred by an organization for problems related to divergent management-shareholder objectives. The
costs consist of two main sources: costs inherently associated with using an agent (e.g., the risk that agents will use organizational
resources for their own benefit) and costs of techniques used to mitigate the problems associated with using an agent (e.g., the
costs of producing financial statements or the use of share options to align executive interests to shareholder interests).


Agency Theory: A theoretical framework used to describe the relationship of power and interest between someone, the principal,
who hires a second party, the agent, to act on his behalf.


Annual General Meeting (AGM) (Shareholders’ Assembly): A shareholders’ gathering, usually held just after the end of each
fiscal year, at which shareholders, directors, and management discuss the previous year, the financial statements and the outlook for
the future. At the meeting, directors are elected and other shareholder concerns may be raised. The AGM is the main opportunity
for shareholders to put questions directly to the directors of the company and to exercise their voting and decision-making power.


Annual Report: A document issued annually by companies to their shareholders. It contains information on financial results and
overall performance during the previous fiscal year and comments on the future outlook. The Annual Report should include the
Corporate Governance Report and other narrative reports, such as the CEO’s Report.


Auditor’s Opinion: A certification that accompanies financial statements, provided by independent auditors who audit a company’s
financial statements and records. The opinion indicates whether or not, overall, the financial statements present a fair reflection of
the company’s financial condition.




         46	
Audit: Is a review of the historical financial statements to enhance the degree of confidence in them. Then, examination and
verification of a company’s financial and accounting records and supporting documents by a competent, qualified professional
and independent external auditor is to assure readers that they are in accordance with applicable reporting and accounting
requirements, are free from material misstatement due to fraud or error and are true and fair representation of the company’s
financial condition.



 B
Board of Directors: The collective group of individuals elected by the shareholders of a company to direct and control the company.
They define vision and mission, set the strategy and oversee the management of the company. The board is charged with selecting
the chief executive officer (CEO), defining the compensation package of officers and setting the long-term objectives of the firm
and oversight of risk and compliance


Board Statutes (or Board Charter): Document that details the roles, responsibilities, composition and functioning of the board of
directors and its committees.


By-Laws: A written document stating the rules of internal governance for a company as adopted by its board of directors or
shareholders. Includes topics such as election of directors, duties of officers, and how share transfers should be conducted.



  C
Chairman/Chairperson of the Board: Highest-ranking director in a board of directors. The chairman is responsible for leadership
of the board, the effectiveness of the board’s functioning, that it has proper access to all the information it requires to make an
informed decision, the elaboration of the board agenda, and ensuring that the board’s business is conducted in the interest of all
shareholders.


Chief Executive Officer (CEO): The highest-ranking management officer of the company who reports to the board of directors.
The CEO is tasked with short-term decisions and leadership of employees, implementation of strategy, risk management and
oversight of management.


CEO Succession Planning: The process by which boards of directors ensure that their organization has the ability to sustain
excellence in CEO leadership over time, with seamless transitions from one leader to the next. Changing the head of an enterprise
impacts company culture, board/CEO relations, and perceptions from multiple constituencies inside and outside the business.
Effective CEO succession requires a well-defined program that ensures a supply of highly capable candidates ready to assume the
CEO position whether through an unexpected event or a planned transition.


                                                                                                                          47
Codes of Conduct/Ethics: Developed and adopted by organizations to define appropriate behaviors and actions on relevant and
potentially delicate subjects. It is an indicator of how the company will achieve its goals and go about its business.


Committees of the Board: Comprises board members only; committees are established to assist the board in the analysis of specific
subjects outside of regular board meetings. Common committees are the Audit, Remuneration and Nomination Committees.


Common Shares: Equity securities representing ownership in a corporation and providing the holders with voting rights and the
right to a share in the company’s residual earnings through dividends and/ or capital appreciation.


Compliance: Agreeing to and abiding by rules and regulations. In general, compliance means conforming to a specification or
policy (internal or external), standard or law that has been clearly defined.


Concentrated Ownership: A form of ownership in which a single shareholder (or a small group of shareholders) holds the majority
of the company’s voting shares.


Conflict of Interest: Reflects both a legal and/or ethical situation where loyalties, interests and duties compete and conflict. It
includes a situation that has the potential to undermine the impartiality of a person because of the possibility of a clash between
the person’s self-interest and professional interest or public interest. It may also be a situation in which a party’s responsibility to a
second party limits its ability to discharge its responsibility to a third party. Directors have a duty to avoid conflicts of interest and
should always act in the best interests of the company and the shareholders as a whole.


Control Block: The combined group of shares that represent the majority of a company’s voting shares.


Controlled Companies: Firms in which an individual or a number of connected individuals or a legal entity holds the majority of
the voting rights.


Control Environment: Under IFC’s Corporate Governance Methodology, the internal control environment includes:
         • Internal control system
         • Internal audit function
         • Risk governance
         • Compliance function


Controlling Shareholders: Shareholders who own enough of the company’s voting capital to control the composition of the
board of directors — typically, this is 30 percent or more and is usually a controlling family or state shareholder.




         48	
Corporate Social Responsibility: The responsibility of enterprises for their impacts on society. The phrase refers to a process to
integrate social, environmental, ethical, human rights and consumer concerns into the business operations of enterprises and their
core strategy, in close collaboration with their stakeholders, with the aim of:
• Maximizing the creation of shared value for their owners/shareholders and for their other stakeholders and society at large
• Identifying, preventing and mitigating their possible adverse impacts


Cumulative Voting: A voting system that gives minority shareholders more power, by allowing them to cast all of their board
of director votes for a single candidate, as opposed to regular or statutory voting, in which shareholders must vote for a different
candidate for each available seat, or distribute their votes between a number of candidates.


Current Ratio (current assets/current liabilities): A measure of the short-term liquidity of the firm — the ability to pay its short-
term liabilities.



 D

Disclosure: Refers to the obligation of a firm to provide material, market-influencing information in accordance with the
requirements of a number of parties, including regulatory authorities, the public or in accordance with standards, such as accounting
standards, and self- regulatory contracts. Disclosure contributes to the transparency of the firm, which is one of the main corporate
governance principles.


Dispersed Ownership: An ownership structure in which there is no controlling block of shareholders. The shares are held by
many shareholders, each of whom owns only a small percentage of shares, and none of whom can make or influence decisions on
corporate matters alone.



 E

Executive Session: The portion of a board of directors’ meeting that excludes the chief executive or any other executive.


 F
Family Constitution: Guidelines for the rights and duties of family members who will share in the family’s resources, mainly those
associated with invested companies.




                                                                                                                          49
Family Council: Organized forum for family members to meet and discuss the current and future state of the family business.
Members may, or may not, be directly involved in the day-to-day business operations. The family council is a way of building family
unity and cohesiveness through a shared vision of the family’s guiding principles and to separate the professional management
of the firm from the personal family issues. It is usually the forum to determine how the family shareholding will be voted on any
matter.


Family Office: A group of support services designed for families with very large and complex sets of assets. Often they will comprise
financial, legal and investment banking support. The office is intended to protect family interests. The Family Office is intended as a
vehicle for optimal management and comprehensive coordination of individual wealth components. The family office can be a tool
to implement broader succession, leadership, and family governance plans.


Family-Owned Businesses: Companies and projects in which the controlling shareholders belong to the same family (immediate
or wider family members) or group of families.


Fairness: Respect for the rights of all shareholders and stakeholders. One of the corporate governance principles ensuring the
equal treatment of all shareholders and attention to the legitimate rights of stakeholders.


Financial Statements: a complete set of financial statements comprises a balance sheet, an income statement, a statement of
changes in equity, a cash flow statement and notes. They collectively communicate an entity’s economic resources or obligations at
a point in time or the changes therein for a period of time in accordance with a financial reporting framework.


 G
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP): Accounting rules, conventions and standards for companies, established by
reporting requirements and accounting standard setters in the country. Each country is likely to have a GAAP, which is unlikely to
be identical to any other country’s GAAP. For example US GAAP is the body of accounting policies applicable to U.S.-registered firms
and the GAAP rules are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). These are not identical to IFRS standards issued
by the International Accounting Standards Board and applied in Europe and many other countries.


 H
Hostile Takeover: The continued pursuit of a company acquisition after the target company’s board rejects the offer; or a situation,
in which the bidder makes an offer without prior notification of the target company’s board.




          50	
  I
Independent Auditors: Professionals from an external audit firm charged with undertaking an audit of the financial statements.
An audit may be required annually, half-yearly or quarterly. In most countries the independent auditors undertake an annual
audit. They must have no personal interest in the financial statements and ought not to have had any role in the development of
the financial statements. The independent auditor is required to render an unbiased judgment that the financial statements and
accounting records of the firm are likely to be free from material misstatement and are a fair reflection of the financial position of
the firm.


Independent Director: Someone whose only nontrivial professional, familial, personal or financial connection to the corporation,
its chairman, CEO or any other executive officer is his or her directorship. The independent director is expected to be capable of
applying objective judgment to all company decisions.


Insider trading: Trading in securities by someone connected with the company or with special knowledge about the company.
Insider trading can be illegal or legal, depending on when the insider makes the trade. It is illegal when the material information is
not available to the public and such information has the capacity to have an effect on the share price.


Institutional investors: Are professional investors who act on behalf of beneficiaries, such as individual savers or pension fund
members. Institutional investors/shareholders may be the collective investment vehicles, which pool the savings of many or the
asset managers to whom they allocate the funds. (Definition taken from ICGN – Corporate Risk Oversight Guidelines 2010).


Internal Audit: An independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value and improve an organization’s
operations. It helps an organization to accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and
improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes.


Internal Control: A process implemented by an entity’s board of directors, management, and other personnel, designed to provide
reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of objectives relating to operations, reporting and compliance.


Investor Relations: The corporate communications department of a company. This department specializes in information and
disclosure management for public and private companies as they communicate with the investment community at large.




                                                                                                                           51
 L

Lead Director: A term used in the United States to refer to an independent director who should provide counterbalance to the power
of any controlling shareholders’ representatives on the board and/or the CEO. The Lead Director tends to be the leader of several
independent directors on the board and who ensures that the supervisory responsibilities of the board are being accomplished. The
Lead Director’s core responsibilities include involvement in agenda setting, chairing executive sessions, providing feedback to the
CEO after executive sessions and helping to shape boardroom dynamics.



M
Market Capitalization: The market value of the firm, defined by the number of outstanding stock multiplied by the market price
of the stock.


Minority Shareholders: Those shareholders with minority stakes in a company controlled by a majority shareholder — usually
less than a 5 percent stake. However, each country may determine various thresholds applicable to the term “minority shareholder.”



 N

Non-Voting Shares: Owners holding this share class do not commonly have voting rights at the AGM, except on some matters of
highest importance. Usually, non-voting shareowners have preferential rights for receiving dividends.


 O
One-Tier Board: A board of directors composed of both executive and non-executive members. It delegates day-to-day business
to the management team. Found in United States, the United Kingdom, and Commonwealth countries. (see Two-Tier Board)


Ownership Structure: The way in which company shares are distributed among shareholders.


 P

Preferred Shares: Equity securities representing ownership in a corporation with preferential rights over other share classes in
regard to the payment of dividends and distribution of assets upon liquidation. Preferred shares usually do not carry voting rights.




         52	
Proxy: A proxy in CG terms is any person or agent, legally authorized to act on behalf of another party. Very often, shareowners not
attending a company’s annual meeting may choose to vote their shares on resolutions being put to the meeting by proxy. The proxy
will cast votes on relevant issues on the shareowners’ behalf. Most companies, when they circulate notices for the annual meeting
to shareowners, include a proxy notice. This is a notice providing information on the issues on which there will be a vote at the
meeting. The proxy information should allow shareowners to make an informed decision on the issue.


Pulverized/Dispersed Ownership: An ownership structure in which there are no controlling shareholders.


Pyramidal Structure: An organizational structure common in family-dominated companies. Legally independent companies are
controlled by the same family through a chain of ownership relations.



 R

Related Party: A party is related to an entity if it can directly or indirectly control the other party or exercise control through other
parties; it may also be where parties are subject to a common control from the same source. Related parties tend to have influence
over the financial or operating policies of a firm or have the power to influence another party’s actions. A related party may be a
close family member (including partners, spouses, children, other relatives), a key manager in the entity (and their close family
members), or entities, such as subsidiaries of the entity, it holding company, joint ventures, and associates.


Return on Equity (ROE): Net income/book value of equity. A measure of profitability, indicating the percentage return on capital
invested by shareholders.


Risk Management: The process of identifying, analyzing, managing and monitoring a corporation’s exposure to risk and
determining optimal approaches to handling such exposure.



 S
Sarbanes-Oxley Act: U.S. legislation that tightened up corporate financial reporting, introduced a federal accounting supervision
board and criminal liability for executives who are shown to have falsified accounts.


Say on Pay: The ability of shareholders in a corporation to actively vote on how much senior executives employed by the company
should be compensated. Corporate laws may provide this power to shareholders.




                                                                                                                             53
Shareholders’ Agreement: A written document governing the relations among shareholders and defining how the company
will be managed and controlled. The agreement helps to align the objectives of controlling shareholders to safeguard common
interests and to protect the interests of minority shareholders.


Shareholders Rights: The rights resulting from ownership of shares, which may be based in legal rights or other rights contracted
with the company. The basic shareholder rights include the right to information on the company, to attend the meeting of
shareholders, to elect directors, to appoint the external auditor, voting rights and cash flow rights.


Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (S&P500): An index of the 500 largest U.S. companies, accounting for 85 percent of the dollar value
of all shares listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). The index provides a general measure of the overall performance of the
U.S. stock market.


Staggered Board: Structure of board of directors in which every year a fraction of the directors is elected, each for a multiyear term.
Also called a classified board.


Stakeholder: A person or organization with a legitimate interest in a project or company. In a more general sense, it refers to
suppliers, creditors, clients, employees, and the local community— all affected by the actions of the company.


Share Option: An agreement, or privilege, which conveys the right to buy or sell a specific security or property at a specified price,
by a specific date. The most common share options are: calls — the right to buy a specified quantity of a security at a set strike price
at a time on or before expiration — and puts — the right to sell a specified quantity of a security at a set strike price at a time on or
before expiration.



T

Tag-Along Rights: If a majority shareholder sells his/her stake, minority holders have the right to participate and sell their stake
under the same terms and conditions as the majority shareholder. This right protects minority shareholders and is a standard
inclusion in shareholders’ agreements.


Takeover: The purchase of a public company (the target) by another company (the acquirer or bidder).


Trading Policy: Terms and conditions that specify the conditions under which insiders — typically directors and officers of a
company — can trade company shares. It also includes specific periods when insiders may not trade their shares, called “blackout
periods.”




         54	
Transparency: The corporate governance principle of publishing and disclosing information relevant to stakeholders’ interests and
to shareholders on all price-sensitive material matters.


Tunneling: An illegal business practice in which a majority shareholder or a high-level company insider directs company assets or
future business to themselves for personal gain.


Two-Tier Board: A board of directors that divides supervisory and management duties into two separate bodies. The supervisory
board, comprising non-executive directors, oversees the management board, comprising executive directors. The arrangement is
common in France, Germany, and Eastern Europe. Not all styles of two-tier board are identical.


V
Value Based Management (VBM): Value Based Management (VBM) is the management approach that ensures corporations are
managed consistently on value (normally maximizing share- holder value). The three elements of VBM are:
• Creating value: how the company can increase or generate maximize future value, similar to strategy
• Managing for value: governance, change management, organizational culture, communication and leadership
• Measuring value: valuation


Voting Rights: The right to vote at shareholders’ meetings on issues of importance for the company.


Voting Shares: Shares that give the shareholder the right to vote on matters of corporate policy, including elections to the board
of directors.


W
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC): A measure of return on a potential investment. The measure includes cost of debt
and equity, weighted by their relative contribution to overall costs in proportion to total funding and the cost of the related interest
or dividend payments.




                                                                                                                            55
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW

Washington, DC 20433 USA

Tel: +1 (202) 458-2559

Facsimile: +1 (202) 974-4349

ifc.org/corporategovernance




In Partnership with            April, 2015
