                                                 97176




 Evaluation of Water Services
  Public Private Partnership
Options for Mid-sized Cities in
            India


               Final Report


David Ehrhardt, Riddhima Gandhi, Josses Mugabi
            and William Kingdom



                 June 2015
Table of Contents

1     Introduction                                                  1
2     The Three Case Studies                                        3
3     Unique Water Sector Challenges in Mid-sized Indian Cities     6
      3.1    Current Operations                                     7
      3.2    Investment: To Serve Current Population                9
      3.3    Investment: To Meet Future Demand                     11
4     Viability Gap—Analysis of Two Cities                         14
      4.1    Calculating the Viability Gap                         14
      4.2    Main Results—Breaking Down the Viability Gap
             Components                                            15
      4.3    Sensitivity of the Viability Gap to Variables         17
      4.4    Scenario Analysis—Realistic Improvements versus DPR   24
5     Why Traditional PPP Models Don’t Stack up                    28
      5.1    Traditional PPP Models                                28
      5.2    Features the Innovative PPPs Must Achieve             30
6     The Innovative PPP Models                                    32
      6.1    The Phased Performance Based Contract                 33
      6.2    The Joint Venture Partnership                         41
      6.3    Issues in Implementing an SPV for Water Supply        46
7     Advantages of Proposed PPP Models                            48
      7.1    Advantages over Traditional Models                    48
      7.2    Advantages over Business As Usual in Two Cities       51
8     Conclusion                                                   53



Appendices
Appendix A : Framework for Data Collection                         58
Appendix B : Case Study Tables from Interviews with Suez and
     Veolia                                                        63
Appendix C : Feedback from Private Operators                       70
Tables
Table 3.1: Poorly Structured Utilities                                    7
Table 3.2: Challenges with Current Operations                             9
Table 3.3: Investment: To Serve Current Population                       10
Table 4.1: Design Implications from Sensitivity Analysis                 24
Table 4.2: Scenario Assumptions- DPR versus Realistic
Improvements                                                             26
Table 6.1: Differences between the Cost and Service Efficiency
Models                                                                   39
Table 7.1: Advantages of Management Contract over Phased
Performance Based Contract                                               48
Table 7.2: Advantages of JV Partnership with a Utility SPV over
Concession                                                               49
Table 7.3: Advantages of PPBC over Current Structure in
Bhubaneswar                                                              51
Table 7.4: Advantages of JV Partnership with Utility SPV over
Current Structure in Coimbatore                                          52
Table 8.1: How the Innovative PPP Models Tackle the Sector’s
Unique Challenges                                                        55
Table A.1: Government of India Performance Benchmarks                    58
Table A.2: Process Management scorecard                                  60
Table B.1: PPP Summary (Port-au-Prince, Delhi, and Algiers)              64
Table B.2: PPP Summary Continued (Gabon, Jeddah, and Ideal
Arrangement)                                                             67



Figures
Figure 2.1: Key Characteristics of the Three Case Studies                 3
Figure 3.1: Unique Challenges in India’s Urban Water Sector               6
Figure 3.2: Challenges to Meet Future Demand in Coimbatore               13
Figure 4.1: Bhubaneswar Viability Gap                                    16
Figure 4.2: Coimbatore Viability Gap                                     17
Figure 4.3: Sensitivity of Bhubaneswar’s Viability Gap to NRW            19
Figure 4.4: Sensitivity of Bhubaneswar’s Viability Gap to Real Tariffs   20
Figure 4.5: Impact of Coimbatore’s Water Tax on Viability Gap            21
Figure 4.6: Impact of Concessional Finance on Viability Gap              22
Figure 4.7: Impact of Operational Efficiency on Coimbatore’s
Viability Gap                                                    23
Figure 4.8: Scenario Analysis—DPR Case versus Realistic
Improvements Case for Bhubaneswar                                26
Figure 5.1: Traditional PPP Models Are Inadequate                28
Figure 6.1: Structure of the Phased Performance Based Contract   34
Figure 6.2: Phased Performance Based Contract: Roles over Time   36
Figure 6.3: Cost Efficiency versus Service Efficiency            38
Figure 6.4: Structure of JV Partnership: Utility                 42
Figure 6.5: Structure of JV Partnership: Concessionaire          45



Boxes
Box 4.1: Impact of Hours of Supply on NRW                        27
Acronyms
Capex      Capital expenditure

CCB        City Corporation of Belgaum

CMC        Coimbatore Municipal Corporation

DPR        Detailed Project Report

JV         Joint Venture

KUDWSB     Karnataka Urban Supply Water Distribution Board (Karnataka State Water
           Board)

NRW        Non-Revenue Water

O&M        Operating and Maintenance Costs

PHEO       Public Health Engineering Organization

PPBC       Phased Performance Based Contract

SPV        Special Purpose Vehicle

TWAD       Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board (Tamil Nadu State Water
           Board)

ULB        Urban Local Body (City Government)
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by a team comprising Josses Mugabi (Senior Water and Sanitation
Specialist, World Bank), William Kingdom (Lead Water and Sanitation Specialist, World
Bank), David Ehrhardt (Chief Executive, Castalia Strategic Advisors) and Riddhima Gandhi
(Senior Analyst, Castalia Strategic Advisors).

The report draws on sector work undertaken in India to inform the design of a possible
urban water supply and sanitation project. The original sector work, and the subsequent
activities leading to the preparation of this report, were supported by the Public-Private
Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF).
This report builds on fieldwork and consultations in three representative cities —
Bhubaneswar, Belgaum and Coimbatore. The team would like to thank city officials in each
of the cities, and the Ministry of Urban Development for their support in conducting the
study.
In addition, the team worked with representatives of potential private sector operators to
seek their input on the models. Companies represented included Essel RPW Projects Pvt.
Ltd., Doshion Veolia Water Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Jindal Saw Ltd., SPML Infra Ltd., Jain
Irrigation Systems Ltd., and SUEZ Environment India. The team also acknowledges the
contribution of three consultants —Anand Kumar Jalakam, S.R Ramanujam, and Sanjay
Dahasahastra —who conducted most of the field work on which this report is based, and
Suneetha Dasappa Kacker (Water and Sanitation Specialist, World Bank) who managed the
field work.
The report benefited greatly from peer reviews by Iain Menzies (Senior Water and Sanitation
Specialist, World Bank) and Jane Jamieson (Senior Industry Specialist, IFC).
Executive Summary
Indian cities, home to 375 million people, are growing by 11 million every year. Mid-sized
cities—with populations between 500,000 and 5 million—will absorb much of this growth.
Most water utilities in these cities are in need of assistance. They face a diverse set of
challenges in terms of providing a continuous supply of water to the current population, as
well as preparing for future demand from the rapidly growing population. Figure 1 highlights
these challenges, substantiating them with examples from three mid-size cities which were
studied as part of this evaluation—Bhubaneswar, Coimbatore and Belgaum.
Figure 1: Unique Water Sector Challenges in Mid- sized Indian Cities




PPPs can move the water sector in these cities forward by building stronger institutions,
improving operational and management efficiency, and increasing access to capital.
Unfortunately, traditional PPP models—Concessions, Leases and Management Contracts—



                                             i
face particular challenges that may inhibit their successful implementation in mid-sized
Indian cities. Figure 2 below explains why. In essence, the risks for the operator are too large
in concessions or leases, given the information uncertainty and poor quality of assets to
operate. On the other hand, the limited scope and duration of management contracts limit
the ability of the operator to create lasting changes which would benefit Local Governments.
Figure 2: Traditional PPP Models Don’t Stack Up




Therefore this report presents alternative PPP models tailored to meet the needs of mid-
sized Indian cities. From this analysis two promising new options have emerged: a Phased
Performance Based Contract, and a Joint Venture Partnership.
These models have been created by analyzing gathered from three diverse mid-sized Indian
cities, discussions with experts, private investors and government officials, as well as lessons
learned from PPPs in similar challenging environments.
Phased Performance Based Contract (PPBC)
This model is a two phase, 10 year full service management contract between the City
Government and private operator. The initial objective will be to create a city water utility,
incorporated under company law, owned by the City Government. The operator would
manage the city water utility for the duration of the contract, with a target to get a set
percentage of households onto 24 by 7 water supply. The structure is shown in Figure 3.




                                               ii
Figure 3: Structure of the Phased Performance Based Contract




To support the investment needed for 24 by 7 supply, a fixed capital fund will be allocated at
the start. The National and State Government and other development agencies will provide
these funds, in the form of grants and concessional loans. The City Government may also
contribute. The fund amount will be set at the estimated cost of meeting the 24 by 7 target.
The contractor will be able to spend from the fund, following strict procurement guidelines
as defined by the government. The fund can be used to make capital improvements, such as
network transmission and production investments, and to reform the utility. Use of these
funds would be independently audited. The continued provision of this capital fund will be
subject to fulfilling certain conditions.
The operator will be paid a fixed management fee, and performance pay based on the
efficiency with which it uses the capital fund to bring customers onto 24 by 7. The
performance pay could be a share of any cost reduction in achieving the target service levels.
Alternatively, the contractor could be paid a set amount for each additional household
(above the target) provided with 24 by 7 service by a set date.
Proceeding to phase II—which would start in year six—will be contingent on satisfactory
performance in phase I. More specifically, the operator will have to meet the minimum
standards determined at the start, failing which the City Government can decide to terminate
the contract. Figure 4 outlines how roles would evolve over time.




                                              iii
Figure 4: Phased Performance Based Contract: Roles over Time




During phase II, the operator will be expected to embed the good practices that it began to
implement in phase I. Specific responsibilities, services standards, and fees may be adjusted
in the transition to phase II, to take into account new information that has emerged.
The City Government will hold the operator accountable for achieving the standards set out
in the contract. In particular, the private operator will be required to report the number of
households it puts onto 24 by 7, and this will be monitored by an auditor. The government
will continue to set tariffs and standards for the utility.
Key advantages of the PPBC over a management contract include the focus on building a
utility at the very start, rather than just managing what exists, and stronger incentives for the
aspects of performance that really matter—such as managing a capital program to achieve 24
by 7 service. The fixed capital fund provided upfront, also overcomes the difficulty of
finding funding sources for a large improvement program. Moreover, the conditions set
around using the fund, ensure that only cost-efficient investments are made. Finally, the
longer duration and flexibility to respond to emerging information, are also important
advantages.
As a result, this model can be applied to a city utility with low cost recovery and a large
viability gap. However, the government must be willing to agree to establish a ring-fenced
utility—typically a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) created under company law and owned by
the City Government—and possess the means to provide a fixed capital fund, replenishing it
during phase II if necessary.



                                               iv
Joint Venture (JV) Partnership
This model also involves the creation of a new city-level water company, structured as a
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), jointly owned by the City Government and a private investor,
with the latter holding more than half the shares. This water company will be capitalized by
the transfer of water infrastructure from the government to the company, and an equity
injection by the investor. In the case that asset transfer is not the preferred route, the SPV will
be a jointly owned concessionaire which will not own the assets, but will have the rights to
use them over the long term5. In either case this new water services SPV will be responsible
for all aspects of water service, including bulk water production, distribution, billing and
collections, and capital program planning and implementation.
The private partner will be competitively selected. It must be an experienced utility operator,
with capital to invest. The partner chosen will be the firm or consortium with the required
skills and experience that is willing to inject the most equity in exchange for an agreed stake
in the company. The basic structure of the JV Partnership is shown in Figure 5 below.
Figure 5: Structure of JV Partnership




The water company will raise money for investment. Concessional finance will be used
wherever possible to keep the cost of capital down, while private finance will be used when

5
    See Section 6.2, JV Partnership Variant: Concessionaire SPV for more details and diagram explaining the structure of this
     variation



                                                               v
needed to move more quickly, or expand investments beyond the limit of the concessional
finance available.
The utility will be regulated through a contract that sets service standards and tariffs. These
will be reviewed every three years, in accordance with the contract. Coverage and service
standards may be changed in light of emerging information and new priorities. Tariffs would
be set to cover reasonable cost, including a reasonable return on capital invested. Where
necessary, the government may provide subsidies to keep tariffs at affordable levels. The
utility’s performance under the contract would be monitored and enforced either by a
regulatory office in the City Government, or by a State Water Regulator, if one was created.
The JV Partnership has various advantages over a traditional concession. The rate of return
approach to setting tariffs promotes capital investments, even in a situation of information
uncertainty. Partial public ownership of the utility, and government representation on the
Board, not only promotes trust and information sharing between the public and private
sector, but also gives the company access to concessional financing. By giving the City
Government a stake in the commercial success of the utility, the usual short term political
incentives to hold tariffs below cost, will be somewhat counter-balanced. Finally, in addition
to being a simpler contract to understand, the JV’s potentially indefinite duration makes it
well suited to sustain the performance of the utility over the long term.
As a result, this model can be applied to a city where the City Government is comfortable
with entering a long-term agreement with a private partner, and will assist with organizing
concessional loans. The utility must have a relatively strong financial position. It must be
close to full cost recovery, and have (if at all) a viability gap that is small enough to close with
concessional finance. This is crucial to attracting the initial private equity that is required to
form the water company.
In conclusion, the two models presented in this report supplement the options for mid-sized
Indian cities as they consider how best to provide quality water services to rapidly growing
populations.




                                                 vi
11          Introduction
Successful mid-sized cities6 will be vital to India’s growth and prosperity in the coming
decades. Indian cities are home to over 375 million people now7, and their population is
likely to double by 2035.8 Yet water supply in most mid-sized cities falls short of
Government of India benchmarks for service, efficiency and cost recovery. In many of them
water flows in the pipes for 2 hours a day or less, its quality is poor, and it is provided by
utilities that cannot even cover their operating costs.
Governments at both the State and Urban Local Body (ULB) levels across India, have
realized that a new paradigm of safe, reliable, self-sustaining 24 by 7 water services is needed
to sustain urban growth and improved living standards. These governments are thus looking
for new institutional models—including public private partnerships (PPPs)—that can
respond to India’s unique challenges.
With this in mind, the Government of India (GoI) enlisted the support of the World Bank
to develop India-specific PPP arrangements for the water sector. The World Bank hired
Castalia and a team of Indian consultants9 to explore if innovative PPP models could be
developed to improve water services quickly and sustainably.
The report is informed by:
             Consulting with officials from city Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), and the Ministry
              of Urban Development (MoUD) to identify the specific challenges affecting the
              sector;
             Engaging with international water operators like Veolia and Suez, to brainstorm
              emerging PPP models that could respond to the Indian challenge (see Appendix
              B);
             Gathering data on three representative cities—Bhubaneswar, Belgaum and
              Coimbatore—to ensure recommendations are grounded in reality; and
             Conducting a financial viability gap analysis on the cities, to understand the scale
              of financial demand imposed by improvements required.



6
    Our definition of mid-sized cities includes second-tier and third-tier cities. As per Government of India definitions,
    second-tier cities have populations between 5 million and 1 million, and third-tier cities have populations between 1
    million and 500,000.

7
    “India’s urban awakening: Building inclusive cities, sustaining economic growth,” McKinsey Global Institute 2008, pg 37.
     The figure for 2012 was extrapolated from the 2008 figure, assuming a constant growth rate provided by the report
     (1.25%).
8
    “India's urban population will double in 25 years,” Times of India, Source:
     http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2010-12-17/india/28259598_1_urban-population-urban-areas-
     pranab-mukherjee, (accessed December 7 2012).
9
    The team included, S.R. Ramanujan, Anand Jalakam and Sanjay Dahasahastra


                                                              1
              Conducting a “market sounding” exercise with potential private sector
               operators10, to understand their views on the design of the PPP models. (See
               Appendix C: Feedback from Private Operators)
Drawing on these findings, two innovative PPP models were designed to overcome the
unique challenges more effectively than (i) the traditional PPPs, and (ii) the business as usual
approach.
Following a brief introduction to the three city case studies (Section 2), the report lays out
the Indian water sector’s unique challenges, using case examples to substantiate findings
(Section 3). The challenges include day-to-day operational issues associated with running a
utility, as well as policy and planning issues that affect the utility’s governance and
investment planning to meet current and future demand. The results of a financial viability
gap analysis11, applied to Bhubaneswar and Coimbatore reveal the magnitude of
improvements required, and the key drivers that affect the utilities’ financial performance
(Section 4). These complex challenges make traditional PPP models—Management
Contracts, Concessions and Leases—less amenable for use in mid-size Indian cities. As
Section 5 describes, this is because the traditional models are too risky for the operator or
government, or too limited in scope to create lasting improvements.
The remaining sections focus on explaining the design and procurement strategy for the two
innovative PPP models—the Phased Performance Based Contract and the Joint Venture
(JV) Partnership (Section 6 and 7). These models have the potential to deliver better results
than the traditional PPPs and business as usual scenarios. This is because in addition to
reforming dysfunctional utilities into focused and accountable organizations, they are able to
respond to information uncertainty, include strong incentives, have clear sources of funding,
and promote capital efficiency.




10
     Companies represented included Essel RPW Projects Pvt. Ltd., Doshion Veolia Water Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Jindal Saw
     Ltd., SPML Infra Ltd., Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd., and SUEZ Environment India.
11
     The financial viability gap is the negative value that is left over when the net present value (NPV) of operating cashflows
     is less than the present value of capital expenditures required to run a business. The presence of a viability gap indicates
     the commercial unviability of a project or entity, while the size of the viability gap reflects the amount of subsidy that is
     needed to attract private sector interest in the business. (Section 4 provides more details on how to calculate the viability
     gap)


                                                                 2
12        The Three Case Studies
Bhubaneswar, Coimbatore and Belgaum—each distinct in its own way—together capture
the diversity of India’s urban water sector. Information gathered from these cities was used
to complement the desk-based research, and help to ensure the innovative PPP models are
grounded in reality. This section sets the stage for the rest of the report, by introducing the
three cities.
Two key considerations ensured the data collected from the cities revealed factors that
would be relevant. First, mid-sized cities were selected that were sufficiently different from
each other in terms of water service levels, investment needs, physical size and population,
institutional structure, political economy and governance issues. Second, a common data
collection framework was prepared and applied to all the cities. This ensured that
comparisons on parameters such as Non-Revenue Water (NRW)12 levels, hours of service,
pipe condition, staffing and so forth, could be made across the case studies. Each city’s main
characteristics are shown in Figure 12.1 below. (The framework developed for the data
collection is provided in Appendix A.)
Figure 12.1: Key Characteristics of the Three Case Studies




Bhubaneswar
12Non-Revenue Water is a measure of water losses, it is the difference between the volume of water put into a water
distribution system and the volume that is billed to customers. NRW comprises three components: physical (or real) losses,
commercial (or apparent) losses, and unbilled authorized consumption.

                                                            3
Bhubaneswar is the capital city of Odisha, and is situated on India’s eastern coast. With an
economy driven mainly by the metals and metal processing industries, it is a relatively small
state capital with a population of 840,000, and a total area of 135 square km. However, being
one of the most quickly developing cities in the east, it is expected to double in size over the
next two decades. Water service in Bhubaneswar is poor—only half the population has
access to a piped connection. Those who do have a connection receive water for just 2 hours
a day. The water assets are leaky and illegal connections high, resulting in an estimated NRW
level of 57 percent.
All water supply functions, including bulk water sourcing and supply, distribution, operations
and maintenance are performed the Public Health Engineering Organization (PHEO). The
PHEO is a state level body, under the State Department of Housing and Urban
Development, that is responsible for providing water and sewage services in urban areas of
Odisha. There is a specific Bhubaneswar division of the PHEO that caters to the city and its
surrounding urban periphery. The City Government, the Bhubaneswar Municipal
Corporation (BMC), currently does not have any responsibility for water supply or sewage in
the city. This is in spite of the 74th amendment to the Indian Constitution, which requires
that municipalities take responsibility for providing water services.
Despite having a relatively clear institutional structure, the PHEO, that provides water
services to Bhubaneswar, is not run on modern commercial lines. Financial performance is
poor, with cost recovery levels of 36.5 percent. The utility is run like a government
department, instead of a revenue generating business, with no incentives to achieve financial
self-sustainability. For example, the PHEO follows government hiring and budgeting
processes, inconsistent with the needs of the utility. It is overstaffed, and 75 percent of its
workforce is unskilled. Furthermore it is completely reliant on State Government grants to
cover its operating losses and finance any capital works.
Coimbatore
Coimbatore is an industrial city in the southern state of Tamil Nadu. Its population is 1.6
million. The city is gaining recognition as an engineering and textile manufacturing hub and
becoming increasingly prosperous. As a result of its rapid urbanization, Coimbatore’s city
limits were expanded in 2011 from 105 square km to 257 square km, to include its sprawling
urban periphery. This has meant that the already poor performing water provider is
overstretched. In the old city, water flows in pipes for two to three hours every alternate
day13. NRW is surprisingly low, at approximately 23 percent. However, this number is subject
to a wide margin of error, given the sparse data on the asset condition and low supply hours.
Currently the city’s Urban Local Body (ULB)14—the Coimbatore Municipal Corporation
(CMC)—is responsible for water distribution and operations. It operates some new bulk
water assets, but is reliant on the State Water Board—Tamil Nadu Water Supply and
13
     This data has been estimated as it is not reported consistently by authorities.
14
     In India, ULB, City Government and municipality are used interchangeably and refer to the third-tier of government that
     manage cities and towns.


                                                                  4
Drainage Board (TWAD)—for the rest of it bulk water production. This has recently led to
coordination inefficiencies and disputes over raw water purchases. Furthermore, water
operations within the CMC are fragmented. For example, the majority of the staff are shared
across the ULB’s numerous urban service functions. The CMC is also currently
understaffed—even by international standards—with only 1.18 staff per thousand
connections. This lack of dedicated technical staff and clear management processes will be
detrimental to water provision in coming years.
Despite the poor service, cost recovery in Coimbatore is high, at 172 percent. This level of
cost recovery can be attributed to the well-designed water tax linked to property values,
which brings in over half the utility’s revenues. As a result the financial position of
Coimbatore’s water utility is quite strong.
Belgaum
Belgaum is a strategic transport junction in the state of Karnataka, and connects major cities
such as Mumbai, Bangalore and Goa in the western part of India. It has a population of
480,000, and covers a total area of 94 square km. The city’s population is expected to grow
by approximately 250,000 in the next two decades.
Water provision in Belgaum is beset with challenges. There are no metered connections,
NRW is estimated at 56 percent, and almost 70 percent of the distribution network requires
replacement.
However, the City Government has demonstrated a real willingness to try and turn the
situation around. This is evidenced by the implementation of the World Bank funded pilot—
Karnataka Urban Water Sector Improvement Program (KUWASIP)—that has managed to
bring continuous supply to a small section of the city, previously known for its high number
of illegal connections. In the rest of the city however, water provision is shockingly low —it
is supplied for only two hours once every three days.
The City Government—the City Corporation of Belgaum (CCB)—has delegated bulk water
supply, distribution and maintenance works to the State Water Board—the Karnataka Urban
Water Supply and Distribution Board (KUDWSB). Although this delegation of responsibility
has been in effect since 2006, it is still incomplete. Specifically, there is no clear
understanding as to which organization is responsible for financing and implementing the
much needed capital works in the city.
Furthermore, the utility’s 75 percent cost recovery hides an unconditional state grant for
electricity use—its largest operational expenditure. Like Bhubaneswar, Belgaum’s water
provider, KUDWSB, is effectively run like a government department, following state
procurement, hiring and budgeting procedures that are not aligned with the needs of a well-
functioning city utility. For example, a state freeze on hiring has meant that there is an
unbalanced hierarchy in the utility’s management structure, with far too many senior staff in
relation to the lower levels.



                                              5
13     Unique Water Sector Challenges in Mid-sized
       Indian Cities
The Indian urban water sector’s myriad challenges can be grouped into categories related to:
current operations, investment needed to serve current population, and investment needed
to serve future population. These problems are summarized in Figure 13.1, and discussed
further below.
Problems related to current operations include service levels below benchmarks for quality,
efficiency and cost recovery. Poor utility governance structures and weak performance
incentives also belong in this category.
Investment needed to serve current population is driven by dilapidated water assets and
leaky networks. These result in high NRW levels, preventing 24 by 7 service. To make
matters worse, most utilities don’t actually know the full extent nor the condition of their
assets.
Explosive urban population growth means that massive investment is needed to serve the
populations of the future. However, weak capital expenditures (capex) planning, uncertainty
about where populations will ultimately settle, and scarcity of funding sources, makes this a
daunting task.
Figure 13.1: Unique Challenges in India’s Urban Water Sector




                                             6
13.1   Current Operations
Current operations means running the utility on a day-to-day basis, supplying customers with
water, and employing standard processes to manage costs and revenues. Most Indian water
providers are unable to do this efficiently, resulting in poor financial performance. This in
turn creates a vicious cycle, making it hard to improve infrastructure, management systems,
and services. Utilities are badly structured, have low cost recovery, provide poor services,
and struggle to reach commercial efficiency.
Poorly structured utilities
Existing service providers at the ULB level either formally don’t exist (with service provided
by a State level entity), or they exist but are “empty shells” with regards to the equipment,
systems, and procedures to be expected in a modern utility. Many have poor governance,
non-standardized management processes, and outdated technology. For example in
Coimbatore, water service provision is mixed with other urban services provided by the City
Government. Most staff are shared between these different services, so few, if any, are solely
dedicated to managing water services.
In Bhubaneswar and Belgaum, there is no link between revenues and costs, as the
government at the State level subsidizes operating losses. These subsidies arguably deter
operational cost efficiency and organizational self-sufficiency.
Information management systems are weak across the board, either due to the low priority
given to sharing information, the absence of technology, or lack of skilled staff. Finally, the
links between operations and capital expenditure planning and finance are generally weak. In
Belgaum, for example, there is lack of clarity over whether or not the State Water Board is
responsible for capex planning and implementation. This is because the city municipality has
not done a good job of clearly delegating roles and responsibilities to the Board.
Table 13.1 shows how the three municipal providers studied measure up against four key
indicators of a well-structured utility.
Table 13.1: Poorly Structured Utilities




                                              7
Low operating cost recovery
Operating revenues are often below costs, with typical cost recovery rates between 30 to 50
percent nationally.15 Bhubaneswar falls within this range at 36.5 percent, as shown in Table
13.2 below. Belgaum achieves 72 percent cost recovery. While relatively high, it still means
the Belgaum utility cannot pay its way—and this is after a subsidy for electricity, its largest
operational expenditure.
As Coimbatore shows, it is possible to do better—Coimbatore dedicates a certain amount of
its property tax as revenue for water services. This allows it to cover operating costs and
generate a surplus for investment.
Poor service levels
Most city water providers in India supply water for three to five hours per day16, compared to
the Government’s benchmark of 24 by 7 water supply. In the case studies this number is
even lower, as shown in Table 13.2 below. Supply hours range from two per day in
Bhubaneswar, to two every three days in Belgaum. Moreover, in Belgaum and Coimbatore
daily hours of supply are not reported consistently or accurately.
Low commercial and staff efficiency
Existing providers suffer from low staff efficiency, meaning that staff are unable to perform
tasks quickly and effectively. Bhubaneswar’s utility is currently overstaffed, with 39 staff per

15
     Castalia report on Water Professionalization, April 2011
16
     Water and Sanitation Program (2008). Benchmarking Urban Water Utilities in India. WSP/World Bank. New Delhi.


                                                                8
1000 connections, far above international standards. In addition, there are too many
unskilled workers, as shown in Table 13.2. On the other hand, some providers suffer from
overreliance on outsourcing to independent contractors as a result of staff shortages. An
example of this is Coimbatore, where maintenance works could be delayed or below
standards due to difficulties managing and coordinating with independent contractors. In
Belgaum, a freeze on staff hiring has led to a poor matching of staff skills with the utility’s
needs.
Commercial management systems are typically weak, as evidenced by an almost complete
absence of metering in Bhubaneswar and Belgaum, shown in Table 13.2. In Coimbatore,
although 100 percent of the connections are metered, the majority of the meters are old and
should be replaced. It is difficult to tell how many meters are in working condition, as the
utility rarely reads the meters, relying on past estimates instead.
Table 13.2: Challenges with Current Operations




13.2 Investment: To Serve Current Population
Achieving 24 by 7 service, even for the current population, will require huge investments.
Investing to reduce the leakiness of the networks will be particularly important. The research
highlighted the following common impediments to improving service levels for current
population.
Poor and uncertain data on asset stock and condition
Base data on current assets is lacking. Systematic data collection, information management,
and mapping systems, are all rare. For example, none of the cities have completely mapped
networks, or make use of GIS systems. Many pipes were laid 40-50 years ago and have
outlived their useful life, as in Bhubaneswar and Belgaum (see Table 3.3 below)


                                              9
NRW underestimated
Engineering reports either fail to report NRW numbers (as in the case of Coimbatore) or do
a poor job of calculating NRW. NRW projections are often grossly underestimated because
engineers tend to overlook how NRW numbers might increase as hours of service increase.17
Typical NRW rates in India are high, at 50 to 60 percent.18 Bhubaneswar and Belgaum seem
to fall within this range as shown in Table 3.3 (although there is doubt as to how these
numbers were calculated). Lack of systematized revenue collection systems also results in
large, but often unknown commercial losses (primarily illegal connections). Commercial
losses are particularly hard to measure, for example in Bhubaneswar estimates of illegal
connections vary from 11,000 to 30,000 (see Table 3.3 below).
Rehabilitation expenditure large and unknown
The water distribution system of most cities is in poor shape, with major investments
required to replace pipe connections and install meters. As shown in Table 3.3 as much as 60
percent of the piped network in Bhubaneswar and 80 percent in Belgaum are thought to
need replacement. In Coimbatore it is difficult to estimate the level of replacement needed,
because there is not enough data on network condition.
Furthermore, Detailed Project Report’s19 (DPR’s) rehabilitation expenditure projections vary
in their level of conservatism. For example, Coimbatore’s DPR makes a conservative
estimate of US$8 per capita, while according to Belgaum’s more liberal assessment, US$152
per capita is needed (see Table 3.3 below).




Table 13.3: Investment: To Serve Current Population




17
     Physical water losses increase linearly with hours of continuous, pressurized service. See Box 1.1 Impact of hours of
     supply on NRW, for a more detailed explanation.
18
     Ministry of Urban Development, India (2009). Service Level Benchmarking Databook: MoUD, New Delhi
19
     These are engineering reports written for the cities commissioned by the City Government. They are authored by external
     local engineering firms and provide indicators of current utility performance and try to project future needs.


                                                              10
13.3 Investment: To Meet Future Demand
As India’s urban population is expected to increase by almost 11 million every year, water
infrastructure will need to keep pace, running out networks into new neighborhoods, and
abstracting and treating more water. The planning and financing challenges are immense,
particularly given the inadequate structures now in place. The research highlighted the
following four fundamental problems in expanding water supply networks to keep pace with
growing urban populations.
High, but unknowable population growth rates
Urban population growth in India is predicted to increase at an unprecedented rate—adding
240 million people to its current 375 million by 2030.20 Cities like Bhubaneswar and
Coimbatore, already close to 1 million in size, are expected to grow by a further 0.5 to 1
million in the next two decades. This will compound the problem of dismal water service
quality and stress existing infrastructure. It is also very difficult to predict where future
populations will live. Furthermore, the Indian urban planning system, instead of molding the
shape of cities, finds itself habitually following behind.




Capital expenditure planning is weak and actual costs uncertain

20
     “India’s urban awakening: Building inclusive cities, sustaining economic growth,” McKinsey Global Institute 2008, pg 37


                                                              11
Providers rarely develop detailed capital expenditure plans. In the three cities studied, the
DPRs made inconsistent assumptions about capital cost drivers such as NRW levels and
future water demand. As a result capital expenditure numbers predicted have a large margin
of error. According to the DPRs, the numbers range from US$121 per current capita in
Bhubaneswar to meet demand until 2032, to roughly half that amount (US$70) for
Coimbatore until the year 2044.
Financing sources are uncertain
Currently few cities have the ability to cover operating expenses, let alone fund capital
programs from tariff revenues. Belgaum and Bhubaneswar rely on grants for all their capital
expenditure programs, while Coimbatore can cover just 52% of capital costs from its own
budget. There is thus an over-reliance on State and Central grant funding. In the future, such
grant funding is very unlikely to be available in the growing quantities in which it will be
demanded.
Institutional fragmentation
Divided responsibilities between cities’ core and periphery create inefficiencies and hinder
responses to growth. This is a common challenge for Indian cities undergoing rapid
urbanization. For example, until 2011, the urbanized peripheral areas of Coimbatore were
served by multiple, small-scale ULBs (City Governments) instead of the Coimbatore
Municipal Council. This was changed in 2012 when city limits were expanded. However,
other forms of institutional fragmentation persist in Coimbatore. For example, the State
Water Board and ULB have overlapping functions of owning and operating bulk water
assets. Recently, this has led to an unresolved dispute over raw water payments between the
two authorities.
The fragmented institutional structure and the challenges of rapid population growth are
depicted for the city of Coimbatore in Figure 13.2 below.




                                             12
Figure 13.2: Challenges to Meet Future Demand in Coimbatore21




21
     The “New city” lines and “New periphery” lines around the old city are not an exact representation of city limits. They
     just serve the purpose of trying to illustrate the point of rapid urban growth.


                                                             13
14     Viability Gap—Analysis of Two Cities
This section explores the financial viability of water services in mid-sized cities based on
detailed assessments in Bhubaneswar and Coimbatore. It draws lessons about what PPPs
must focus on if they are to increase financial viability. It also highlights the effects that
different levels of financial viability can have on the types of PPPs that can succeed. To
measure financial viability, the concept of a “viability gap” (VG) has been used. The VG is
essentially the shortfall of cash receipts over cash outflows, over an extended period, taking
into account financing costs.
Most water utilities in India have a viability gap. They fail to meet operating costs from
revenues, let alone finance capital expenditures from revenues. This lack of financial viability
creates challenges for PPPs, since private firms are normally only interested in opportunities
that are financially viable.
India has pioneered the concept of viability gap funding in road and other PPPs. In the
context of road PPPs, the VG is the gap between projected toll revenues and roads’
operating and capital costs. Often the government provides an upfront capital contribution
to the operator—equal to the value of the VG. The idea is that a government contribution
‘tops up’ the funding of a scheme, allowing private capital to be attracted for a large part of
the capital cost. In this report, the VG is used as a measure of how far a PPP for water
services would be from covering all its costs—both capital and operational—from user fees
or other water specific funding sources.
This section discusses the results of a viability gap analysis conducted on Bhubaneswar and
Coimbatore’s water utilities. The cities were picked specifically because of significant
differences in their financial performance and institutional arrangements.
14.1   Calculating the Viability Gap
The viability gap for Bhubaneswar and Coimbatore was calculated using the following steps:
Step 1: Project            For each city, population growth, water demand, revenues and
demand, revenues          operating expenditures were projected for a given time period. The
and operating costs       city DPRs, which assume all households will be on 24 by 7 within 5
                          years—were used to make these projections. Cashflows were
                          adjusted for inflation.


Step 2: Estimate           The revenues and operating costs were discounted using a
NPV of operating          standard nominal rate of 10 percent, to arrive at the net present
cashflows                 value (NPV) of operating cashflow for each city. If this value was
                          negative, it meant the utility had an operating cash deficit, and
                          conversely if this value was positive, it indicated the city had an
                          operating cash surplus.


                                              14
Step 3: Estimate the       Next, the cost of financing the capital expenditures (capex) was
PV of cost of             calculated, using a nominal cost of capital of 13 percent. Baseline
financing capex           capital expenditure estimates were taken from the DPR, and were
                          adjusted for inflation. The 13 percent cost of capital was chosen
                          because it was assumed capex was being privately financed (this
                          value was always negative since expenditures signify cash outflows).
                          These cashflows were then discounted at the standard nominal rate
                          of 10 percent, to arrive at the present value (PV) of cost of
                          financing capex.


Step 4: VG=NPV of          The viability gap is the result of adding the NPV of operating
operating cashflow-       cashflow to the PV of cost of financing capex. If the PV of the
PV of cost of             financing costs exceeds the NPV of the operating cashflow, there is
financing capex           a viability gap. If on the other hand, the net result is positive, it
                          means the entity has a value that private investors would be willing
                          to pay for. The value of the VG is always provided in present value
                          terms.


14.2 Main Results—Breaking Down the Viability Gap Components
Applying the viability gap methodology to the two cities to the cities yielded very different
results. Coimbatore, with its small viability gap of US$8 million is practically self-sufficient,
and can fund almost all its planned capital improvements from its own budget. Bhubaneswar
on the other hand has a viability gap of US$97 million. In addition to needing subsidies for
any type of capital work, Bhubaneswar needs subsidies to just keep operations going.
Bhubaneswar
The present value of the viability gap in Bhubaneswar is US$97 million. As seen in Figure
14.1 below, the gap is composed of an operating cashflow gap (shown in gray), and a capex
financing gap (shown in light blue).




                                               15
Figure 14.1: Bhubaneswar Viability Gap




The operating cashflow gap arises because every year revenues are insufficient to cover
operating costs. Over the 20 year modeling period, discounting the annual operating
cashflows back gives an NPV of negative US$15 million.
Capital expenditures need to be made over the next 20 years for capacity augmentation,
network rehabilitation and expansion. It is assumed that this capex is privately financed at 13
percent22. The present value of the cost of financing this capital expenditure is US$82
million.
Adding these two negative present values together gives a total viability gap of US$97
million. The forecast cost of owning, operating and funding this utility over the next 20 years
is US$97 million (in PV terms). The government would have to provide a subsidy with a
present value equal US$97 million if it wanted a private firm to take responsibility for
operating and financing the utility. Equally, if the utility remains an entirely public
responsibility, US$97 million (in PV terms) is approximately the value of the funding it will
require over the next 20 years.
Coimbatore
In contrast, the present value of the viability gap in Coimbatore is only US$8 million. It is
composed of an operating surplus (shown in gray), and a capex financing gap (shown in light
blue). This is shown in Figure 14.2 below.
22
     13% percent is the assumed cost of private finance in India, with a 70-30 commercial debt to equity ratio.


                                                               16
Figure 14.2: Coimbatore Viability Gap




The operating surplus in Coimbatore exists because revenues are consistently outstripping
operating expenditures by a wide margin. As a result, over the 32 year modeling period,
discounting operating cashflows back gives a positive NPV of US$116 million.
The capex financing gap arises because over the 32 year period, capital expenditure is needed
for capacity augmentation, network rehabilitation and expansion. Using a private cost of
capital of 13 percent, gives a present value of negative US$123 million for cost of financing
capex.
Adding together the positive NPV of operating cashflows, and the negative PV of cost of
financing capex, results in a viability gap of US$8 million (PV terms). Thus only US$8
million in viability gap funding from government would be needed to make the water service
in Coimbatore viable as a privately financed PPP.
14.3 Sensitivity of the Viability Gap to Variables
How can these utilities reduce their viability gaps? What changes might actually worsen their
financial viability in the future? To answer these questions, this section looks at how the
viability gap is affected by changes in the following parameters:
              NRW
              Tariffs
              Access to concessional finance

                                             17
              Operational improvements, including collection efficiency, capital use
               efficiency, staff efficiency, maintenance and repair efficiency, and chemical
               use efficiency
By looking at how these operational and financial variables drive the viability gap —the
sensitivity analysis can help to prioritize the design features that the innovative PPPs must
include.
In both the cities analyzed, NRW levels, tariffs, and the use of concessional finance have a
large impact on the size of the viability gap. Operational improvements have mixed results.
In particular, staffing levels, efficiency in electricity and chemical use, and maintenance
expenditure have lower impacts on the viability gap, while collection efficiency and capital
expenditure efficiency have more substantial impacts.
Non-Revenue Water
Curbing NRW may offer the greatest potential for reducing the viability gap. At the same
time, failure to reach target levels of NRW can have catastrophic effects on a utility’s
financial viability. As Figure 14.3 below shows, if Bhubaneswar fails to hit the DPR’s NRW
target of 25 percent, and instead achieves a level of only 35 percent, the VG surges from
US$97 million to US$112 million—a US$15 million increase.
The reason for this sensitivity is that the analysis assumes that the city must achieve 24 by 7
water supply. If NRW is above target levels, it means more bulk water must be put into the
system in order to allow 24 by 7 supply to be sustained (if the additional bulk supply were
not available, the city would again have to resort to intermittent supply of water). The cost of
building the additional bulk supply is therefore added to the capital expenditure plan, to
offset the higher NRW. At the same time there are operating cost increases associated with
treating the water. This increase in capital and operating expenditure requirements drives the
viability gap higher.




                                              18
Figure 14.3: Sensitivity of Bhubaneswar’s Viability Gap to NRW23




A one percent increase in NRW from the base case (DPR) results in a one percent increase
in the VG. However, Figure 14.3 shows, this relationship is not linear, so every incremental
percentage increase in NRW (x-axis), results in a higher percentage change in the VG.
A similar nonlinear relationship is seen in Coimbatore. In fact, the VG in Coimbatore is even
more sensitive to increases in NRW—a one percentage point increase in NRW from the
base case (assumed to be 20 percent) results in a 15 percent increase in NRW.
Tariffs
An obvious way to improve financial viability is to increase tariffs. The sensitivity analysis
shows how the VG reacts to different levels of annual tariff increase. As Figure 14.4 below
shows, real tariff increases of five percent per annum over a 20 year period are needed to
close the VG in Bhubaneswar. This means that average real tariffs over this period will have
to almost double from current values.
In Bhubaneswar, the DPR case assumes that the tariff rate is indexed to inflation, hence in
real terms24 there is no change in tariffs charged over the entire period. This DPR case is
shown with the left most of the two dotted vertical lines. The dotted line starts at zero
percent per annum real tariff increase. If traced all the way down to the blue line —this gives

23
  In this chart the y-axis range goes up to negative US$300 million for PV of cashflows. This has been done to demonstrate
the extent of impact NRW has on the VG. In comparison, the y axis in the other charts—also showing PV of cashflows—
go up to only negative US$100 million, as the impacts on VG for these variables is not as large.
24
     Real terms means the monetary value in today’s (2012 US$) terms. Every year tariffs grow by the rate of inflation in the
     economy, so the relative value of the tariffs increases year-on-year, but in the real or inflation adjusted terms, tariffs stay
     at 2012 levels.


                                                                 19
a viability gap of US$97 million (see left axis, PV of Cashflows). The orange line further
up—shows the average real tariff over the period at US$0.35/m3 (see right axis, Average Real
Tariff).
It is also possible to read off the graph the tariff increase that would close Bhubaneswar’s
viability gap. The blue line crosses the horizontal axis at 5 percent. This means that an
average increase in tariffs of 5 percent per annum would be required to close the viability gap
in Bhubaneswar.
The orange line then allows you to see what this means for the average tariff over the period.
Reading down from an average real tariff increase of 5 percent to the blue line, and then
across to the vertical axis on the right, shows that the average tariff over the period would be
US$0.65/m3—twice the current US$0.34/m3 tariff.
Figure 14.4: Sensitivity of Bhubaneswar’s Viability Gap to Real Tariffs




In Bhubaneswar’s case, a one percent real tariff increase per annum will reduce the viability
gap by 17 percent. However once again, this relationship is not linear, so every percentage
increase in real tariff from the base case will have a progressively bigger impact on the
percentage change in the VG.
The relationship between tariff increase and VG reduction is far more sensitive in the case of
Coimbatore. Specifically, a one percent increase in the real tariff rate in Coimbatore results in
the VG disappearing—the VG goes from being negative US$8 million, to the utility having a
positive value of $20 million.



                                               20
Thus it is clear that Coimbatore’s tariff regime is the main explanation behind its strong
revenue projections, and hence, its small viability gap. Customers pay a flat rate monthly
tariff indexed to inflation, but are also charged a municipal property tax that is dedicated to
water services. This has ‘water tax’ been treated as part of the water revenue in our analysis.
Figure 14.5 below shows how important this tax revenue is for the water sector’s viability.
Without the contribution from the property tax, the NPV of operating cashflows goes from
being positive US$116 million to negative US$25 million. Not having a water tax increases
Coimbatore’s VG to US$148 million—almost 19 times its original value.
Figure 14.5: Impact of Coimbatore’s Water Tax on Viability Gap




Concessional finance
The viability gap is sensitive to the use of concessional finance. Concessional finance means
lower than market rate loans, typically provided by government or development institutions.
Concessional finance can used be instead of private finance, and will bring down the cost of
capital significantly—for example the Government of India provides concessional loans for
as low as 2 percent. The financing structure for capital expenditures can be all private
finance, or all concessional finance, or somewhere in between. Depending on the structure
chosen the weighted average cost of capital (WACC) will change. In the DPR case, it was
assumed that all capital expenditure was privately financed, with a 70-30 private debt to
equity ratio, yielding a weighted cost of capital of 13 percent.
Figure 14.6 below shows how the VG changes when concessional finance is blended in. In
Coimbatore, if the financing is structured so that the WACC falls to 11.5 percent, the

                                              21
viability gap will disappear, making the business attractive to private investors. There are
several ways this could be achieved. One option would be to use a 40-60 debt to equity ratio,
with debt provided by the World Bank at a concessional rate of 6.5 percent, and Indian
private equity being provided at a rate of 19 percent. This results in a WACC of 11.5 percent.
In the case of Bhubaneswar, the VG can fall by US$36 million if all its capital expenditures
are financed by a one percent concessional loan. Although this fall is significant, it is not
enough to close the VG. In fact, even if all the Bhubaneswar water utility’s capital
expenditures were covered by grants, there would still be a viability gap. This is because its
NPV of operating cashflows is negative.
The figure below also shows that the relationship between concessional finance and the VG
is linear for both Coimbatore and Bhubaneswar. Specifically, if concessional finance is
blended so that the WACC falls by one percent, the resulting fall in the VG is approximately
20 percent in Coimbatore and four percent in Bhubaneswar.
Figure 14.6: Impact of Concessional Finance on Viability Gap




Operational improvements
Figure 14.7 below shows the impact of various operational improvements on Coimbatore’s
water utility.




                                             22
Capital efficiency—or the strategic use of capital to maximize improvements while spending
as little as possible—has a moderate impact on the viability gap. If, for example, capital
efficiency falls by 30 percent, the viability gap increases to US$22 million from US$8 million.
Collection efficiency seems to have the largest impact on the VG within this category,
although it may not be very visible as collection efficiency is already at 100 percent for
Coimbatore. However, if collection efficiency falls, the VG will rise sharply in response. For
example, the VG can go from being US$8 million to US$68 million with a 30 percent fall in
collection efficiency—an almost nine fold increase in the viability gap.
In contrast, if labor efficiency falls by the same percentage, the VG becomes US$17 million.
The impacts of one-off improvements in other operational variables, specifically—electricity
use, maintenance and chemical use efficiency are even smaller.
Figure 14.7: Impact of Operational Efficiency on Coimbatore’s Viability Gap




Main implications of PPP model design from sensitivities
The table below summarizes the level of impact the main drivers have on the viability gap. It
also highlights the implications of these findings on the design of innovative PPPs.




                                              23
Table 14.1: Design Implications from Sensitivity Analysis
Driver                  Sensitivity to Implication for PPP Model
                        Viability Gap
NRW                     High               Must encourage the design and implementation of
                                           effective NRW programs, as a top priority.
Tariff rates/regime     High               Where possible progressive increases in tariffs
                                           should be allowed, perhaps linked to service
                                           improvements. Where tariff increases are not
                                           enough to close the viability gap, subsidies to
                                           cover the difference between costs and tariff
                                           revenues may need to be provided by the City
                                           Government.
Concessional            High               Concessional sources of finance should be made
finance                                    available, especially for larger capital works
Collection efficiency Medium-High          Collection must remain high
Capex efficiency        Medium             The PPP structure should encourage the operator
                                           to find ways to use capital efficiently, reducing the
                                           capital expenditure needed to achieve any given
                                           objective.
Operational             Medium-Low         Contrary to what is often thought reducing labor
efficiency                                 costs or other operating costs need not be the
                                           driver for profitable and successful PPPs.
                                           Reducing NRW, using capital efficiently, accessing
                                           commercial finance, and getting tariffs and
                                           collections right, are likely to be much more
                                           important.


14.4 Scenario Analysis—Realistic Improvements versus DPR
The viability gap analysis was conducted using data from each city’s DPR. Another
scenario—the realistic improvements (realistic) scenario—has been simulated to these what
happens if some of the DPRs’ assumptions are unrealistic. In particular, the focus is on how
effective the DPR capital programs will be on reducing NRW and thus achieving 24 by 7
water supply.
The realistic scenario assumes that capital expenditure does not reduce NRW as much as
expected, and as a result, new bulk water supply facilities need to be built in order to supply
enough water to provide 24 by 7 service.

                                              24
Under the realistic case the present value of the VG increases to US$142 million for
Bhubaneswar, and to US$249 million in Coimbatore.
Testing the DPRs’ NRW assumptions
The city DPRs’ assumptions about the reduction in NRW that can be achieved with the
planned expenditure may well be too optimistic.
Bhubaneswar’s NRW level is currently 57 percent. Such high NRW levels are indicative of
poor asset and network conditions, which cause physical water losses. Additionally, it means
there is significant unbilled water consumption, water theft in various forms, and
underperforming metering systems. Reducing NRW thus means spending to improve asset
condition.
Bhubaneswar’s DPR assumes a dramatic fall in NRW levels, from 57 percent to 20 percent
in just 5 years. NRW levels are assumed to then remain at 20 percent over the rest of the
planned period. This is to be achieved with replacing 50 percent of the network and
increasing metering to 100 percent (currently metering is 1 percent).
There is no doubt that this level of capital expenditure will improve network condition and
reduce leaks. However, a reduction to 20 percent NRW combined with an increase in hours
of supply to 24 per day, may not be achieved. The main reasons for this are:
        Hours of system pressurization—As the system is pressurized for 24 hours each
         day, leakage volumes would increase by 8 times, all else being equal. Thus the
         improvement in asset condition must reduce the leakiness of the network by a
         factor of 6.5 just to keep NRW percentages constant at 57 percent
        Lack of experience—Indian utilities and contractors are not used to concentrating
         on leakage reduction, and so may not achieve the theoretically possible levels, due
         to lack of experience
        Difficulty of detecting new leaks—It is likely that much of the replacement of
         pipes, service connections, and meters, would be done under conditions of
         intermittent supply. This would make it hard to detect new leaks that are being
         built in around, for example, new service connections.
The realistic scenario therefore assumes that NRW falls from 57 percent to 50 percent in
five years and then remains at 50 percent. This in effect means that the asset condition is
improving with capital expenditure, but not as dramatically as the DPR assumes. As a result
NRW is falling—but not as dramatically as the DPR expects. The assumptions made under
the two scenarios are shown in Table 14.2 below.




                                            25
Table 14.2: Scenario Assumptions- DPR versus Realistic Improvements




As Table 14.2 shows, the only difference between these two scenarios is the assumption
about NRW’s responsiveness to capital expenditures. However, this has major implications.
As can be seen in Figure 14.8 below, the viability gap under the realistic scenario is US$142
million, almost one and a half times the VG in the DPR scenario. This is because higher
expenditure—both in terms of operating and capital expenditure—is needed to sustain 24 by
7 water provision over the entire 20 year period.
Figure 14.8: Scenario Analysis—DPR Case versus Realistic Improvements Case for
Bhubaneswar




                                             26
Box 1.1 further details the impact of hours of supply on NRW, using the example of
Bhubaneswar.
    Box 14.1: Impact of Hours of Supply on NRW
    Water in Bhubaneswar is provided for 2 hours a day, and NRW is 57 percent. If the asset condition
    doesn’t improve and service levels increase to 24 by 7, total water production will increase by five
    times, as shown in the figure below. This is primarily because physical losses grow linearly with
    hours of network pressurization.

                         Relationship between NRW Volume and Hours of Service




    Although water production required has gone up by five times, the NRW percentage increases by
    only 35 percentage points. This is shown in the figure below.
                            Relationship between NRW% and Hours of Service




    Thus if there was no improvement in asset condition, and water supply was increased from 2 hours
    to 24 hours, water production would rise by a factor of five, but NRW would increase by only 35
    percentage points, although to an unimaginable level of 92%.




                                                    27
15     Why Traditional PPP Models Don’t Stack up
Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) are increasingly of interest to governments of mid-sized
cities across India. PPPs have the potential to improve value for money, sustainability and
accountability for water investments. However, the key to success is designing a PPP that fits
the needs of the city.
This section highlights why traditional PPP models—Concessions, Leases and Management
Contracts—may not work in mid-sized cities. The level of uncertainty, and the scale of
improvements needed to turn around utilities, may deter operators from getting involved in
concessions and leases. Alternatively, operators may demand high compensation to take on
the risks. The limited time frame and scope of work for management contracts means they
may not be of much value to the utility, since longer term interventions will be needed to
make more sustained improvements. Having analyzed why traditional PPP models may not
work, this section then lists the key issues the innovative PPPs must tackle.
15.1   Traditional PPP Models
Figure 15.1 below summarizes the main features of traditional PPPs and why they might fall
short. These points are further elaborated in the sections that follow.
Figure 15.1: Traditional PPP Models Are Inadequate




Concessions


                                             28
Concessions give private operators (concessionaires) responsibility not only for the
operation and maintenance of the system, but also for financing and managing investments.
Asset ownership rests with the government from a legal perspective; however the
concessionaire has full rights to use the assets. After the concession period, which typically
lasts 25 to 30 years, the right to use all the assets reverts to the government. This includes
any new assets the concessionaire has created during this time. Famous concessions in water
include Buenos Aires (Argentina), in the early 1990s, followed by cities like Manila
(Philippines) and Jakarta (Indonesia).
Although concessions can improve the operational and investment performance of a water
utility, they are difficult to implement. The tariff price cap used in typical concession can
prove difficult in situations where there is great uncertainty about costs. Typically bidders are
asked to bid a tariff they need to operate the service, but in conditions of great uncertainty,
bidders will not be able to bid cost-reflective tariffs, since they cannot estimate costs.
As a result of the large financing and operational risks, the concessionaire may not find this
type of contract appealing. Alternatively, the concessionaire would charge very high tariffs or
demand large subsidies in order compensate for the massive risks it would have to bear in
committing to meet specified service standards, for fixed tariffs, in a situation where it
cannot estimate costs.
Lease (Operations and Maintenance) Contract
Leases are typically ten to fifteen year contracts that give private operators responsibility for
operating and maintaining the water service, but not for financing investments. Operators
have to pay operations and maintenance costs, and for this they get to keep a share of the
tariff revenues. In other words, from the tariff income generated they need to pay the
operations and maintenance costs, and can keep whatever is left over as profit. There are
variants of this arrangement in which the operator pays a fee to the city for the right to use
the assets if the service is expected to generate operating profits. Conversely, the city may
agree to pay a set amount per unit of water delivered (even if this is not covered by the tariff)
if the service is expected to make an operating loss. As the operators profits are determined
based on the utility’s sales and costs, there is an incentive for the operator to increase
operational efficiency. Leases in the water sector have been very popular and successful in
France and francophone countries such as Senegal. Other examples include Gdansk (Poland)
and Cartagena (Colombia).
As the government is responsible for financing the capex program under a lease contract, it
must co-ordinate with the operator. Although the lease may be easier to implement than a
concession, depending on the time period, the scope for improvements may not be as large.
This is because the operator typically does not control the capital expenditure program.
The unknown, but generally poor quality of assets, high NRW levels, low metering, and
erratic service levels make it difficult to predict the operations and maintenance costs the
operator would have to take on. The operator may not even want to be dependent on the
government for capex investments, as that would directly feed into the utility’s operational

                                               29
performance. As a result the operator may not be prepared to undertake such a risky lease,
or would charge high fees as compensation for doing so.
Management Contracts
Management Contracts transfer responsibility for managing a utility to a private operator, for
a short time period—often three to five years—and offer a fixed management fee in
exchange. They are simpler to implement than other PPPs, because of their more limited
mandate, shorter time period and fixed fee structure. If the management contractor has
flexibility to change the way the business is run and has clear performance incentives, it may
improve operating performance.
Management contracts were a popular option for water utilities between 1995 and 2000.
Examples include Amman (Jordan), Gaza, and Trinidad and Tobago.
However, given the constrained scope of the management contract and the short contract
duration, it may not be adequate for tackling the various intertwined challenges in water
services in medium cities. In many cities, there is no clearly defined water utility to manage.
Often the turn-around period for the utility may be longer than five years. Furthermore,
improvements required are not just operational—a major capex component must be
included, as massive investments need to be made to rehabilitate and expand the network
and reduce NRW levels. Finally it is challenging to design long term incentive for private
operators in management contracts. In the absence of a long-term interest in the utility,
operators may focus on quick fixes, instead of strategic changes that would benefit the utility
over the longer term. As a result the government may not derive satisfactory value from this
type of arrangement.
15.2 Features the Innovative PPPs Must Achieve
Under the ultimate goal to meet the Government of India’s benchmark of providing 24 by 7
water supply for current and future city population, any PPP model should achieve the
following:
 Build a ring fenced, well managed and efficient utility—by consolidating all the
water functions (bulk water, operation and distribution) under a single authority, untangling
the various supporting functions (administrative, finance) from links they may have to other
public services, defining service areas clearly, and finally putting in place a more autonomous
governance structure that rewards performance and increases accountability.
 Effectively control NRW levels—through carefully designed programs that make the
best use of the allocated funds to reduce leaks quickly and efficiently, and reduce illegal water
losses by improving billing and collection systems.
 Be robust to uncertainty about the costs of achieving service improvements—by
designing a PPP that includes incentives to invest time and resources into collecting
information, because it can later benefit from this new information through adjustments in
remuneration and service level targets.


                                               30
 Improve information management and accountability—by making sure the utility
adopts a governance structure that has clearly defined management roles and responsibilities,
and giving the government the job of holding the utility to a high standard. This will see to it
that citizen’s interests are protected.
 Access to funds for asset improvement, with declining reliance on concessional
terms over time—by first making available a large enough pool of concessional finance,
arranged either through state governments or multilateral development agencies, and then
giving the private provider enough freedom to make good operating and investment
decisions. Strong incentives should also be tied to achieving financial sustainability,
specifically though efficiency in the use and financing of capital, and making strategic
operational and management changes to increase cost recovery.




                                              31
16          Alternative PPP Models
Two PPP models have been developed to help mid-sized city utilities in India overcome the
unique challenges they face in providing 24 by 7 water supply. Briefly, these are:
             Phased Performance Based Contract: This is a two phase, 10 year full service
              management contract between the City Government and private operator to run
              city water services. An autonomous city-level water utility company, incorporated
              under company law, will be created if one does not already exist. This company
              (commonly referred to as a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)),25 will be fully owned
              by the City Government. In phase I, the operator will be engaged to get a pre-
              determined percentage of homes onto 24 by 7 water supply, in exchange for a
              management fee. Government entities will provide a fixed capital fund for the
              necessary investment. An additional performance-based payment will be available,
              if the operator exceeds performance targets. Proceeding to phase II—which
              would start in year six of the contract—will be contingent upon satisfactory
              performance in phase I. In phase II, the operator’s management fees and
              performance targets would be updated to reflect new information and priorities.
             Joint Venture (JV) Partnership: This option also involves the creation of a new
              water company (SPV). However in this case the new company will be a JV
              between by the City Government and a private partner, with the private partner
              owning a majority of shares in the company. Two variations are possible—the
              SPV can either be an investor owned utility that owns the infrastructure assets, or
              or a concessionaire (in which case the ULB will own the assets but the SPV will
              use them, and invest in their upkeep and expansion). In either case, this new SPV,
              will be responsible for all aspects of water service. This will include bulk water
              production, distribution, billing and collections, and capital program planning and
              implementation. The SPV will raise money for investment. Concessional finance
              will be used wherever possible, (particularly in initial years) to keep the cost of
              capital down, while private finance will be used when needed to move more
              quickly, or expand investments beyond the limit of the concessional finance
              available. The SPV will be regulated through a contract that sets service standards
              and tariffs. These will be reviewed every three years, in accordance with the
              contract. The SPV’s performance under the contract would be monitored and
              enforced by a regulatory office in the City Government, or by a State Water
              Regulator (if one was created). The JV Partnership model is inspired by the
              success of the mixed private-public ownership (‘empresa mixta’) model,

25
     An SPV or Special Purpose Vehicle is a separate legal entity established under company law for the purpose of providing
     defined services—in this case water services. SPVs can be set up by the public or private sector, and both can have
     ownership in the SPV. (See section 6.3 for further details on SPVs, and their various benefits)


                                                              32
              particularly in Latin America26, but with some adaptations to suit the Indian
              context.


16.1      The Phased Performance Based Contract
In this model a private operator will be brought in to reform and improve the operational
and financial performance of the city’s water services. The improvements will be delivered in
two phases, with a focus on providing all households with 24 by 7 supply by the end of the
contract. The City Government will motivate the operator to perform well by offering a
performance incentive.
The Phased Performance Based Contract (PPBC) will initially focus on the creation of an
autonomous utility company that is responsible for meeting the city’s water needs. This type
of utility company, established under company law, is often referred to as a Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV). Immediate access to a large capital fund, performance incentives tied to
measurable outcomes, and a fixed time frame will make it likely that improvements are
delivered quickly and sustainably. Furthermore, a review of the situation before the second
phase begins, will allow for contract terms to be tailored to emerging information.
PPP structure
The structure of the PPP model during phase I is shown in Figure 16.1 below, and is
explained in more detail in the sections that follow.




26
   Ringskog, K. (2003). The Empresa Mixta: Mixed Private-Public Ownership Companies. In: Appleton, B. (ed). Town
Water Supply and Sanitation Companion Papers B6, Bank Netherlands Water Partnership, World Bank, Washington DC,
pp. 211-215

Rivera, D (1996). Private Sector Participation in the Water Supply and Wastewater Sector – Lessons from Six Developing
Countries. Washington DC. The World Bank.

Marin, P (2009). Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in
Developing Countries. Washington DC. PPIAF/World Bank



                                                            33
Figure 16.1: Structure of the Phased Performance Based Contract




Creation of the ring-fenced water utility
The initial objective of the PPBC will be to create a well-defined water utility company (SPV)
at the city-level, if one doesn’t exist already. Creating this utility will involve a series of
measures, which will depend on the existing organizational arrangements. This first step will
be to ensure there is a single corporatized entity—a company established under Company
Law and owned by the City Government—that has the autonomy and authority to supply
water services to the city, covering bulk water supply, operations and distribution functions.
Furthermore, this entity will need to have the characteristics of a well-performing utility
including—clear governance structures, standardized management processes and modern
technology. The private operator, drawing on its knowledge and expertise, will be expected
to work with the City Government to achieve this.
In most cases, an entirely new corporate entity will need to be created, and assets and staff
will be transferred into it from the current owners—by the ULB or a State Water Board.
Alternatively, if a defined utility already exists, changes to its powers and structures may be
needed to ensure it is autonomous and accountable. These may include giving the CEO
power over personnel decisions, ensuring that there is a ring-fenced budget in which the
utility is expected to cover expenses from revenues (including defined subsidies), and so on.



                                              34
Phase I
Phase I will focus on delivering 24 by 7 supply to households. In six years’ time27—by the
end of phase I—the private investor will be expected to provide close to a 100 percent28 of
households with 24 by 7 water supply. It will do this by improving the utility’s infrastructure
and operations. To improve operations, it will design and implement human resources,
administrative, commercial and distribution system management programs well-suited to the
utility’s requirements. It will also plan and execute needed capital works program to
rehabilitate and expand the network.
In return for these services, the City Government will pay the contractor a fixed annual
management fee, and provide performance incentives (See section on performance efficiency
incentives below). The City Government will also make available a fixed capital fund,
composed of grants and concessional loans, for the operator to use for improving the
infrastructure.
The capital fund
The main features of the fixed capital fund are outlined below:
              Funding source: State or National Government, donors, and the City
               Government itself.
              Fund value: A fixed budget will be allocated at the start of the contract. This may
               be set at the estimated cost of achieving the target level of households on 24 by 7.
               Performance incentives in the contract will motivate the operator to find ways to
               reduce costs below this level, or provide 24 by 7 service to more households for
               the fixed budget provided.
              Guidelines for use: The capital fund can be used for capital improvements, such
               as network, transmission and production investments, and to reform the utility.
               The government will design guidelines for use, including application and
               procurement processes. These guidelines will ensure probity and value for money
               in expenditure from the fund, while allowing the contractor the discretion it needs
               to achieve results.
              Governance: Each period, the operator will provide a detailed investment plan
               for requested funds. Procurement must follow guidelines. An auditor will oversee
               and approve fund draw-downs, and ensure they comply with guidelines.
Phase II
At the end of six years, phase II will begin. Figure 16.2 shows how the role of the private
operator and City Government will evolve over the 10 year period.


27
     This is the prescribed duration of phase I, however it may be negotiable based on the context. The same applies for the
     duration of phase II.
28
     This number is prescriptive, and can be modified based on pre-existing situation in the city.


                                                                35
Figure 16.2: Phased Performance Based Contract: Roles over Time




Prior to the commencement of phase II, the contract will undergo review. At this time, it
will be determined whether or not the private operator has met minimum standards. If the
operator meets minimum targets, the contract extension will be automatic.
During phase II, the operator will be expected to embed the good management practices,
training programs and formalization of standard processes that it began to implement in
phase I. It will also be required to continue with planning and implementing the capex plan
to rehabilitate the network. With such continued efforts in place, by the end of 10 years, the
goal will be to maintain continuous water supply for existing households, and bring any
remaining households onto 24 by 7 water service.
Specific responsibilities, services standards, and fees may be adjusted in the transition to
phase II, to take into account new information that has emerged. The capital fund may also
need to be replenished, to fund the investments needed to bring any remaining households
onto 24 by 7 service.
Accountability mechanisms in the PPBC
The City Government will hold the private operator accountable for achieving the standards
set out in the contract. In particular, the private operator will be required to report the
number of households it puts onto 24 by 7. The government will appoint an auditor to verify
that households are in fact receiving continuous service. The auditor will also oversee use of



                                             36
the capital fund. Service levels by area will be published, so citizens can let the city know
whether the achievements the operator claims are in fact being achieved on the ground.
The City Government will also continue to be accountable to citizens. It will set water tariffs
at reasonable levels and define the performance levels for the utility. At the same time, by
bringing in private sector expertise to manage the day-to-day operations, the government will
ensure a well-functioning, results oriented utility that can better meet the needs of citizens.
Performance efficiency incentives—Cost versus Service Efficiency
Achieving 24 by 7 water supply for all households is the ultimate goal for the PPBC, and can
be arrived at in different ways. For example, a simple approach that some cities are adopting
is replacing all their networks. However, this can prove to be expensive. Other approaches
may deliver more value for money. An example of this could be targeting parts of the
network most in need of replacement, and paying more attention to the hydraulic and
pressure zoning of the network.
In Indian cities, given the uncertainty around network condition, it is difficult for the
government to know which approach to getting to 24 by 7 will work best. Furthermore, in
many cases the right approach can only be found by a process of trial and error of working
on the network. As a result it may not be advisable to specify which approach to use at the
start of the contract. In fact, this is an expertise the contractor is expected to bring.
The City Government therefore needs to find a way to incentivize the contractor to work
hard and use its judgment to figure out which approach will maximize number of
households on 24 by 7. At the same time, the government needs to ensure that this will be
done in the most cost-effective manner. Based on these constraints, two variations of
performance incentives have been developed for use with the PPBC. One model focuses on
service expansion with a limited budget, and the other focuses on cost reduction for a given
service level.
        Cost Efficiency Model: In this model the focus is on minimizing costs by giving
         the operator a share of savings. The operator keeps 10-15 percent of funds left
         over from the fixed capital fund, after the target percentage of households have
         been provided with 24 by 7 water supply. In this way the operator is incentivized
         to make cost effective improvements to the existing system, and deploy capital
         more efficiently than in the business as usual case.
        Service Efficiency Model: In this model the focus is on maximizing service for
         the fixed amount of capital expenditure funds available. The operator receives a
         fixed outperformance payment for every household above the target percentage
         of households provided with 24 by 7 water supply. The benefit is that more
         households will receive improved service, for the funds budgeted.
Figure 16.3 below depicts the difference between the two incentive models. To show this,
the figure illustrates a DPR scenario, and a PPP scenario in which greater levels of efficiency
are achieved. The dotted line plots the relationship between money spent and service levels

                                              37
achieved under the DPR scenario. The PPP case is illustrated by the solid line to the right.
This line shows that for any given level of expenditure, more households can be brought on
to 24 by 7 supply. The greater number of households is shown by the orange arrow.
Alternatively, for a given number of households on 24 by 7 supply, a lower level of
expenditure would be needed. The cost reductions are shown by the green arrow.
In the cost efficiency model, the contractor would be rewarded by a share of the savings in
getting a set number of households on to 24 by 7. In the service efficiency model, the
contractor would be paid a performance incentive for each additional household brought
onto 24 by 7 service within a specified expenditure cap.
Figure 16.3: Cost Efficiency versus Service Efficiency




Which of the two performance pay options is better will depend on the conditions of each
specific city. The main differences are highlighted in Table 16.1 below.




                                            38
Table 16.1: Differences between the Cost and Service Efficiency Models




If expanding 24 by 7 service to the maximum number of households is a government
priority, the service efficiency model may be preferable. Rapidly increasing the number of
households on 24 by 7 service, above the initial target set out in the contract, is clearly
aligned with this objective.
On the other hand, a cost-efficiency target limits government expenditure under the
contract, and may be more acceptable in some cities, if it is felt that cash payments should be
made for cash savings, not service improvements. This option also limits government
expenditure to below a known figure. In contrast, paying for services could result in
unexpectedly high performance payments, if far more customers than expected were
brought on to 24 by 7 service.
It may also be possible to switch between these incentive structures over the 10 year period.
For example in the first few years the goal may be to maximize the households on 24 by 7,
making the service efficiency model preferable. Closer to the end of phase I, the government
may be more interested in trying to minimize costs for bringing the remaining households on
to 24 by 7, in which case it could switch to the cost efficiency model.
Selection of operator
The private operator will be selected through a competitive tender. The tender will follow an
open and transparent process in which the final selection will be made on a quality and cost
basis, considering the bidder’s quality, skills and experience, technical proposal and fee
expectation. However, this will be preceded by screening bidders through a prequalification
stage.


                                              39
While it is desirable to design strict prequalification criteria to attract high quality bidders, it
is also important to encourage specialized firms with useful skills to compete. Given the
wide mandate of this PPP contract, various skills will be needed to perform the functions.
Functions could range from management of construction programs, NRW reduction
programs, commercial operations and human resource management, to billing and
collection. The prequalification criteria will break out these specific functions, along with the
skills necessary to perform each. In this way potential bidders will have a better idea of how
to meet requirements.
Several firms each with some of the skills could bid as a consortium that collectively had all
the skills. For example it may be that a satellite TV operator is excellent at managing
customer relations. A large Indian corporate may have mastered human resource
management and accounting processes. An international engineering firm may have a proven
track record in reducing NRW. While they wouldn’t prequalify individually, together they
could create a well-qualified team.
If the consortium can prove it has the requisite skills collectively, and there is a strong leader
with experience managing a multi-party consortium—it can be prequalified. This approach
will allow Indian firms to enter the market and develop, while also ensuring quality from day
one.
Given the complexities in designing and implementing the prequalification, City
Governments would benefit from assistance from transaction advisors. These advisors might
be funded by donors or State Governments until the market develops.
Innovative features of the PPBC Contract
Certain features make this innovative model well equipped for dealing with the challenges of
water supply in mid-sized Indian cities. These include:
         A contractual requirement to create a city-level, ring fenced water utility company
          at the start of the contract, provides a stable and long term entity to be
          responsible for water services in the city. This entity will also be accountable to
          the city population, because it is owned by the City Government.
         The creation of the stand-alone utility company gives the operator a clean slate to
          introduce good management and governance best practices
         A large capital fund governed by clear rules and managed by the operator
          recognizes the need for significant investment to improve services, and integrates
          this with operations
         The performance incentives promote efficiency in capital expenditure, something
          that has been difficult to achieve in India to date, given the uncertainty about the
          efficient costs for any given service improvement
         A review of the situation prior to the start of phase II, makes the contract
          responsive to emerging information.


                                                40
Role of the City Government
As a result of the PPBC, the role of the City Government will be considerably changed.
Overall, the City Government will take on a more supervisory and regulatory role instead of
running daily operations. Initially, it will put in place reforms to create a city level ring-fenced
water utility company, which it will then own. It will manage the bid process and select the
private contractor. It will also make available the fixed capex fund at the start of the contract.
The City Government will continue to be answerable to the citizens for water services, and
be responsible for setting socially acceptable tariff levels and defining performance levels.
For this it will need to monitor the performance of the operator, ensuring compliance with
the contract.
Where this model could work
This model can be applied to a utility in poor financial condition, with low cost recovery and
a large viability gap. However, the City Government must have the means to set up the fixed
capital fund at contract start, and be able to replenish it if the need arises during phase II.
The PPBC will work in a situation where the government is reluctant to give up full
ownership of the water services.
16.2 The Joint Venture Partnership
The JV Partnership involves the creation of a new corporatized water company (Special
Purpose Vehicle (SPV)), co-owned by the City Government and a private partner. The
private partner will have majority ownership in the company, and will also have management
control over the various water service functions. The SPV can have two variations. If the
government can transfer water assets, the SPV will be a jointly owned utility. In the case that
asset transfer is not the preferred route, the SPV will be a jointly owned concessionaire
which will not own the assets, but will have the rights to use them over the long term29. The
SPV will be subject to a regulatory contract that governs tariffs and performance levels. In
this contract the tariff and service levels will be updated every three years.
This innovative PPP design has various benefits. The government’s minority interest in the
new company promotes trust and information sharing, while the private partner’s controlling
stake gives it flexibility to design a tailored improvement program.
Partial government ownership also makes it easier to secure access to concessional finance,
but at the same time gives flexibility to use private finance. Finally, the tariff and
performance reviews, mandated by the regulatory contract, make sure the required services
and the allowed costs are in line with emerging information.
PPP structure
In outline, the JV Partnership as a jointly owned utility, would look as pictured in Figure 16.4
below.


29
     This variation is discussed at the end of this section. See JV Partnership Variant: Concessionaire SPV for more details.


                                                                41
Figure 16.4: Structure of JV Partnership: Utility




Creation and Structure of the New Utility Company
A new SPV will be created to be the water utility for the city. The utility will be responsible
for collecting tariffs, paying operating and maintenance costs, and generating operating
profits, so that it can attract finance for new investment. The utility will own the water
infrastructure assets, and plan and implement new capital investment, so that it can expand
services as the city grows.
The City Government will select a private partner to co-own the utility with it. This partner
should be an experienced utility operator, with capital to invest. The new utility company will
be capitalized by the City Government (or current water provider) by transferring its water
infrastructure and other existing water business assets to the new company, and the private
partner investing cash that can help fund new infrastructure. Each partner will receive shares
in the company.
It is in the City Government’s interest to allow the private party a majority stake in the
company—for example, a 51 percent stake. Letting the private party have management
control will ensure that the utility is run as a business. Management control will be a
necessary condition for attracting private investment in the utility. A private sector majority
in the Boardroom will also help to insulate the utility from the vicissitudes of day-to-day
politics, making it easier to create a professional and autonomous body.


                                              42
The City Government will receive a substantial minority stake in the utility—for example, 49
percent—and representation on the company Board. As a shareholder, the City Government
will also share in any dividends. The City Government may decide to either keep its
dividends in the SPV as retained earnings or transfer them as revenue to the city budget. A
shareholders’ agreement between the City Government and its private partner will set out in
detail the governance arrangements for the utility.
Regulatory mechanisms
The City Government will protect the interest of citizens through a regulatory contract
between the city and the utility. This contract will set the coverage areas and define the
service standards that must be met. Tariffs will be set to cover reasonable costs and provide
a “reasonable rate of return” on capital invested. Penalties will be levied against the utility in
the event that service standards are not met.
Tariffs and service levels will be reviewed every three years, to take into account the evolving
needs of the city, and emerging information on costs and investment needs. A special
regulatory unit within the City Government may be created to enforce the regulatory
contract and conduct the reviews. Alternatively, a State Water Regulator may take on this
role.
The City Government will continue to provide financial support to keep tariffs at socially
acceptable levels and ensure water is affordable to poorer sections of society. Specifically, it
will vend in its infrastructure assets at a value designed to keep tariffs stable, rather than at its
book or replacement value. The City Government will also be able to continue to arrange for
international, Union and State level concessional finance, wherever available. Concessional
finance will soften the tariff shock from new investment required for service improvements.
This is because a lower cost of borrowing will lower the rate of return required by the
company, lowering tariffs for customers. Finally, the City Government will also make
targeted subsidies available to keep tariffs low for disadvantaged groups, or to extend water
services to disadvantaged areas of the city.
Selection of private partner
Picking the right partner is crucial. The selection process must be fair, competitive and
transparent. To achieve this, candidate firms will be prequalified through an open
competition with specially designed criteria. Expert assistance from State Governments or
donor agencies should be given to City Governments to handle this process.
Since a wide range of functions will be necessary for managing water services, the
prequalification requirements will outline the specific functions along with the skills
necessary to perform each. Firms or consortiums that can prove they collectively have the
skills necessary, will make the shortlist. Additionally, for this type of PPP arrangement the
bidders must also have deep financial pockets.
Prequalified firms will bid for the shares on offer (for example, a 51 percent stake). The firm
that offers the most for this stake will win and be selected as the City Government’s partner.

                                                 43
The equity provided by the winning bidder will be invested in the utility to fund service
improvement programs.
Innovative features of the JV Partnership
Certain innovative features of this model make it particularly well-suited to mid-sized Indian
cities. This arrangement provides the city’s water provider with a “clean slate”—the legacy of
poor management practices and existing debt are not passed on when the government
transfers assets. Instead, the utility is given the ability to recreate itself using well-defined
processes and systems by leveraging private sector expertise. The ring fenced nature of the
utility also ensures improvement efforts are focused on water services.
The flexibility of choosing between concessional and private financing options will likely
improve the speed of service improvements. The rate of return approach to resetting tariffs
every three years allows the utility to respond to emerging information. It also means that
access to cheaper loans feeds directly into lower tariffs for customers.
Another innovative feature of the regulatory contract is that it aligns public and private
incentives, and reduces conflict of interest. Preserving a public sector interest in the
continuing financial success of the SPV can help to counterbalance the political pressures for
short term tariff reductions at the expense of the long term health of the utility. Moreover, a
seat on the Board provides government with a free flow of information which can promote
understanding, coordination and trust.
Role of the City Government
As a result of a JV Partnership, the role of the City Government will be altered considerably.
In the JV Partnership the City Government will play a major role in selecting the private
investor, and designing the regulatory contract. After the establishment of the SPV and the
transfer of management responsibilities to a private partner, the City Government’s role will
become one of regulation, governance, and assistance with planning and financing.
The City Government will enforce the regulatory contract, and work with the utility to
update tariffs and service standards every three years. Through its seats on the Board, the
City Government will be able to ensure that good corporate governance is followed, and
contribute to utility strategy and planning. This will be particularly important in coordinating
the expansion of water services with the expansion to the city itself.
The City Government will also help to attract as much concessional finance as possible, in
order to minimize financing costs for new investment, and thereby keep tariffs down. Given
these changes, the City Government can also decide to focus its attention on other issues
relating to the water sector—such as designing special programs to provide affordable water
to disadvantaged households.
Where this model could work
The JV Partnership can be applied to a city with a poorly defined or non-existent water
utility, with significant room for improving governance structure and management processes.


                                               44
However, the City Government should be willing to make a long term commitment to a
private sector partner, transfer asset ownership, and assist with organizing concessional
loans. The utility should be close to full cost recovery, if necessary through a history of
reliably provided subsidies that can be embodied in the JV Partnership going forward. The
utility’s viability gap must be small enough, so that it can be closed with concessional
finance. The ability to close the gap is crucial to attracting the initial private equity
investment.
JV Partnership Variant: Concessionaire SPV
In some cases, governments may not wish to transfer ownership of the infrastructure assets
to a firm that will become majority privately owned. A form of the JV Partnership will still
be possible, with the main difference being that the joint venture SPV will be a
concessionaire operating the service, rather than a utility that owns the assets. This means
that instead of owning the water assets, the SPV will sign a concession agreement with the
City Government with full rights to use the assets over the life of the contract. The City
Government (or current public sector owner) will maintain ownership of the assets
throughout. This model is shown in Figure 16.5.
Figure 16.5: Structure of JV Partnership: Concessionaire




Regulatory functions, like setting tariffs and service standards, and revising them every three
years, will continue to be performed by either a special monitoring unit within the City

                                              45
Government or a State Water Regulator. However, these functions will now be embodied in
the concession contract instead of a regulatory contract. The concession contract would
typically be for a 20 to 30 year period, with the concessionaire required to finance investment
over that period.
16.3 Issues in Implementing an SPV for Water Supply
Both innovative PPP models require the creation of a new company—an SPV—dedicated to
water service provision. The PPBC requires that the SPV be established under the Indian
Companies Act, and owned 100 percent by the City Government. In the JV partnership the
majority of shares in the SPV will be owned by the private partner, with the City
Government holding a substantial minority stake.
Establishing such a stable, stand-alone entity with sole responsibility for water services
creates a new institutional environment with flexibility to provide better services.
Furthermore, establishing the SPV under company law imports clear governance practices in
areas such as accounting standards, disclosure norms, and roles and responsibilities of
managers.30 However, there are some practical issues with creating an SPV that will need to
be considered.
Fair value for existing water assets
Valuing the publicly owned water assets that must be transferred to the SPV is a complicated
task. It is likely to be controversial in the case of the JV partnership model, since the private
sector is either gaining (i) majority ownership of the assets under the utility SPV, or (ii)
majority use of the assets under the concessionaire SPV. The public will want to ensure that
the government gets fair value for the assets. Transfer at a discount should be avoided. This
is a particularly sensitive issue in light of the recent controversy over other PPPs such as
Delhi’s Indira Gandhi International Airport31, where it is alleged that government land was
leased to the private operator at a large discount.
These water assets will have cost more to construct than they are worth in the commercial or
market value sense. This is because the market value is based on the profit that can be
generated from the assets. However, these assets typically generate commercial losses. The
public will need to be educated that book value (or replacement cost of the infrastructure) is
not a good measure of its commercial value. The real focus must be on establishing a bid
process that is both competitive and transparent, so that the fair value can be achieved.
Tax issues
Transforming a purely public entity into a corporatized SPV under company law could have
tax implications. For example, an SPV set up under the Indian Companies Act is subject to
Income Tax, Service Tax and Value Added Tax (VAT), which a public entity is generally


30
     Pg 1, Utility Models under KUWSMP- World Bank, Draft Discussion Paper (2012)
31
     Implementation of Public Private Partnership, Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi, Report of the Comptroller
     Auditor General of India 2012


                                                           46
exempt from. It would thus be necessary to clarify if a water services SPV could be exempt
from any of these tax burdens for performing what is essentially a public sector service.
Legal powers and duties specific to water services
It would also be prudent to check if the SPV (particularly if it is majority privately owned)
has the legal authority to perform statutory water service functions on behalf the
government. For example, the SPV may not have the right to break roads, access pipes on
private property and so forth. As a result, such authority would need to be clearly and legally
delegated to the SPV.
As per the 74th Amendment to the Indian Constitution, responsibility for water services in
cities has been decentralized to City Governments. City Governments that want to have
these services performed by SPVs cannot avoid this constitutional responsibility. However
they can discharge the responsibility by delegating it to the SPV. This has already been done
in Karnataka, wherein the responsibility for all water supply functions has been delegated to
the State Water Board (KUWSDB). Thus City Governments would be well advised to
ensure that a formal delegation to the SPV for supplying water services has been made, and
that it is constitutionally effective.




                                              47
17     Advantages of Proposed PPP Models
The two innovative models are designed with the needs of mid-sized Indian cities in mind.
As a result, the Phased Performance Based Contract (PPBC) and JV Partnership are
expected to outperform their traditional counterparts—the Management Contract and the
Concession. This section compares the relative merits of the innovative models over the
traditional models.
This section also discusses why the innovative PPPs will be better at water provision than
the existing situation in typical mid-sized cities. Specific examples to illustrate these points
are taken from Bhubaneswar and Coimbatore.
17.1   Advantages over Traditional Models
The PPBC and the JV Partnership can be compared to a management contract and a
concession respectively—on points of duration, risk transfer, capital programs and
financing—to draw out their various advantages.
Phased Performance Based Contract versus Management Contract:
Key advantages of the PPBC over a management contract include the focus on creating and
then building the capacity of a utility that will have long term responsibility for providing
water services in the city, as against than just managing what already exists. In addition the
PPBC provides stronger incentives for the aspects of performance that really matter—such
as managing a capital program to achieve 24 by 7 service. The longer duration and flexibility
to evolve are also important advantages of the PPBC. These are summarized in Table 17.1
below.
Table 17.1: Advantages of Management Contract over Phased Performance Based Contract




                                              48
Unlike a management contract, the PPBC requires that a water company—with clearly
defined governance rules—be built as the first step. Focusing on building a well performing
water utility from the start will make the contractor more effective, and the improvements
more lasting.
Performance incentives in the PPBC focus on reducing costs for providing a fixed number
of households with 24 by 7, or maximizing the number of households on 24 by 7 with a
fixed budget. This focuses the contract on the most important objectives, and promotes
capital efficiency.
A PPBC is a 10 year contract, broken into two phases. In contrast, most management
contracts last for just five years. A longer term arrangement means that larger, and
potentially more complex improvement programs can be implemented. A break point
between the two phases helps ensure good performance and adaptation to emerging
information. Related to this, the PPBC will be better suited to keeping up with the city’s
growing needs.
JV Partnership versus Concession
The JV Partnership with the SPV as a utility has advantages over a traditional concession
because it provides better alignment of incentives between the government and private
sector, promotes on time investments through access to both concessional and private
finance, and reduces the risks associated with lack of information. It is also a simpler
contract to understand, and more likely to be sustainable in the long-term. Table 17.2
summarizes the main differences.
Table 17.2: Advantages of JV Partnership with a Utility SPV over Concession




                                            49
All but the last three differences, shown in the table above also fully apply to the JV
Partnership with the SPV as a concessionaire.
Both JV Partnership models are well-placed to handle information uncertainty. Lack of
information is a common issue in the Indian context. The JV Partnership models are able to
deal with this constraint through the “cost plus” regulatory contract that adjusts both tariffs
and service levels every three years to reflect emerging information. In contrast, the
traditional concession seeks to lock in services standards and tariffs as far as possible for the
duration of the 20 to 30 year contract, making it brittle to initial uncertainties and
unexpected developments.
An adaptive, cost-plus approach could be thought to bring with it a risk of inefficiencies.
Both variants of the JV Partnership models achieve efficiency through three main
mechanisms:
 The regulatory lag
 The scrutiny of costs and capex plans before tariffs are determined
 Tariff glide path provisions so that tariff adjustments reward the utility for past efficiency
  gains by allowing the utility to profit from them for more than three years.
A big advantage of the rate of return approach to tariff setting is that it promotes capital
investments even in a situation of uncertainty.
Another advantage of the JV Partnership models over a traditional concession is its
alignment of incentives between government and private sector goals. In a concession, the
government is interested in increasing service levels while lowering tariffs as much as
possible. This is at odds with the concessionaire’s interest in lowering costs, but keeping
tariffs as high as possible. The JV preserves a public sector interest in the continuing
financial success of the utility, through partial public ownership of the SPV. This feature
counterbalances the political pressures for low tariffs at the expense of the long term health
of the utility. The 49 percent public ownership stake also gives the government board
membership, and hence access to corporate information and involvement in strategic
decision making. This can promote understanding, coordination and trust.
The public often struggles to understand standard concession contracts, with their abstract
of separation of asset ownership (which remains with the government) from use of the
assets and provision of the services (which is vested in the private concessionaire). In
contrast, the JV Partnership with the SPV as a utility uses more familiar commercial firms—
the company owns the assets it needs to provide the service. Public ownership is provided
through a substantial minority stake in the shares of the utility company. Control of service
standards and tariffs are provided through a regulatory contract—as with electricity utilities
in India, and water utilities in other English-speaking countries such as the UK, USA and
Australia.
Admittedly, the JV partnership with the SPV as a concessionaire is more complicated in this
regard. The concessionaire doesn’t own the assets, the city does. But the concessionaire uses

                                               50
the assets and provides the services, and is also partly owned by the city. This could be hard
to explain.
Because the JV Partnership with the utility SPV is of indefinite duration, it is well equipped
to sustain the performance of the utility over the long term. In contrast both a concession
and the JV with the concessionaire SPV will likely end after 30 years. The incentives for the
concessionaire to plan and invest for the long-term start to diminish surprisingly early in the
life of the concession, as problems arise in investing in anything that will have value after the
end of the contract.
17.2 Advantages over Business As Usual in Two Cities
Well-designed PPPs offer mid-sized city water utilities real potential to improve services
toward meeting Government of India benchmarks. PPPs can move the water sector in these
cities forward by building stronger institutions, improving operational and management
efficiency, and increasing access to capital.
Phased Performance Based Contract versus business as usual
Observations from the Bhubaneswar case study are used to show expected improvements
under the Phased Performance Based Contract in Table 17.3 below.
Table 17.3: Advantages of PPBC over Current Structure in Bhubaneswar




If a PPBC was to be implemented in Bhubaneswar a new ring-fenced water SPV would have
to be created to serve the city’s needs, replacing the current state level provider—the PHEO.
This new utility SPV would be fully integrated (providing bulk water, operations and
distribution), but most importantly would have its own accounting, hiring and management
practices—in contrast to the current state of affairs. A private operator would be brought in

                                               51
to make these management and governance changes, so that the utility is run like a business
instead of like a government department. The performance incentives would make sure that
in addition to reducing operating losses, a well thought out capital improvements program is
being prioritized, in contrast to the existing situation.
JV Partnership versus business as usual
The current situation in Coimbatore is used to show the beneficial impact of a JV
Partnership with a utility SPV in Table 17.4 below:
Table 17.4: Advantages of JV Partnership with Utility SPV over Current Structure in
Coimbatore




A JV Partnership with a utility SPV would make several improvements to how water services
are provided in Coimbatore. To begin with, Coimbatore’s City Government and State Water
Board would have to transfer the water assets, and jointly capitalize a new water utility SPV
with a private partner. This would mean that water services would now be provided by a
single entity, instead of being spread across several departments and other entities.
This new ring-fenced water SPV would be autonomous and would be managed by a private
partner, with a majority stake. This private operator, in addition to bringing good
management and governance practices, would have staff solely dedicated to providing water
services. This is contrary to the existing state of affairs in Coimbatore. Furthermore, with
clearly defined roles and responsibilities, staff would be held accountable for their behavior
and be incentivized to perform well, instead of the existing situation where staff have unclear
roles and limited decision-making ability.
The regulatory contract would also hold the utility SPV to a high standard, and increase the
company’s service area as the city grows—making it adaptable to the rapid growth expected.

                                              52
This is in contrast to the current situation, wherein accountability is limited, and service
expansion also limited due to institutional fragmentation.
Finally, the option to use both private and concessional finance would help to expedite
capital improvement programs, and possibly fund larger ones, compared to the current
situation, where only public finance is accessible.

18     Conclusion
India’s mid-sized cities struggle to provide water services, and at the same time keep
up with demand growth from rapid urbanization.
Service levels tend to be abysmal, compared to Government of India benchmarks for water
service. For example, in most cities water flows through pipes for 2 hours a day or less,
metering is negligible, and coverage is low. Something must also be done to curb NRW
levels estimated at 50-60 percent.
Most city water utilities are loss making. With cost recovery levels in the range of 40-60
percent, they don’t earn enough revenue to cover even operating costs, and are thus
continually reliant on government subsidies. Moreover, with 11 million people being added
to the urban population annually, their dilapidated water assets are coming under greater
stress with each passing year.
It is clear that these water utilities need assistance. Many cities are considering PPPs
to help respond to these challenges.
Through private sector involvement, city water utilities seek three main things:
        Improved skills and modern technologies;
        Access to a larger capital pool and financing flexibility; and
        A more focused institutional structure for water service provision, freed from the
         constraints of departmental management, and subject to greater incentives and
         accountability.
However, the unique challenges in mid-sized cities mean that traditional PPPs
models may not work well. Some of the major challenges are outlined below:
        In many cases there is no utility that is solely dedicated to providing water to the
         city. Instead, as in the case of Coimbatore water utility functions are performed
         across multiple government agencies, often with overlapping functions. In other
         cases, such as Belgaum the City Government has delegated some responsibility
         for water services to a state level agency, but it is unclear who is responsible for
         capital works and system upgrading. Hence, the first job may be to create a utility
         company, as opposed to the typical PPP response of taking over and managing an
         existing one.



                                              53
        The widespread lack of information on base data, such as NRW levels, asset
         condition and service levels, means that reasonable costs of service cannot be
         estimated. As a result private partners will be unwilling to bid fixed tariffs or sign
         up to meet service standards for fixed payments—it is simply too risky for them.
         This is especially true when the poor condition of assets requires large
         investments to be made upfront.
        The scale of change that is needed, and the institution building required, means a
         short duration management contract style PPP is not likely to help turn the utility
         around. Instead a longer term engagement is required, but again, traditional long
         term PPP models tend to be too risky under the conditions in Indian mid-sized
         cities.
        Resistance to tariff increases, combined with low levels of financial viability (due
         to poor service), means that continued public sector financial support will be
         needed. This will particularly be the case for financing the major capital programs.
         Few, if any, traditional models envisage providing concessional finance for large
         capital programs that are run by the private player.
        Rapid but unpredictable urban growth means that coverage areas, services
         standards, and other factors in a contract will need to be adjusted rather
         frequently. As a result the PPP contract will have to be amenable to change and
         have the ability to deal with large information gaps. Several traditional models
         struggle with being responsive to new information.
Two new models may assist City Governments looking for solutions.
The two innovative PPP models—the Phased Performance Based Contract (PPBC) and the
Joint Venture (JV) Partnership—have been tailored to meet the needs of water utilities in
mid-sized Indian cities.
Table 18.1 below summarizes how each model is able to overcome the major challenges the
sector faces. A recap of each model is provided in the sections that follow.




                                             54
Table 18.1: How the Innovative PPP Models Tackle the Sector’s Unique Challenges




The Phased Performance Based Contract is like a management contract in terms of its
reliance on government funding sources, level of government involvement, and basic
remuneration structure—but it has some key differences. To begin with, if a ring-fenced city
utility company (SPV) for water services doesn’t exist, it must be created as the first thing the
operator does. Thus the PPBC puts in place a utility SPV that will focus on providing 24 by
7 water service to all households in the city for the long term.
The operator will manage this utility, and ensure it is well run by making operational and
management improvements. It will also be responsible for implementing capital programs,
and will have access to a large fixed capex fund to do so. In addition, the operator will be
eligible for performance payments, through one of two incentives structures, specially
designed for use with the PPBC. Essentially, the incentives are designed to make sure the
operator receives these performance payments for being cost efficient while getting
households onto 24 by 7 service.
The contract will last 10 years, and be broken up into two phases. A performance review will
be conducted after the first phase. Advancement to the next phase, and potential revision of
fees and service targets, will be contingent upon the operator’s performance.
The key advantages of this model are: (i) immediate access to a large capital fund, (ii)
performance incentives tied to measurable outcomes, (iii) a fixed time frame that make it
                                               55
likely that improvements will be delivered quickly and sustainably, and (iv) a performance
review before the second phase begins, so that contract terms can be tailored to the
operator’s performance and the latest information.
This model may be suitable for cities with a large viability gap and low cost recovery. Under
this model the government can continue to own assets, but must be willing to make a large
capital fund available at the beginning of the contract, and replenish it for phase II if
necessary.
The Joint Venture Partnership is a long term arrangement, in which a private firm is
selected to partner with the City Government in creating a new mixed-ownership city water
utility SPV. Alternatively, the SPV can be a jointly owned concessionaire, wherein the assets
will remain in public sector ownership. In either case however, this private partner will have
a majority controlling interest in the SPV. The winning partner, selected by competitive bid,
must have the right mix of skills to improve performance, with capital to invest in making
these changes.
The SPV will be responsible for all aspects of water provision in the city, from operations, to
planning, to financing and implementing capex programs. The day-to-day operations will be
managed by the private partner.
Tariffs and service standards will be set by a regulatory contract that makes adjustments to
reflect new information every three years. The role of City Government will evolve from
direct responsibility to policy, governance and regulation, as well as coordination with city
planning and attracting concessional finance.
Advantages of the model include: (i) Financing flexibility—through access to both private
and public sources of capital, given the joint ownership structure (ii) long-term (and
potentially indefinite) contract duration, ensuring partners take a long-term and strategic
interest in the utility (iii) adaptive response to emerging information, through the regulatory
contract that sets tariffs on a “reasonable” rate of return basis.
The JV may be suitable for a city utility that is close to full cost recovery, and has a small
financial viability gap that can closed with concessional finance. The City Government must
also be willing to enter into a long-term commitment with the private operator, and provide
support through organizing concessional finance for the company.
In conclusion, the models presented in this report are a useful addition to the set of
institutional and financial options open to mid-sized cities in India as they work on a step
change in service levels to support a higher quality of life and increased urban productivity in
a rapidly urbanizing country.




                                              56
57
Appendix A: Framework for Data Collection
City Selection Criteria
         Second tier and third tier Indian cities
         Typical
         Diverse experiences
            – One good condition, one poor condition, one in the middle
            – One good condition, two poor condition but experiencing different difficulties
            – Located in Karnataka (because of World Bank’s existing involvement in the
              state)?
Information on each City
         Background Data
            – Location
            – Population
            – Service area
            – Number of customers
         Government of India performance benchmarks (see Table A.1 below)
Table A.1: Government of India Performance Benchmarks

Indicator                                                            Benchmark

Coverage (percentage of households connected)
Per capita supply of water (litres per day)
Extent of metering (%)
Extent of Non-Revenue Water (%)
Continuity of water supply (hours per day)
Quality of water supplied (%)
Efficiency in addressing customer complaints (%)
Cost recovery in water supply services (%)
Efficiency in collection of water supply-related charges (%)

Source: Professionalization of UWSPs in India – Capacity and Performance Gaps Assessment Report


         Service levels
            – Average hours of water per day (as referenced Table A.1)
            – Percentage of the population served


                                                  58
   – Percentage of potable water (e.g. the percent of samples that test negative for
     coliforms) (as referenced in Table 1)
 Capital expenditure needed to reach 24/7 water supply for existing population
   – Bulk supply deficit
   – Estimate of capital expenditure needed (R) for
       Bulk supplies
       Distribution system improvements
   – Age of pipes
       Average age
       Percentage of pipes that were constructed prior to 1950
       Percentage of pipes that were constructed after 1950
 Reliability of information on capital expenditure needed
   – Reliability of capital expenditure estimate
   – Is pipe network accurately mapped?
 What is needed to meet growth?
   – Forecast population growth (20 years)
   – Forecast demand growth (20 years)
   – Capital expenditure needs estimated for serving the new population on 24/7
     basis for
       Bulk supply
       Distribution
 Cost recovery (as referenced in Table 1)
   – Revenue (R)
   – Cash revenue (R)
   – Operating costs (exclude depreciation)
   – Staff per 1,000 connections
   – Average tariff (R/cubic meter)
   – Average household bill (R/month)
   – Operating cash margin
       (cash collected – operating cost)/(operating cost)
 Ability to improve cost recovery – indicate the extent to which this could be
  possible
   – Through measures such as:

                                      59
              Increasing collection ratio
              Decreasing staff costs
              Decreasing energy costs
              Increasing tariffs
        Ability to fund operating losses
          – Where does the money come from now to fill the gap?
          – How sustainable is this?
        Ability to fund capital expenditure
          – How much capital expenditure was funded recently?
          – Who provided the money?
          – What sources can fund the future need?
          – How likely is it to be adequate?
        Government capacity
          – [What is the best way to report this?]
        Utility capacity
          – What is the best way to report this? (See Table A.2 below for an option used
            by NWSC)
Table A.2: Process Management scorecard
SNo   Description                                   City1   City2   City3   General Remarks
1     Technical Process Management

       Water Resources Management

       Water Treatment Management

       Water Distribution Management

       Planning & Development

       Water Quality Procedures

       Maintenance Operations

       Connections

       Wastewater treatment

       Sewerage Management

       Asset Management and Risk


                                               60
SNo   Description                                   City1   City2   City3   General Remarks
        Management


2     Commercial Process Management

       Commercial Structure

       Customer Orientation

       Commercial Operating Procedures

       Connections Management

       Metering and Meter Reading

       Water Loss Control Management

       Billing Systems

       Revenue Collection

       Debt Management

       Customer Service

       Customer Relations


3     Human Resources Management

       Human Resources Manuals & HR
        information Management Systems

       Recruitment, deployment, Induction
        & Retention as well as completeness
        & comprehensiveness of the structure

       Participative staff appraisal

       Performance incentives


       Training, TNA and Training
        plan/Calendar

       Welfare

       Occupational Health and Safety

4     Financial Management

                                               61
SNo    Description                                    City1   City2   City3   General Remarks

        Financial policies & Procedures
         Manual

        Financial sustainability

        Asset Inventory (both in terms of
         numbers & value)

        Asset management policies

5      Management Information Systems

        GIS, Geo-referencing and mapping

        QMS & EMS

6      Cross Cutting Processes

7      Performance Planning & Contracting
        Performance Improvement Plans
          (PIP)

        Performance Incentive Designs

        Performance Monitoring &
         Evaluation

        Project and Contract Management

8      Procurement & stores
        Efficiency of the MANAGEMENT
          CONTRACTs procurement system

        Efficiency of the stores

9      Logistics
        Vehicles, equipment, Computers
         (hard & soft ware)
Legend (Score 1 -5)
   - 1 (Poor or does not exist)
   - 2 (Weak)
    - 3 (Fair)
    - 4 (Faily Good)
    - 5 (Good)
Source: Professionalization of UWSPs in India – Capacity and Performance Gaps Assessment Report




                                                 62
Appendix B: Case Study Tables from Interviews with
Suez and Veolia
In interviews, Suez and Veolia discussed several international cases that showed aspects of
good practice. In Table B.1 and Table B.2 below, we show the PPP anecdotes provided to
us by Suez and Veolia in the interview, organized by the relevant aspect of PPP. In the
tables, we also include the same aspects for the Haiti and Delhi PPP case studies. In the final
column, we include the “ideal” arrangement relevant to each aspect that was suggested by
Suez.
For the cases mentioned by Veolia and Suez, we include only the information that was
discussed during the interview. The cases discussed in the tables are:
        Port-au-Prince—We describe a “management assistance” contract that includes
         provisions for the contractor to undertake capex planning and procurement, and
         capacity building. The contract includes an “emergency” turn-around phase in the
         first year. It requires the contractor to produce easy-to-monitor reports to enable
         the Government counterpart to track its progress toward meeting well-defined
         KPIs, including KPIs for capacity building. We have enclosed a separate,
         extensive case study on this contract
        Delhi—The privatization of the Delhi Vidyut Board provides a good example of
         how PPP can succeed in an Indian context by building political consensus. It also
         provides lessons on the restructuring of a public utilities—such as moving excess
         liabilities to a holding company—that attracted good bidders and incentivized
         them to invest in expanding the network
        Algiers—SUEZ discussed the Algiers management contract, which is an example
         of PPP that quickly turned around a water utility that was failing. The contract
         covered all aspects of utility management. Under the contract, SUEZ posted 27
         full time managers in Algiers, and each of these managers was matched with a
         local counterpart to aid knowledge transfer. SUEZ did the planning and
         procurement for a $500 million capex fund to extend and improve the network
        Gabon—Veolia discussed the example of the Gabon contract as an example of
         the “evolving” contract arrangements. The contract is a concession for both water
         and electricity, so the costs of providing water are cross-subsidized by electricity
         revenues
        Jeddah—Suez also discussed the Jeddah management contract as an example of
         an evolving management contract with capex and performance-based KPIs.




                                              63
Table B.1: PPP Summary (Port-au-Prince, Delhi, and Algiers)
                             Issue                    Port-au-Prince                           Delhi                                   Algiers
                                                      The investment needs were to be met
                             1. Poor quality of       by an emergency capex plan, and a
                                                                                                                                       Creation of a $500 million fund for
                             assets and significant   longer term capex plan, both of which Not an issue
                                                                                                                                       capex
                             investment needs         were to be designed by the contractor
                                                      and approved by the Government
                                                                                               Training Centre- CENPEID for own
                                                                                               and other Utilities employees; Sanchay
                                                                                               (Repository)—Knowledge
                                                                                               Management Portal linking all
                                                      Contract includes a robust capacity
                             2. Poor management                                                employees; SEEKH (Learning)—           No information
                                                      building program
                                                                                               Platform for Sharing of Best Practices
                                                                                               and Knowledge; NDPL Innoverse
                                                                                               and SHINE—Fostering culture of
                                                                                               innovation & improvement
                                                      Contractor incentivized to increase the Contractor incentivized to reduce
                                                                                                                                       Low service baseline: Only eight
                             3. Low levels of service number of connections and increase      losses, thereby improving reliability
                                                                                                                                       percent had 24/7 supply
                                                      reliability of existing connections     for customers
How did the PPP overcome….




                                                                                               Improved billing and payment
                             4. Poor customer
                                                      No information                           options. 14 new "customer care"         No information
                             relations
                                                                                               centres and call centres established.
                                                      Contractor implements new                Focus in contract on reducing
                             5. Weak commercial
                                                      management systems and a capacity        commercial losses through a focus on    No information
                             practices
                                                      building program                         billing , collection, and metering
                             6. Lack of good          Contractor carries out capex planning
                                                                                                                                       First step was due diligence, funded by
                             records on assets and    but takes no risk on the condition of    Not a large issue
                                                                                                                                       Suez
                             performance              underground assets




                                                                                                  64
                                            Issue                   Port-au-Prince                           Delhi                                   Algiers
                                                                    Contractor produces easy-to-monitor
                                            7. Limited experience   reports so that Government
                                                                                                           Not a large issue                         No information
                                            in PPPs                 counterparts can enforce contract with
                                                                    limited knowledge or experience
                                                                                                             PPP reform was the outcome of a
                                            8. Political                                                     political mandate for Sheila Dikshit.
                                            environment                                                      Employees brought on Board with a
                                                                    Not a large issue                                                                No information
                                            detrimental to reform                                            promise of job security, pension
                                            process                                                          security, and a bonus when reforms
                                                                                                             succeeded.
                                                                    National agency, DINEPA, in control, The private operator owned
                                            9. Management
                                                                    with contractor providing            controlling shares in the distribution      No information
                                            Control
                                                                    "management assistance"              companies.
                                                                                                             Slums not targeted in contract.
                                                                    Not explicitly included in contract, but
                                                                                                             Companies undertook awareness
What were the key aspects of the contract




                                            10. Slum areas          slum areas benefit from improved                                                 No information
                                                                                                             building in slums on loss reduction
                                                                    reliability through their suppliers
                                                                                                             initiatives
                                                                    Capex planning and management                                                    They created a $500 million fund, for
                                            11. Capex planning                                               $550 million in capex investment
                                                                    undertaken by contractor, with                                                   which SUEZ did the planning and
                                            management                                                       undertaken.
                                                                    approval from DINEPA                                                             procurement
                                                                    Contractor trains and works with
                                                                                                             Staff were retained in privatized
                                            12. Human resources     utility staff, but does not have a say                                           No information
                                                                                                             companies and given job security.
                                                                    over HR decisions.
                                                                   Contractor is paid a fixed fee, with
                                                                   bonuses for meeting KPIs and           The Government pays a tariff subsidy
                                            13. Payment conditions
                                                                   penalties for failing to produce       based on the operators AC&T loss           No information
                                            and mechanisms
                                                                   reports. The contractor can double the reduction target
                                                                   fees it receives through bonuses




                                                                                                               65
Issue                  Port-au-Prince                          Delhi                                    Algiers
                       The KPIs are tied to: Technical and
                       operational performance: Improved
                       quality of service; Management
14. Key Performance
                       performance: increased collection        AC&T Loss Reduction                     No information
Indicators
                       rates; Administrative and financial
                       efficiency; Human resources
                       performance: effective training of staff
                       Operator of the "management
                       assistance contractor" will be in a
                                                               Government provided the subsidy
15. Evolution of the   good position to bid on more
                                                               until 2006, with cost recovery           No information
contract over time     involved PPP of the water utility, if
                                                               thereafter
                       the contract progresses to such a
                       phase
                       Operating and capital costs are very
                       heavily subsidized by donors. Some
                                                             Full cost recovery through tariffs after
16. Cost Recovery      progress toward cost recovery is made                                            No information
                                                             2006
                       by reducing technical and commercial
                       losses




                                                                 66
Table B.2: PPP Summary Continued (Gabon, Jeddah, and Ideal Arrangement)
                                                                                                                Ideal Arrangement as Defined by
                             Issue                    Gabon                                   Jeddah
                                                                                                                Suez
                                                      Electricity cross-subsidizes water to
                                                      meet water investment needs. The
                             1. Poor quality of       private investor is obligated to provide                  Set up "Caisse des travaux" for capital
                             assets and significant   at least US$135 million in               No information   works, linked to capital planning
                             investment needs         rehabilitation investment over the life                   undertaken by the contractor
                                                      of the contract, 65% of which must be
                                                      in water
                                                                                                                Contractor provides management
                                                      The consortium lead, Veolia, provides
                             2. Poor management                                               No information    systems and delivers capacity building
                                                      management systems and expertise
                                                                                                                program
                                                      Service improvement in the contract is
                                                      tied to requirements for expansion of                     Only three to four KPIs for which the
                             3. Low levels of service                                        No information
                                                      the network, and an index of                              operator is accountable
                                                      interruptions
How did the PPP overcome….




                                                                                                                Management systems include
                             4. Poor customer                                                                   customer service systems. Expand
                                                      No information                          No information
                             relations                                                                          payment options for customers to
                                                                                                                improve ease of payment
                             5. Weak commercial                                                                 KPIs targeted to reducing commercial
                                                      No information                          No information
                             practices                                                                          losses
                                                      Contract included a "first year study                     Set up "Caisse des travaux" for capital
                             6. Lack of good          on coverage" and a "five year study on                    works so that the operator does not
                             records on assets and    coverage" to determine achievable      No information     take risks on assets. Or, have operator
                             performance              coverage rates given population trends                    carry out required studies before
                                                      and network condition                                     contract commences




                                                                                                67
                                                                                                                                Ideal Arrangement as Defined by
                                            Issue                   Gabon                                    Jeddah
                                                                                                                                Suez
                                                                                                                                Contractor produces easy-to-monitor
                                                                    Regulation is mostly by contract with
                                            7. Limited experience                                                               reports so that enforcing KPIs does
                                                                    minimal reliance on                      No information
                                            in PPPs                                                                             not need to rely on extensive
                                                                    government/regulator capacity
                                                                                                                                experience or technical knowledge
                                                                    Gabon has a history of private
                                                                                                                                Select locations for PPP where a
                                            8. Political            participation in utilities dating to 1935.
                                                                                                                                political mandate exists for reform.
                                            environment             An economic crisis in the late 1980s
                                                                                                               No information   Bring staff unions on Board early and
                                            detrimental to reform   strengthened the imperative for
                                                                                                                                pay them a bonus when reform
                                            process                 private participation to increase
                                                                                                                                succeeds
                                                                    investment
                                                                                                                                Apply a detailed "checklist" with
                                                                                                                                various areas of management control,
                                                                    Concessionaire has management
                                            9. Management                                                                       explicitly selecting which areas are the
                                                                    control over all aspects of water and    No information
What were the key aspects of the contract




                                            Control                                                                             purview of the contractor, which are
                                                                    electricity.
                                                                                                                                the purview of the utility, and which
                                                                                                                                are co-managed
                                                                    Contract includes coverage targets for
                                                                                                                                Include explicit targets and subsidies
                                            10. Slum areas          small towns and rural areas (not         No information
                                                                                                                                for slum-area access
                                                                    explicitly for slum areas)
                                                                    "If a potential customer is located
                                                                    within the perimeter of water
                                                                                                                                Capex planning undertaken by
                                                                    extension (100 meters from existing
                                            11. Capex planning                                                                  contractor. Planning can be procured
                                                                    network) and is accessible via           No information
                                            management                                                                          separately if there is a risk that the
                                                                    practicable roads, the concessionaire is
                                                                                                                                planning cost is uncertain
                                                                    responsible for carrying all the
                                                                    extension works at his expense"
                                                                                                                                Included as part of the "management
                                            12. Human resources     No information                           No information
                                                                                                                                control" checklist




                                                                                                               68
                                                                                  Ideal Arrangement as Defined by
Issue                   Gabon                                  Jeddah
                                                                                  Suez
                                                                                  Operator paid a fee, with bonuses and
                                                                                  penalties linked to the achievement of
13. Payment conditions The concessionaire receives payment                        KPIs and milestones in the contract
                                                               No information
and mechanisms         in the form of tariffs from customers                      such as capex planning. Operator
                                                                                  should have the opportunity to double
                                                                                  the fees through bonuses
                        Investment obligations ($135 million);
                                                                                  Progress toward 24/7 supply;
14. Key Performance     Coverage obligations (54-70%),
                                                                 No information   Improvement in operating cash flows;
Indicators              Quality obligations (indicators of
                                                                                  Capacity building
                        service interruptions)
                        Contract included a 2.5 year
                        "transitory period" at the outset during
                        which no penalties could be applied to                    "Evolving service contract" can
                        the concessionaire, but the                               progress through several phases: a
15. Evolution of the    concessionaire also had a number of                       "rapid turnaround" phase (2 years), a
                                                                 No information
contract over time      obligations, such as to define (and                       "service contract phase" (3 more
                        implement) an emergency repair plan                       years), and a more involved lease
                        and to establish the methodological                       concession after that
                        basis and the tools for controlling the
                        enforcement of the contract
                        The contract defines a "social tariff"
                        for consumption of less than 15m3
                        per month of about half the normal
                                                                                  If cost recovery cannot be achieved
                        tariff. Costs of providing water are
                                                                                  immediately, the contract should
16. Cost Recovery       cross-subsidized by electricity          No information
                                                                                  include transitional subsidies and a
                        revenues, such that there is not full
                                                                                  plan to reach cost recovery
                        cost recovery for water but there is
                        full cost recovery on across both water
                        and electricity




                                                                  69
Appendix C: Feedback from Private Operators
On March 18th 2013, the World Bank held a “market sounding” workshop in New Delhi
with potential private operators. The purpose of this meeting was to get their feedback on
the innovative PPP models being proposed. Companies that were represented included,
Essel RPW Projects Pvt. Ltd., Doshion Veolia Water Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Jindal Saw Ltd.,
SPML Infra Ltd., Jain Irrigation Systems Ltd., and SUEZ Environment India. These
companies were invited because of their interest in developing and operating water services
in Indian cities. The main responses from this workshop are presented below.
Comments on the JV Partnership
The following points were brought up with respect to the JV Partnership:
        The private sector thought that government ownership in the company
         (SPV) should be limited to 24%, so as to reduce the dilution of the investor’s
         dividends and governance of the company. They believed this would give the
         private operator a large enough incentive to ensure the company would rapidly
         improve performance, as well as provide more freedom to manage.
        The private sector thought that in light of the viability gap, government
         contributions would be needed. Since most utilities would be expected to have
         relatively large viability gaps, upfront capital grants would be needed to close
         them. Such contributions would not be available through the private sector.
        The private sector felt that it would be difficult to attract commercial
         finance in initial years. This is because banks would most likely look at historic
         financial performance of the utility while it was under government management,
         and decide not to provide finance based on the poor track record.
Comments on State-level Involvement
In considering how State Governments would be involved in making the proposed models
work the private operators shared the following views:
        They preferred to have an independent State-level regulatory body set
         tariffs, particularly in the JV Partnership. They felt that this would result in
         more neutral decision-making, and give the private operators an additional layer
         of comfort in partnering with the government.
        They thought that State-level financial assistance would be needed in the
         form of capital grants, for viability gap funding. This is because of the low
         financial viability they were expecting the utilities to have, and the absence of
         private sector alternatives. Cash-strapped City Governments might also not have
         the ability to provide such assistance.
        They emphasized the need to transfer state owned assets used for city
         water provision to the SPV being created. This would be regardless of whether



                                            70
           the SPV was owned 100 percent by the City Government, or was jointly owned
           with a private operator.
Comments on Procurement and Contract Supervision
In discussing the selection of operators, the following points were raised:
        The private sector stated that it would be desirable for the State
         Government and donor agencies to assist City Governments with
         designing prequalification criteria. This is because whilst the innovative
         models require applying strict prequalification criteria in order to attract high
         quality bidders, City Governments have little experience in administering such
         qualifications.
        The private sector believed that strict contract supervision would be
         necessary, and City Governments would likely need assistance managing
         this. This is because in practice it would be difficult to enforce strict
         prequalification in all cases, so the focus would also need to be placed on strict
         contract supervision. In this way if an under-qualified bidder was selected and was
         underperforming, remedial action could be taken more promptly.
        The private sector wanted prequalification criteria to be designed in a way
         that would not preclude local operators and consortiums with requisite
         competencies from bidding. For example local firms would not be able to
         compete with international counterparts in terms of years of experience, but could
         have better insights into the Indian context. They thought that giving local firms
         the chance to compete and win, would help to strengthen their expertise.
         However, strict quality standards were also supported. The idea that a consortium
         could form that would prequalify as a group was understood as a way to ensure
         quality while allowing firms with some but not all the required skills to enter the
         market through partnering with other firms.




                                              71
