                                          97222




        GCC Engagement Note No. 2
  IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF FINANCIAL
INTERMEDIATION IN THE GULF COOPERATION
       COUNCIL (GCC) COUNTRIES


      Finance & Markets Global Practice




                  June 2015
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This Engagement Note was prepared by Pietro Calice, Senior Financial Sector Specialist,
GFMDR, under the guidance of Nadir Mohamed, Country Director, MNC05; and Rolf Behrndt,
Practice Manager, GFMDR. Input was provided by Roberto Rocha, Senior Adviser, GFMDR;
Mario Guadamillas, Practice Manager, GFMDR; Alison Harwood, Practice Manager, GFMDR;
Abayomi Alawode, Head of Islamic Finance, GFMDR; Jamal Al-Kibbi, Program Manager,
MNCA5; Sunita Kikeri, Program Manager, GFMDR; Aquiles Almansi, Lead Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR; Laura Ard, Lead Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR; Anderson Caputo
Silva, Lead Securities Specialist, GFMDR; Krishnamurti Damodaran, Lead Financial Sector
Specialist, GFMDR; Paul Moreno-Lopez, Program Leader, MNC05; Hana Polackova Brixi,
Program Leader, MNC05; Raj Nallari, Lead Economist, GFMDR; Sami Ben Daamech, Senior
Operations Officer, MNCKW; Miquel Dijkman, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR;
Harish Natarajan, Senior Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR; Jan Philipp Nolte, Senior Financial
Sector Specialist, GFMDR; and Peter McConaghy, Financial Sector Specialist, GFMDR.




                                               2
                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 4

II. Regional context ................................................................................................................... 4

III. Financial sector in GCC countries ........................................................................................ 6

IV. Trends and issues .................................................................................................................. 7

V. Areas of World Bank Group engagement ........................................................................... 10



                                                 TABLES AND CHARTS
Table 1: GCC financial sector – Key structural metrics ............................................................. 7

Figure 1: GCC banking sector – Key financial metrics .............................................................. 8

Figure 2: GCC financial sector – Actual levels vs. benchmark (percent, 2013) ........................ 9




                                                                       3
  IMPROVING THE QUALITY OF FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION IN
     THE COUNTRIES OF THE GULF COOPERATION COUNCIL


                                           I. Introduction
This Engagement Note provides a snapshot of financial development in the countries of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) ── Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) ── and identifies key areas of the financial sector reform agenda where the World
Bank Group (WBG) through the Finance & Markets Global Practice (FMGP) can provide its
support, in particular through the provision of analytical services and advisory (ASA).
A key challenge for GCC countries is to diversify their economic structures, increase the role of
the private sector, improve the efficiency of the government and reform the educational system
and the labor market. This is essential to create employment opportunities for a young and growing
domestic population. In this context, the development of an efficient, stable and inclusive financial
sector is a policy objective in itself and a necessary conduit to a more diversified and productive
economic system.
The financial sector in the GCC, which remains dominated by banks, presents a degree of depth
and intermediation capacity in line with the overall level of financial development and structural
characteristics of its member countries. Yet it has not produced the expected inclusive growth-
enhancing benefits, signaling a “quality gap” with respect to the rest of the world. Access to finance
for small and medium enterprises (SMEs) is among the lowest in the world and the impact of the
financial sector on long-term economic growth is weaker than in other regions.
Against this backdrop, this Engagement Note suggests that improving the quality of financial
intermediation in GCC economies is a balancing act between enhancing access and preserving
stability. Accordingly, it detects and discusses several areas of engagement for WBG which are
consistent with the financial sector reform agenda of the region. In particular, based on the
expertise and delivery capacity of WBG, particularly of FMGP, this Engagement Note suggests
that WBG target ASA in the following areas: (i) financial infrastructure, particularly insolvency
regimes, creditor rights and payment and settlement systems; (ii) banking competition; (iii)
government debt capital market development, including sukuk; (iv) credit guarantee schemes for
SMEs; and (v) macroprudential supervision.
                                       II. Regional context
The GCC economy as a whole comprises nearly 50 million inhabitants and produces an aggregate
GDP of about $1.6 trillion (2013 figures). Total GDP is equivalent to 85 percent of the total
Canadian output. The oil and gas sector contributes more than one half of GDP in the GCC. Other
contributing sectors, albeit much smaller, are construction, tourism and banking. Given the arid
climate, agriculture is of negligible importance. Developments in nominal GDP and export values
are closely related to energy prices, in accordance with the strong focus on oil and gas in the
economy.


                                                  4
While displaying some significant differences in terms of size and population, GCC countries
share a number of structural economic features. In terms of population and aggregate output, Saudi
Arabia is the largest of the six countries, comprising about 29 million inhabitants (about three-fifth
of the total GCC population) and accounting for more than half of total GCC GDP. The other five
countries are considerably smaller: the second largest country, the UAE, is home to only 9.3
million people, or one-third of the Saudi population. The UAE produces roughly a quarter of total
GCC GDP, slightly more than half that of Saudi Arabia. Key common features are a high
dependency on hydrocarbons (as expressed in the share of oil and gas revenues in total fiscal and
export revenues), a young and rapidly growing national labor force, and a heavy reliance on
expatriate labor in the private sector.
These features also pose common structural policy challenges to GCC economies. The latter face
three major challenges to economic development, namely (i) an increased need for diversification
away from oil and gas; (ii) privatization, liberalization and efficiency-recovering initiatives in view
of the large size of the government sector; and (iii) reforms to labor market and educational
systems. The key issue behind these challenges is generating sustainable growth in the private non-
oil sector that can provide employment opportunities for a young and rapidly growing population.
Against this background, the development of the financial sector has been a policy priority in many
GCC countries over the past two decades. Financial sector development in the region has been
closely associated with the policy objectives of economic diversification, privatization, and
liberalization. Financial markets play a central role in these strategies: a thriving financial sector
ensures resources are allocated efficiently toward growing enterprises and thus contributes to
employment generation, productive investment and, through these channels, economic
diversification. In this respect, aspirations to build financial centers to recycle global savings have
been high in many GCC countries. More important, however, a competitive financial sector can
help promote economic activity in other parts of the economy, most importantly through credit,
equity, and debt financing of entrepreneurial activity, an efficient allocation of savings and
investment assets, and reliable and cost-effective infrastructures for payments and securities
transactions.
Promoting financial sector development in the GCC is particularly important given global
economic events of recent years. On the one hand, the global financial crisis has cast a shadow on
the financial services industry, sent shockwaves through private and public sectors in the region
and has taken its toll on business sentiment and growth. Moreover, political uncertainty and
instability has increased in the MENA vicinity. On the other hand, the significant drop in oil prices
in recent months has introduced a new reality in GCC economies. Though the outlook for oil prices
over the medium term remains uncertain, government spending will likely be constrained for a
number of years. For example, the IMF estimates that the revenues of GCC countries will slip by
$300 billion in 2015 only. This means that the current growth model which is anchored in rising
oil prices and government spending will no longer work. Instead, countries will need to further
diversify their economies and enable the private sector to become a self-sufficient engine of growth
and jobs.



                                                  5
                            III. Financial sector in GCC countries

The financial sector in the GCC countries is bank-based and, with the exception of the UAE and
Bahrain, have penetration rates well below that of advanced economies. At the end of 2013, the
UAE and Bahrain (including the offshore sector) had the largest banking sectors. Total banking
sector assets stood at 144 percent of GDP in the UAE and over five times GDP in Bahrain. By
contrast, in Oman, with the smallest banking sector, total bank assets amounted to about 60 percent
of GDP. Saudi Arabia’s banking sector is also relatively small in the regional and international
context.

The banking sector is largely domestically owned. This reflects entry barriers and licensing
restrictions for foreign banks, including GCC banks. Except for Bahrain, all GCC countries have
limits on foreign ownership. Therefore, the cross-border presence of GCC banks and other foreign
banks is limited and is mostly in the form of branches, in many cases as single branches. Foreign
bank presence is important in Bahrain and the UAE, with regulators opening up the financial sector
to foreign banks on a reciprocal and selective basis.

Two additional structural features are common to the GCC’s banking sectors: public ownership
and concentration. Public and quasi public-sector ownership varies but ranges from 13 percent in
Kuwait, to 30 percent and 35 percent in Oman and Saudi Arabia, respectively, and reaches over
52 percent in the UAE (data approximate). Oman and Saudi Arabia's relatively high public-sector
ownership is mostly attributed to quasi government ownership, while in the UAE public ownership
of domestic banking assets is mostly attributed to direct ownership by the government (42 percent).
The GCC banking sector is also heavily concentrated, with a few banks dominating the market: in
all countries, the three largest banks (all domestic banks) account for 50–90 percent of total
banking sector assets. Bahrain, Kuwait, and Qatar are the most concentrated banking systems.

Nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) have a limited presence in the GCC, with some exceptions.
Investment funds have been growing rapidly in several countries, although they tend to remain
largely focused on domestic equity and real estate. Most mutual investment funds are bank-owned;
they are present, although on a limited basis, in Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE. Kuwait has
approximately 95 investment companies, equivalent to 75 percent of banking sector assets (2012
data). Their relatively large asset size and increasing reliance on the banking sector for financing
has raised their systemic risk and possible spillover effects on the banking sector. The insurance
sector remains small and is mainly focused on property/casualty risks. Contractual savings are
underdeveloped and dominated by public pension systems, which are mainly defined-benefit,
“pay-as-you-go” schemes. They contribute little to the accumulation of long-term resources for
investment.

With regard to financial markets, GCC stock markets developed very dynamically over the last
decade, reaching an average capitalization of 107 percent of GDP in 2007. After a major correction
in 2008, average stock market capitalization was down to 44 percent in 2013. However, stock
markets play a major role only in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, the largest market which account for
half of total volumes for the region as a whole. Listings remain concentrated in a very small number
of sectors, especially basic industries and financial services. The GCC stock markets are dominated
by domestic retail investors, who tend to be prone to less sophisticated investment behavior than


                                                 6
institutional investors. The dominance of domestic retail investors in GCC markets reflects
restrictions on foreign participation in GCC stock markets.

Debt securities markets are the least developed financial segment in the GCC. Still, the market is
on an upward trajectory, particularly the corporate bond market. Moreover, sukuks (Islamic bonds)
play an increasingly important role in bond issuance in the GCC, given the dynamic
growth──albeit from a relatively low basis──of Islamic finance in the region and increasing
demand for Shariah-compliant investment products worldwide. The GCC is one of the largest
Islamic banking markets with approximately $300 billion in financial assets, about one third of the
total global Islamic banking assets.

                          Table 1: GCC financial sector – Key structural metrics
                                                               Stock Market      Insurance    Total Bond
                                 Domestic Bank Private C redit
                                                               Capitalization   Premiums /     Issuance
          Country         Year   De posits / GDP   / GDP
                                                                  / GDP *           GDP      Volume / GDP
                                        %            %               %               %            %
Bahrain                   2005       54.44          43.68          108.74          1.56          6.13
                          2009       78.28          71.44          73.82           2.01          5.59
                          2013       70.55          69.10          52.91           1.76          6.67
Kuwait                    2005       53.01          50.93          160.99          0.56          0.62
                          2009       79.09          79.07          90.58           0.47          0.47
                          2013       62.67          59.19          52.99            …            0.18
Oman                      2005       26.82          30.83          49.41           0.98           …
                          2009       39.05          46.68          35.86           1.28           …
                          2013       35.16          42.62          25.68           0.94          1.06
Qatar                     2005       46.91          33.72          196.08          0.96          5.31
                          2009       58.83          51.73          89.83           0.97         15.79
                          2013       60.36          39.11          66.53            …            3.13
Saudi Arabia              2005       39.42          35.42          196.71          0.31          0.36
                          2009       59.08          45.63          74.29           0.45          0.65
                          2013       50.56          40.12          50.87           0.44          1.73
United Arab Emirates      2005       46.21          43.76          64.20           1.11          3.70
                          2009       75.54          84.46          31.47           1.60         13.78
                          2013       68.11          64.39          17.70           1.29          3.94
OECD (median)             2005       77.51          100.07         79.96           5.60         14.60
                          2009       89.47          110.75         59.98           5.36         23.46
                          2013       93.10          114.21         61.99           4.49         15.33
* Figures are for 2012.
Source: Finstats

                                       IV. Trends and issues
Sustained credit growth before the crisis followed by a substantial correction and uncertain
outlook

GCC economies saw a marked acceleration in credit growth to the private sector beginning in the
middle of 2000s. Over the period 2003–08, Qatar and the UAE experienced significant private
sector credit growth at around 45 percent and 35 percent, respectively, while Oman had the slowest
rate in the region at around 20 percent. Albeit indirectly, credit to the private sector was spurred
by the increase in international oil prices. Higher oil prices boosted government spending and non-

                                                     7
oil GDP growth and, as a result, strengthened business confidence and local and regional private
sector activities and investments.

With the global chain of events unleashed by the Lehman Brothers’ failure in September 2008, the
ensuing drying up of funds──both domestic and cross-border──contributed to an equally
spectacular decline in the growth of credit. For example, after peaking at 26 percent in mid-2008,
credit growth in Bahrain slowed down to just over 4 percent in 2010. More recently, although
credit growth has been picking up from its post-crisis lows (at around 10 percent for the region),
the recovery from the boom-bust cycle is still incomplete. Lower oil prices are likely to delay any
significant rebound in credit provision given the negative impact that the latter have on government
spending, which is a major driver of private consumption and corporate investment, and ultimately
of economic growth.

Stable financial systems

Notwithstanding the positive impact of increasing bank intermediation in the GCC on economic
activity, as international experience shows, high rates of credit growth during an economic upturn
almost invariably lead to high levels of credit defaults when economic activity slows. Yet the
region proved fairly resilient to recent episodes of financial stress. True, authorities had to
intervene directly to stem unintended consequences of the financial crisis, but systemic stability
was never at risk. This is also true historically: GCC economies have a lower propensity to
widespread instability when compared with other regions. With the only exception of Kuwait in
the early 1980s, no GCC country has ever experienced a systemic financial crisis.

                                  Figure 1: GCC banking sector – Key financial metrics

                    Regulatory capital ratio (%)                      Nonperforming loans % gross loans




 Source: Finstats

Banks are in general highly capitalized and liquid though they present high concentration ratios.
Regulatory and supervisory frameworks are well developed and on par with OECD economies. In
2013, the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets (capital adequacy) in the GCC ranged from 16.0
percent in Qatar to 19.2 percent in UAE. This is considerably more than the level required by the
Bank for International Settlements (BIS) regulation (Basel III). Despite this prudent approach,
GCC banks show healthy profitability, also partially owing to favorable tax regimes, and a low
share of non-performing loans (NPL) in total loans, the only exception being UAE and Bahrain
(7.3 percent and 5.6 percent respectively in 2013). Figure 1 presents some financial metrics for the
banking sector in GCC.

                                                           8
The impact of lower oil prices on banking systems is likely to be muted in the near term, but
downside risks are likely to increase over time. Second-round effects of lower oil prices on
economic activity could weaken asset quality, liquidity, and profitability, but the speed of
adjustment is likely to vary across countries. GCC banking systems will be affected by the decline
in oil prices, given the strong correlation between non-oil growth and government spending, but
they should remain resilient owing to their high capital.

Deep financial systems

Despite the recent boom-bust cycle, GCC countries have experienced several decades of steady
financial deepening──that is, increasing importance of the financial sector in the economy. As a
result, the region stands out rather favorably compared with other regions. Using standard
measures of financial depth──ratio of private sector credit to GDP and stock market
capitalization──it appears that financial development is adequate in GCC economies, amply
surpassing the averages seen in other emerging markets. When measured in relation to non-oil
GDP, credit to the private sector and stock market capitalization in the GCC registers the highest
rates among emerging market countries. In addition, the capacity to generate and intermediate
deposits, as proxied by the ratio of private credit to deposits, is also significant.

That GCC economies on average display deep financial systems is confirmed not only by a
comparison with other regions but also in relation to the structural characteristics of their
economies. Recognizing that a country’s financial development may be partly explained by
structural factors such as its income, population size and density, age distribution, natural resources
endowment and offshore financial markets, WBG has produced financial structure benchmarks
against which a country’s financial development can be compared across time. From this
perspective, actual and predicted measures of financial depth for GCC countries are broadly
aligned, the only notable exception being stock market capitalization, for which the level observed
is about a third (half) of that predicted by their structural factors (see Figure 2).

               Figure 2: GCC financial sector – Actual levels vs. benchmark (percent, 2013)




                       * Figures are for 2012.
                       Source: Finstats




                                                    9
Quality gap in financial intermediation

Despite its depth, the GCC financial sector has not produced the expected inclusive growth-
enhancing benefits, signaling a “quality gap” with respect to the rest of the world. First, the region
has fallen short in providing access to financial services for their population. All six countries have
a smaller number of deposit and loan accounts, especially female accounts, than other high-income
economies. The average share of SME lending in the region amounts to only 2 percent, and has
not improved in recent years. SMEs perceive the lack of external financing as a serious obstacle
to business expansion. Available credit tends to be heavily concentrated, favoring a few large and
well-established firms, especially in the real estate and oil & gas sectors. GCC countries exhibit
one of the world’s highest ratios of top 20 exposures to total equity (at about 180 percent).

Second, the impact of financial depth in GCC economies is weaker than in other regions. Put
differently, the level of financial deepening in the region is less effective than in other regions
when it comes to generating long-term economic growth. Although it is difficult to ascertain
exactly why the same amount of credit in GCC pays a lower dividend than in other regions, it is
plausible that limited access to financial services, and to credit in particular, is a key piece of the
puzzle, as is low competition in the financials sector.

                                  V. Areas of WBG engagement

The “new normal” that GCC economies are now facing, characterized by lower oil prices, provides
an opportunity to introduce far-reaching reforms in the financial sector to address the “quality
gap”. Financial stability is not enough for GCC economies to reap the benefits of economic
diversification and there is a dire need for inclusive financial development. A successful reform
agenda for the coming years will necessarily be a balancing act. Enhancing access to the existing
depth requires a combination of policies aimed at improving the environment for financial
intermediation. At the same time, as financial services increase in size and breadth and the
borrower pool expands beyond the traditional large and well-connected firms, credit risk is set to
rise. Policymakers should then ensure that the benefits of reforms are not undone by excessive
instability.

WBG through FMGP is well positioned to assist GCC countries in improving the quality of
financial intermediation. FMGP’s mandate is to support client countries in the achievement of
financial inclusion and stability as well as sustainable growth by delivering integrated public and
private sector solutions tailored to country circumstances. The ultimate goal is to contribute to
building deep, diversified, efficient, inclusive, and stable financial systems──which are critical
enablers toward the achievement of the twin WBG goals of alleviating poverty and fostering
shared prosperity. Support is typically provided by delivering a custom-made package──as
opposed to stand alone projects──of finance, knowledge, advisory and convening services, in
partnership with other Global Practices and agencies within the WBG.

In particular, WBG can assist GCC economies with ASA in the following areas, which have a
direct or indirect impact on the quality of financial intermediation:




                                                  10
Strengthen financial infrastructure

There is a need to modernize insolvency laws in GCC countries. In particular, reorganization
procedures have to be made more effective and liquidation procedures more efficient and less
formalistic and cumbersome. Laws need to be modernized, and the functioning of the judicial
system needs to be improved. Specialized courts can be created to deal with insolvency cases.
Recent experiences suggest that some jurisdictions in the GCC are ready to implement an out-of-
court restructuring scheme. At the same time, there is also a need to strengthen creditor rights in
GCC countries. The most appropriate way to do so is to regulate every aspect of the chain of
secured lending through specific legislation, whereas in GCC economies the secured transactions
system is still largely characterized by a fragmented legal framework, with scattered provisions on
financing secured with movable property in different parts of the legislation, included mostly in
the Civil and Commercial Codes. There is not a centralized electronic registry for security interests
in movable property. In terms of both “Strength of Legal Rights” and “Strength of Insolvency”
under the WBG Doing Business Indicators, GCC economies rank lowest in the world.1

GCC countries also need to make marginal improvements to their national payment and settlement
systems. Although GCC economies have state-of-the-art national payment and settlement systems
in place, there are some areas where reforms are needed. First is the legal and regulatory
framework. The latter typically lacks an overarching framework and is spread across several pieces
of legal measures, leading to ambiguity on several aspects, notably: lack of clear articulation on
finality of settlement, oversight powers of the central bank and licensing norms for payment
systems operators and payment service providers. Second is the oversight framework. All GCC
countries have established dedicated departments/organizational units for payment systems within
the central bank. There is a need to formulate a clear oversight framework and implementation
roadmap and attention needs to be given to capacity building. Third is the area of innovative
payment mechanisms. Though there has been a strong growth in electronic payment transactions
in GCC countries as of late, checks remain the main form of payment. There is therefore a need to
upgrade the legal and regulatory framework for innovative payment mechanisms, which is
currently hampering entry of innovative services, including in the area of remittances services.
Finally is regional integration. GCC countries are currently exploring integration of their payment
and settlement systems. However, certain preconditions need to be in place for ensuring safety and
reliability, notably the harmonization of the legal and regulatory framework; robust risk
management framework; and active engagement of private sector players. In all the areas above,
FMGP could mobilize technical expertise to assist GCC countries in their reform efforts.




1
 WBG is currently supporting few GCC countries with ASA aimed at introducing expedited distressed debt workout
procedures; adopting a new Enterprise and Liquidation Law; introducing a new Secured Transactions Law for movable
property, including establishing a new modern electronic registry for recording security interests in movable assets;
and promoting judicial specialization for commercial procedures and insolvency. WBG is also discussing with some
GCC countries programmatic support to improve the overall business environment and the Doing Business ranking
by providing diagnostic services; supporting reform of the legal and regulatory framework; communication and public
awareness campaign; stakeholder training and capacity building; development of an out-of-court workout framework;
and regulation of insolvency practitioners.


                                                         11
Improve competition in the banking sector

Understanding competitive dynamics in the banking sector is an essential ingredient of the
financial sector reform agenda because competition matters for the efficiency of financial
intermediation, access to financial services and systemic stability. There is overwhelming evidence
that more competitive banking systems are associated with higher efficiency and financial
inclusion, without undermining stability. GCC banking sectors exhibit the lowest degree of
competition in the world. Lack of competition is primarily driven by stringent licensing
requirements; low presence of non-bank financial institutions and relatively shallow capital
markets; lack of foreign bank competition due to limits on foreign ownership; and the inability of
banks to engage in non-traditional banking activities as a result of activity restrictions.

WBG is currently conducting a competition assessment of the SME credit markets in the region.
The objective of the assessment is to screen laws, regulations and practices to identify unnecessary
regulatory restrictions to competition and institutional inefficiencies, and propose changes to
improve the regulatory and institutional environment, and ultimately increase access to financial
services for SMEs while maintaining the stability of the banking sector. The assessment will also
look into the institutional framework for competition policy in the banking market and benchmark
it against international best practices. WBG could follow up with more in-depth country-level
competition assessments, including in other segments of the financial markets.

Improve the effectiveness of credit guarantee schemes for SMEs

One common and increasingly used form of government intervention in SME credit markets
around the world is represented by credit guarantee schemes (CGSs). Unlike other types of
interventions, such as state-owned banks or directed lending arrangements, CGSs may generate
fewer distortions in the credit markets and may lead to better credit allocation outcomes. Therefore,
they are considered one of the most market-friendly types of government intervention.

Some GCC countries have already in place CGSs while others are considering to establish one. In
both cases, it is essential that CGSs are designed in a way to maximize outreach and additionality
while preserving financial sustainability. In this context, WBG is currently developing a set of
internationally-agreed principles or best practices for the design and implementation of CGSs
around the world in partnership with regional associations, including the Arab Monetary Fund.
The principles would provide a blueprint for CGSs and guide WBG’s policy advice in this area.2

Develop government debt capital markets and sukuk

The efficient development of capital markets, including debt markets, in GCC economies can
contribute to increase competition in the financial sector while creating new markets and
institutions, especially for the provision of long-term finance. Developing debt capital markets,
including new instruments, requires country-specific strategies addressing weaknesses in each of
the main building blocks. WBG support in this area is in general more effective when there is a
clear strategic need/driving force (e.g. to support infrastructure funding gaps) and the scope of

2
  In this area, WBG is currently helping some GCC countries introduce best practices in the design and delivery of
credit guarantees for SMEs.


                                                       12
ASA is sufficiently broad to address the several building blocks in the market development
agenda.3

Core activities that could be conducted by WBG in debt capital market development include: (i)
reviewing and designing a broad debt market development road map, including legal and
regulatory framework, investor base, primary bond market, money market, market infrastructure,
secondary market, and derivatives; (ii) building benchmark yield curves based on government
securities, including selection of instruments, maturities, issuance frequency, and regular calendar
and supporting mechanisms; (iii) developing primary and secondary markets for conventional and
non-conventional instruments, including examining prospects for development of fixed-income
products, both conventional and sukuk, taking into account current demand and supply trends.
Special attention is required for sukuk market instruments, being the latter highly structured
products which require a high degree of standardization and enhanced regulatory/governance
frameworks; and (iv) strengthening the regulation and the institutional capacity of capital market
authorities and institutional investors, including through providing advice on high-level policy and
supervisory strategy, developing training programs, developing procedure manuals, designing
disclosure systems and improving the regulators’ own governance regimes.

Strengthen macroprudential supervision

GCC countries are advised to strengthen macroprudential oversight. Several GCC countries are
already using a variety of the macroprudential tools advocated in regulatory reform proposals,
including limits on debt service coverage ratios, loan-to-value ratios and loan-to-deposit ratios.
Given the undiversified nature of these economies and their heavy reliance on hydrocarbon
revenues, which lead to sharp cycles, consideration could be given to complementing these
initiatives with other steps aimed at improving supervision. For example, WBG could assist
financial regulators in the region with macro-stress testing of the financial system, including an
assessment of the factors contributing to systemic risk to determine the most appropriate potential
policy responses. In this respect, support can be provided through a systematic assessment of the
interconnectedness of the financial system and through the development of network models.
Capacity building and knowledge transfer would be a key theme throughout the provision of such
services. In addition, WBG could conduct, jointly with the financial sector authorities of GCC
countries, crisis simulation exercises to identify where existing arrangements need to be
strengthened and cooperation fostered. Such simulations typically gather key public decision
makers to experience a plausible financial crisis scenario and identify areas where improvements
are needed, such as availability of information and analytical frameworks to make decisions, public
communication, or assessment of possible responses under tight time constraints.

Finally, there is also scope for addressing specific challenges of Islamic banks to strengthen their
safety and efficiency. Some of those challenges are very similar to those of conventional finance;
others are unique to Islamic finance. The most significant challenges are in the areas of regulation,
supervision, and international harmonization; and risk management. Enhanced international
harmonization and cooperation would facilitate faster growth of the Islamic financial industry.
More international cooperation is needed by home and host regulators and standard setters. The
3
  WBG is supporting some GCC countries in bond/sukuk market development. This assistance includes the
development of a roadmap to develop sound domestic debt capital markets, drawing a detailed assessment of demand,
supply, market infrastructure and regulatory issues.

                                                       13
legal and regulatory framework of Islamic finance needs further work to make it consistent with
international practices while maintaining the unique features of Islamic finance. There needs to be
an integrated crisis management framework to ensure that any emerging crisis in the Islamic
financial system will be managed. In this context, WBG could assist financial sector authorities
with diagnostic and capacity building activities aimed at strengthening the relevant legal,
regulatory and supervisory framework.




                                                14
