                                     97246




TRUST FUND FOR
STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING


GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES


         TFSCB ADMINISTRATION UNIT




         DEVELOPMENT DATA GROUP
             THE WORLD BANK
                MAY 2015
     TRUST FUND FOR STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING (TFSCB)

                          GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES
The purpose of these guidelines is to help task teams prepare TFSCB funding proposals. TFSCB proposals
are expected to be self-contained and should provide all the necessary information for a full consideration
of the funding request.


OVERVIEW OF TFSCB
PURPOSES OF THE TFSCB

The Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB), a multi-donor trust fund, was established in 1999
by the Development Data Group of the World Bank to strengthen the capacity of statistical systems in
developing countries. It is closely coordinated with the work of the Partnership in Statistics for
                         st
Development in the 21 Century (PARIS21) and is part of the worldwide effort to reduce poverty by
strengthening the evidence base for decision-making at all levels. In coordination with national
governments and development partners, the TFSCB provides a practical mechanism to achieve the
PARIS21 vision; that is, to develop effective and efficient national statistical systems and to promote a
culture of evidence-based decision-making.

In 2011 the Busan Action Plan for Statistics (BAPS) was approved at the Fourth High-Level Forum on Aid
Effectiveness held in Busan, Republic of Korea. The BAPS builds on the Marrakech Action Plan for Statistics
(MAPS), which has been in place since 2004. It puts particular emphasis on integrating national statistical
activities with national planning, promoting open access to statistics and increasing knowledge and skills
needed to use statistics effectively. Consistent with the BAPS and the needs of the post-2015
development agenda, the TFSCB pays special attention to improving the production and the use of gender
statistics, advancing the data foundation for measuring sustainable development, experimenting with
innovative approaches in gathering, producing and using data; and making government data more
accessible. The TFSCB helps countries put BAPS into effect, ensuring that financing to improve statistical
activities is robust and flexible.

The TFSCB finances two main kinds of projects. The first type supports the preparation of National
Strategies for the Development of Statistics (NSDS). The TFSCB works with PARIS21 to ensure that all low
income countries have an integrated and comprehensive plan for the strategic development of their
national statistical systems. The purpose of an NSDS project is to define a national long-term strategy to
develop an efficient and sustainable statistical system in the recipient country. Strategies will differ from
country to country due to differences in the political and cultural environment, the administrative
structure (e.g. federal or centralized) and economic situation. An NSDS should be adopted at the highest
political level after having reached a consensus among all stakeholders of the statistical system. PARIS21




                                                     2
has developed guidelines and recommendations for the production of NSDSs and these should be used
                 1
wherever possible .

The second type of project (non-NSDS project) supports capacity-building activities in specific priority
areas. For instance, these projects may target the implementation of one or more critical components of
an NSDS. Non-NSDS projects are expected to be based on a formal assessment of the statistical system
(Open Data implementation projects should be based on the ODRA report and action plan) and must
demonstrate how they will address the main capacity weaknesses. If a country does not have an NSDS or
ODRA it is strongly encouraged to prepare one before applying for a non-NSDS or OD implementation
project. Project proposals are required to set out specific targets for capacity development. The resources
provided must be additional and cannot be used simply to replace national budgetary resources. For
example, while it may be possible to use funds to meet some of the costs of data collection activities,
especially where new activities are being tried out, projects that are just concerned with maintaining
existing systems are unlikely to be approved.

In all proposals, recipients are required to demonstrate their commitment to the project by providing
some contribution to the overall cost, which may be a monetary or in-kind contribution.

KEY FEATURES OF TFSCB
          Aims to achieve the PARIS21 vision and is a key component in supporting the implementation of
           the Busan Action Plan for Statistics.

          Foster evidence-based policy making and effective monitoring.

          Promotes a strategic approach to the development of statistical capacity, supporting the
           preparation and implementation of nationally prepared and owned strategic statistical
           development plans.

          Provides an intervention mechanism to help initiate changes in policy and decision-making
           through improved availability and use of information and statistical data.

          Most projects operate at the national or sub-national level, but the trust fund can also support
           regional and global projects where there is a case for intervention at this level.

          Improves the use of resources for development through better-informed decision-making
           resulting from improved statistical systems and hence better data quality and analysis.

          Promotes partnerships and improves coordination among local and international agencies and
           civil society organizations.

USES OF THE FUND
          The TFSCB finances two kinds of projects as outlined above: those concerned with the
           preparation of an NSDS; and other, non-NSDS projects that aim to strengthen capacity in key
           priority sectors such as gender statistics, administrative data sources, Open Data projects, and
           post-MDG 2015 indicators. Projects should also be results-oriented and promote partnerships
           and knowledge sharing.


1
    The latest version of the PARIS21 NSDS Guidelines, “NSDS 2.0?, is available here.


                                                       3
       TFSCB grants may be used either to finance country-based activities or global or regional
        programs. However, TFSCB grants cannot be used to supplement the administrative or logistical
        needs of these projects.

       Regional and global projects will only be financed where there is a clear case of intervention at
        this level and where a single implementing agency is identified. In general, regional projects will
        be linked to the follow up of PARIS21 regional workshops.

       It is also important to note that the Trust Fund has been set up to build statistical capacity and
        not simply to fund data collection activities. Applications must indicate where there are presently
        capacity weaknesses in the statistical system and how the proposal will address them.

ILLUSTRATIVE ACTIVITIES

In light of the above discussion of statistical capacity building, the following is an illustrative list of
activities, which might be proposed for financing under TFSCB.


(A) FOR NSDS PROJECTS

Supporting the preparation of an NSDS is a major activity of the TFSCB. More detailed information on
good practice in the preparation and implementation of NSDS can be found on the PARIS21 website. In
summary, the process is expected to involve the following steps:

       A detailed assessment of the current statistical system, for example, using an assessment
        framework such as the GDDS or DQAF, identifying strengths and weaknesses and looking at all
        aspects of activities from the quality of the output to aspects such as finance and management.

       An identification of all of the main stakeholders in the statistical system and the establishment of
        processes and procedures for regular consultation.

       The development of a medium-term strategic vision, setting out where the statistical system
        expects to be within the next five to ten years.

       The identification of the main priority actions that will be needed to address the weaknesses and
        achieve the vision. This will generally address at least five areas, including: the regulatory and
        managerial framework, statistical infrastructure, statistical operations and procedures, human
        resources, and physical infrastructure.

       Putting together a detailed implementation or master plan, with a time-bound and budgeted set
        of actions, identifying what will need to be done and when.

       Establishing an implementation mechanism, including a financing plan, mechanisms for
        monitoring and reporting on progress at regular intervals, and a process for review and
        evaluation.

A well-developed NSDS could provide a basis for a larger, more comprehensive project - for instance
financed by a STATCAP lending operation.




                                                     4
(B) FOR NON-NSDS PROJECTS

Non-SDS projects can support activities to strengthen statistical systems at sub-national, national,
regional, and global levels; including but not limited to improvements in the following areas:

          Management, institutional framework and coordination;

          Data user-producer dialogue;

          Human resource capacity, including training;

          Statistical methodologies;

          Data processing and management methods;

          Data quality;

          Dissemination of comprehensive, timely, accessible, and reliable economic, financial, and socio-
           demographic statistics;

          Openness and accessibility of data that could be achieved through improving data integrity,
                                                                         2
           accessibility to data by the public, and accessibility formats ;

          Development of a framework for evaluating needs for data improvement and setting priorities in
           this respect;

          National capacity for poverty analysis;

          Sector-specific capacity improving activities;

          Special areas of economic and socio-demographic statistics such as environmental accounting
           and gender statistics;

          Data foundation for measuring sustainable development; and

          Development of innovative approaches in data collection, processing and dissemination.


HOW TO APPLY
Project proposals funded by the TFSCB may originate from a number of different sources, including
statistical agencies of member countries and international and regional development organizations. It is
highly recommended that agencies interested in preparing an application should make early contact with
the TFSCB Administration Unit or the local World Bank office. For each project, the World Bank will
nominate a Task Team Leader (TTL), who will liaise with the implementing agency, and take responsibility
of supervision of the project to ensure compliance with the fiduciary requirements of the World Bank.
Once the Recipient and the World Bank have agreed to apply for a TFSCB grant, the task teams must
complete the two steps described below.


2
  TFSCB grants can finance open data readiness assessments (ODRA) and technical assistance and training for ODRA
implementation, depending on the country's needs and requests for support. Country-specific grant proposals for ODRA
implementation must include the ODRA report and action plan in the grant proposal. ODRA implementation grants for IBRD
countries will have higher expectations in terms of 3 metrics: quality of the OD portal, number of datasets included in the OD portal,
and number of data uses (apps, visualizations, data mash-ups, or similar).



                                                                  5
Please note that Stage 1 only applies to non-NSDS projects. NSDS proposals are accepted on a rolling basis
and therefore can skip Stage 1 and proceed directly to Stage 2.


STAGE 1
    1.   Prior to preparing a proposal, the team should consult the TFSCB Guidelines and Procedures for
         the program objectives, the activities typically funded by TFSCB, the application conditions and
         selection criteria.
    2.   In consultation with the agency which has expressed interest, the team should prepare a
         proposal following the template provided in Annex 1. The proposal should be no longer than 2
         pages.
    3.   The team should consult the CMU/SMU and Regional Trust Fund Coordinator, as well as seek
         endorsement from the Country or Sector Director (manager). At the time of the final proposal,
         the team must indicate adequate Bank budget commitment to execute the grant activities.
    4.   The proposal should be submitted by TFLAP accredited Bank staff to the TFSCB Administration
         Unit (iivins1@worldbank.org, myamanaka@worldbank.org and mdinc@worldbank.org) as an
         attachment via email. The deadline to submit proposals is indicated in the latest call for proposal
         guide posted on the TFSCB website (http://www.worldbank.org/en/data/statistical-capacity-
         building/trust-fund-for-statistical-capacity-building).
    5.   Proposals will be reviewed and shortlisted by the TFSCB Administration Unit based on the fit with
         the objectives and priorities of TFSCB and the available resources. The task team leaders (TTL) of
         shortlisted proposals will be notified.




STAGE 2
    1.   The Recipient (agency), in consultation with the TTL, will send a formal letter of request to the
         Bank addressed to the appropriate Country Director or Sector Director (Manager), to apply for
         TFSCB Grant funds for a particular project that falls within the parameters of the TFSCB
         guidelines.
    2.   The designated TTL in consultation with the Recipient completes the TFSCB application in GFR
         (see Annex 2). It is recommended that the TTL send the draft proposal to the Administration Unit
         for comment before formally submitting a proposal on GFR.
    3.   For a country-specific proposal, the TTL seeks endorsement from the Country Director or Sector
         Director (Manager). For a regional/global proposal, the TTL seeks endorsement from the relevant
         Sector Director (Manager) and where necessary from the concerned Country Directors. This will
         assure the allocation of required resources for supervision and management of the project. The
         director(s) will be asked to approve the project in the Operations Portal after the proposal is
         accepted by TFSCB. However, it is necessary for the TTL to obtain concurrence beforehand.
    4.   The TFSCB Internal Management Committee (IMC) reviews the proposals, ensuring that they are
         consistent with TFSCB guidelines and procedures, and makes one of three decisions: i) approved
         (with no or minimal revision); ii) revisions and re-submission; or iii) rejection. Revisions and
         resubmission must be completed within 1 months from the date of the decision.
    5.   The Chair of the IMC sends the decision to the TTL and the approving manager.




                                                     6
    6.   The TFSCB window manager clears the GFR in the Operations Portal. The approval from the
         director must be obtained through the system.
    7.   Post-approval procedures are indicated in Annex 3.


APPLICATION CONDITIONS AND SELECTION CRITERIA
APPLICATION CONDITIONS

The following conditions are requirements for all projects to be financed from the Trust Fund.

        All member countries of the World Bank are eligible for the TFSCB funding; however, IDA
         countries will have priority.

        All TFSCB funded activities should be compatible with national and regional development
         objectives as set out in Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers, World Bank Country Assistance
         Strategy reports, and other strategy documents and should be in line with and support the
         PARIS21 consortium, the World Bank and other donors' poverty reduction and MDG-related
         activities.

        All projects financed under TFSCB should be demand driven (demonstrated through an official
         request letter from recipients) to contribute to the development of the statistical system of the
         recipient country and should not be used to cover the administrative or logistical cost of these
         projects.

        All non-NSDS country proposals should indicate how they relate to the national statistical
         development strategy. Priority will be given to projects that are based on an existing national
         statistical strategy and which are in line with the priorities already identified. In countries
         without an NSDS, non-NSDS projects will only be financed where there is a clear justification of
         the need for immediate capacity building before an overall strategic framework can be
         developed and where the project will contribute to the development of a more strategic
         approach to official statistics.

        In line with the overall PARIS21 approach, coordination with other development projects must be
         set out in detail. TFSCB funded projects should promote coordination and collaboration with
         local and international agencies, civil society and NGOs, help to develop partnerships, and to
         strengthen mechanisms to share knowledge and experiences.

        TFSCB funded activities should focus on the most urgently needed components that will make
         most direct impact on the statistical system, and so eventually improve policy and decision
         making and monitoring. For non-NSDS projects in particular, priority will be given to projects that
         are innovative and are unlikely to be financed from other sources. Applications should indicate
         what other funding sources, if any, have been approached to finance the project and what the
         response has been.

        Project proposals may originate from a number of different sources, including staff from national
         statistical agencies and other data providers (i.e. sectoral) and users as well as staff and/or
         consultants from donor agencies. However, all proposals should define the ways in which the
         project is linked to the national statistical system and specify how activities will be coordinated.



                                                     7
         TFSCB financed projects are to be implemented by an appropriate national or regional agency
          that may be a government department, a civil society organization or other national or regional
          agency. Projects may also be implemented by third parties such as donor agencies or, in
          exceptional circumstances as explained in OP 14.40, by the World Bank itself on behalf of the
          grant recipient (BEBR).

         All implementing agencies must be able to sign legal contracts and should demonstrate financial
          soundness and a capacity to manage and account for funds.

         Implementing agencies are required to follow World Bank standard procedures for procurement,
          disbursement and accounting. For each project the Bank will nominate a Task Team Leader, who
          will take responsibility for liaison with the implementing agency, supervision and ensuring
          compliance with trust fund procedures.

         Proposals should define the mechanisms planned for identification, establishment and
          monitoring of priority beneficiaries, and arrangements to ensure that the proposed interventions
          will reach the targeted beneficiaries.
         Proposals should provide assurance of proper project execution, including the necessary
          resources for supervision and management, and should provide for the standard level of World
          Bank Group accountability and oversight for such activities.
         Proposals should list performance indicators to monitor and evaluate the proposed activities,
          including measures of implementation progress and the outcome or impact. They should
          describe the performance monitoring and impact evaluation systems that would be used or
          established for these purposes.
         The maximum budget for any one proposal is US$ 500,000 and the maximum duration is two
          years, with a possibility of one year extension. For NSDS proposals the upper limit is determined
          case by case based on the size and the needs of the recipient country, but past experience
          suggests that most projects require much less support and are normally completed within one
          year.

         Procurement of goods is allowed in Recipient Executed grants only; and the maximum amount
          allocated for goods cannot exceed 20% of the grant amount.

CRITERIA FOR SELECTION

All project proposals will be reviewed to ensure that they satisfy the basic conditions as outlined above.
Projects will then be assessed by the Internal Management Committee using the following criteria.


(A)       FOR NSDS PROJECTS

         The quality of the approach proposed to develop a National Strategy for the Development of
          Statistics, and the extent to which this is in line with good practice as set out, for example, by
          PARIS21.

         The effectiveness of the mechanisms proposed to ensure consistency and alignment with the
          PRSP or other national strategy, and MDG monitoring processes.

         The feasibility of the timetable and the adequacy of the budget.




                                                        8
         The quality of the consultative and participatory process proposed involving both data users and
          producers and the extent to which the views of the key stakeholders have been and will be taken
          into account.

         The level of commitment to the process demonstrated by government and other stakeholders,
          including other donor agencies, as demonstrated, for example, by the level of contributions in
          cash and in-kind.

         The adequacy and feasibility of the mechanisms proposed for project management and
          supervision.

         The adequacy of the reporting process and the monitoring indicators proposed.


(B)       FOR NON-NSDS PROJECTS

         The extent to which the project is in line with the priorities identified in the NSDS, or where such
          a plan does not yet exist, the extent to which the project will lead to a more strategic approach
          to statistical capacity building.

         The extent to which the approach proposed is in line with internationally accepted good practice
          and recommendations.

         The need and suitability of the project for funding from this global trust fund; innovative projects
          that are unlikely to be financed from other sources will have priority, provided they are assessed
          to be technically feasible and financially sound.

         The feasibility of the timetable and the adequacy of the budget.

         The quality of the consultative and participatory process proposed and the extent to which the
          views of the key stakeholders have been and will be taken into account.

         The level of commitment to the process demonstrated by government and other stakeholders,
          including other donor agencies, demonstrated, for example, by the level of other contributions in
          cash and in-kind.

         The adequacy and feasibility of the mechanisms proposed for project management and
          supervision.

         The adequacy of the mechanisms proposed to monitor and evaluate progress and to report to
          stakeholders.


CONTACTS
For further information and questions, please contact Ingrid Ivins (iivins1@worldbank.org; 202-473-2737),
Mizuki Yamanaka (myamanaka@worldbank.org) or Mustafa Dinc (mdinc@worldbank.org) in the TFSCB
Administration Unit. You can also visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/data/statistical-capacity-
building/trust-fund-for-statistical-capacity-building.




                                                       9
ANNEX 1: TFSCB PROPOSAL TEMPLATE (STAGE 1)


    A. BASIC INFORMATION
Proposal Title
Country/Region
Task Team Leader Name
Other team members (if applicable)
Managing Unit
Country/Sector Manager Name
Endorsed by Manager                         Yes/No
Proposed Grant Amount (USD)
Implementing Agency
Partners (if applicable)



    B. PROPOSAL DETAILS
What are the development objectives of the project?




How is the project linked to the national strategy for the development of statistics (if this is a global or
regional project, please also specify the name of the strategy)?




How is the project related to the Bank policy and strategy (as defined in Country Assistance Strategy,
sector strategy and/or other relevant document)?




Please provide a summary description of project activities.




Please provide expected outputs and outcomes (what will change as result of the proposed activities) of
the project.

                                                     10
What are the mechanisms to ensure sustainability and the follow up activities?




    C. BUDGET
Please provide the estimated budget of the project.

      Project component             Expenditure category (choose one)            Amount (USD)
                                       Consultants/Training/Goods




                                                                   Total




                                                  11
    ANNEX 2: TFSCB GRANT FUNDING REQUEST (GFR)
    TFSCB Brief GFR Guidance
    1) The Operations Portal system’s Roadmap provides guidance on the process of creating a GFR. System
        related questions should be addressed to eTF Query at x38510.
    2) The TTL needs to provide necessary information in the GFR in the Operations Portal. (Budget table
        and other information as specified as well as a letter of request from the recipient.)
    3) If the Bank execution is proposed for recipient activities please make sure to attach a request letter
        from the recipient and provide necessary justification.
    4) Please provide the Project ID before submission (a new Project ID may need to be created). (Project ID
        needs to be cleared before the GFR is cleared)
    5) Please note that it is necessary for the TTL to obtain concurrence for the request from either a Sector
        Director or the Country Director before submission.
    6) Please refer to the below template regarding the information that is requested in the GFR in the
        Operations Portal. (Please note that GFR needs to be submitted in the system by the deadline. The
        template below is just for your reference.) Please specify project components such as proposed activities
        with costing, and expected outputs and outcomes etc. under the summary section.
        TFSCB Required GFR attachments TFSCB website

Basic Information

 Grant Name                            TTL Name                              GFR ID


 Execution
 Bank Executed / Recipient Executed
 * Will the bank execute the activity on behalf of the recipient?
  Yes / No
 If Yes, Please contact legal for guidance.
 * Justification :

 Grant Type


 Activity Type


 Project Financing (USD)
 Planned (from AUS) Trust Fund Financing:                 Total Actual Grant To Date:


 Project                               Source                                Amount in USD
                                       Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity
                                       Building

 Program                     Window                       GFR ID                        Amount in USD
 TFSCB                       0000003663


                                                         12
 Funding Window                        Grant Currency/Amount                    USD Equivalent
 TRUST FUND FOR STATISTICAL
 CAPACITY BUILDING - III
 ( 0000003663)

 Estimated Grant Start Date            Estimated Grant Closing Date             Implemented By (Agency)




Additional Information

 Sent to Donor for Approval             Approved by Donor                         TF Usage


 Trustee Account                                                 Window Account
 Multi Donor Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building        TRUST FUND FOR STATISTICAL CAPACITY BUILDING - III
 - III ( TF070561)                                               ( TF056802)

 Disbursing Account                                              Basis of Commitment (BOC)




Development Objective
What is the Development Objective (or main objective) of this grant? (Maximum 7,000 letters)
Note: Please ensure that the objectives in the GFR are clear, concise, complete and do not contain acronyms or
special characters. This is used in the monthly report to Executive Directors and in the Grant Reporting and
Monitoring.




Summary
Summary description of Grant Financed Activities (Maximum 7,000 letters)




                                                            13
TFSCB Specific

TFSCB Specific Questions
* Please explain the linkage to the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS) or the Statistical
Masterplan. (Maximum 1500 letters)

* Please explain the recipient's commitment and ownership. (Maximum 1500 letters)

* Please explain the sustainability of the project and provide supporting evidence. (Maximum 1500 letters)

* How is the Grant related to Bank policy and strategy (as defined in Country Assistance Strategy and/or other
relevant documents)? (Maximum 1500 letters)

* How is the Grant related to other projects financed by the Bank and other financiers/donors? (Maximum 1500
letters)

* Grant execution and implementation arrangements: How will the Grant be managed and supervised? If Bank
executed, please specify. (Maximum 1500 letters)

* Has the recipient received any other TFSCB grants? (Please answer the question as 'Yes' or 'No' )

* If you answered 'Yes' to the previous question, please list the projects and explain how they are related to the
proposed project. (Maximum 1500 letters)

* Please specify if any efforts have been done to find an alternative source of financing, i.e. instead of a Bank
administered Grant? (Maximum 1500 letters)



Disbursement and Financing

Disbursement Projection

 Estimated Grant Start         Grant Currency/Grant            End Disbursement Date       Grant Amount in USD
 Date                          Amount                                                      Equivalent




Disbursement Projection in USD

 From date                               To date                                 Amount




                                               Total Projected Disbursement
                                                       Amount not Allocated




                                                          14
Retroactive Financing

Retroactive financing required
No




Planned Transfer Schedule

 Transfer Date               Transfer Amount (USD)         USD Equivalent           Transfer Conditions




 Total Transfer Schedule
 Amount
 Remaining Amount

Comments on Transfer Conditions (Maximum 1,500 letters):




Allowed Expenses

Allowed Expenses

Grant Currency/Amount :

Is the allocation going to be based on Component?
Yes / No

 Expenditure Category                  Indicative Amount                    USD Equivalent
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
                        Total Amount




                                                      15
GRANT FINANCING PLAN [insert GFR # and country/project name]

Resource                                                                      Amount (USD)
TFSCB
Recipient
Other sources (please identify)

Total

BUDGET TABLE


                   Category (pick                                Unit                            Other
 Components                         Number        Duration                Cost      TFSCB                 Total
                       one)                                      rate                           Sources

                  Goods
1. Component
                  /services/
description
                  training
2.
…



Total cost

COST CATEGORIES

     Summary Costs by Category                                                    Total (USD)
     Goods (max 20 per cent of grant amount)
     Services
     Training
     Total Costs

TIMETABLE

     Activity                                                Number of months from grant approval
     1.
     2.
     ...

Note: These tables can also be submitted in Excel format.



                                                       16
ANNEX 3: TFSCB POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES
POST-APPROVAL PROCEDURES 3

LEGAL AGREEMENT AND ACTIVATION

The Procedures for Small Recipient-Executed Trust Fund Grants, effective April 2012 and last updated on March
19, 2015, apply to all TFSCB projects. Please also refer to the Guidance Note. Once the project proposal is
approved in the GFR, the TTL is advised to contact the relevant lawyer to determine whether the grant agreement
will be prepared by the TTL (using the small grants template) or by the lawyer. Regardless of who prepares the
grant agreement, the lawyer, the finance officer, and the TFSBC Administration Unit (iivins1@worldbank.org;
myamanaka@worldbank.org; mdinc@worldbank.org) should be copied on all exchanges related to the
preparation of the legal documents so as to enable them to intervene as needed. Under all circumstances, the final
draft grant agreement should be cleared by LEG prior to its signing.

Once a grant TF account number is generated, the TTL, in consultation with CTRLD staff, and if needed the assigned
FM and PR specialists, completes the Disbursement Letter using the standardized template for small grants. The
completed disbursement letter is sent to the Recipient together with the grant agreement as a single package.

The TTL prepares execution copies of the Grant Agreement and Disbursement Letter and arranges for signature by
the Bank country director (or, for global grants, the relevant Network/Sector director) and the recipient. Unless
there are additional conditions of effectiveness, including the recipient’s requirements for parliamentary approval
or ratification, for example, the Grant Agreement becomes effective once it is countersigned by the recipient. The
Grant Agreement and the Disbursement Letter are signed in two originals, one for the Bank and one for the
Recipient. The TTL obtains the original hard copy of the countersigned Grant Agreement and sends it along with
the original signed Disbursement Letter to Official Documents in LEG, with an official transmittal memorandum
based on a template provided by LEG. In addition, the TTL provides a pdf file of the countersigned Grant
Agreement and Disbursement Letter to LEG, TACT, and CTRLD.

Once a grant becomes effective, the recipient's authorized representative must provide the original specimen
signatures of the recipient's authorized signatories for withdrawal applications. The original specimen signatures
letter must be filed in Official Documents, normally done by LEG, before disbursements can be made. The TTL also
provides a pdf file of the specimen signatures letter to LEG, CTRLD and TACT.

TTLs should keep in mind that if there is no project activity within six months after the approval of the proposal,
the IMC will review the situation and may decide to cancel the grant.


IMPLEMENTATION AND SUPERVISION

Once activated, the TTLs will be responsible for supervising the activities of this project. Please note that
implementing agencies are required to follow standard World Bank guidelines and procedures regarding
procurement, disbursement and accounting matters.


  3
   For more information on the post approval process, please refer to the Trust Fund Handbook as well as the Bank Procedure
  and Guidance Note for Small Recipient-Executed Trust Fund Grants.


                                                           17
The TTL will be requested and must submit a Progress Report via the Grant Reporting and Monitoring (GRM)
system twice a year. TTLs will be informed by a system generated email when the report is due.

TRUST FUND TTL HANDOVER AND TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITY

Whenever there is a change in the trust fund management, all TTL’s need to fill out the following two documents
and file them in WB Docs under the relevant trust fund number: (i) Trust fund transfer of responsibility and
handover note (see Annex 4 Trust Fund Transfer of Responsibility for a template); and (ii) Interim letter of
               4
representation .

CLOSING

The TTL initiates action for closure when the activities financed by the TF are completed. For recipient-executed
trust funds, after the Loan Department completes disbursements and advises the TTL of the account‘s final status,
the TTL advises the recipient of the final disbursement position, and the cancellation of any balance. This notice is
cleared with copies to LEG and the Loan Department, and copied to the relevant program manager. As soon as
CTRDM (formerly LOADM) receives a copy of the final signed notice, CTRDM cancels any unused funds after which
CTR (formerly ACT) finalizes closure of the trust fund and ensures that the unused funds are disposed of in
accordance with the Administration and Grant Agreements. The TTL advises the Recipient of cancellation actions
via the closing/cancellation notice. CTR (formerly ACT) arranges for any external financial statement audit required
under the Administration Agreement(s).

EXTENSION OF CLOSING DATE AND END-DISBURSING DATE

The grant closing date may be extended if (i) the project objectives continue to be achievable, (ii) the performance
of the borrower and other project implementing agencies is satisfactory, and (iii) the recipient has prepared a
                    5
specific action plan acceptable to the Bank to complete the project, and after consultation with the TF Program
manager and/or TF donors (for stand-alone TFs) as needed. An extension may be approved for selected
disbursements covering only part of a project to permit (a) implementation of high priority contracts; or (b)
provision for retention payments, when the conditions for release are met after the closing date. Normally, an
extension is granted for a maximum of one year with longer extensions allowed only when the recipient requires a
firm commitment for continued Bank financing. The TTLs should also consult the applicable OP/BPs for specific
details on exceptions to extension of closing dates.

If the GRM is not up-to-date any request for an extension and/or allocation of funds will not be granted.




  4
   For more information on letter of representation (LoR), please visit the Partnership and Trust Fund Portal at
  http://go.worldbank.org/D9BVJLU6F0.

  5
   TTL revises the implementation schedule and agrees with the recipient on a written action plan that covers (a) the
  additional time needed to complete project implementation and disbursements, (b) any actions the recipient and/or project
  implementation agencies need to take to meet the revised closing date, (c) the actions required to achieve compliance with
  any loan covenants that have not been fully met, and (d) the monitorable performance indicators that will be used to
  determine compliance with this action plan.


                                                              18
RETROACTIVE EXTENSION

Retroactive extension of closing and end-disbursement dates is always an exception. Once the date elapses and
retroactive extensions are required:

For Bank-executed trust funds, provided the proposed extension is within the boundaries of the trustee/Main
level, the Program Manager may approve the retroactive extension.

For recipient-executed trust funds (including grants which are executed by the Bank on behalf of the recipient),
TTLs should consult their Regional or departmental quality or policy unit or OPCS Advisory Services, before
formally processing requests for retroactive extensions of closing dates. The authority to approve retroactive
extensions of closing dates for grants rests with the Vice Presidents of Regions or departments that manage such
grants.




                                                       19
             ANNEX 4: TRUST FUND TRANSFER OF RESPONSIBILITY


  THE WORLD BANK/IFC/M.I.G.A.

  OFFICE MEMORANDUM
     DATE:   mm/dd/yyyy
       TO:   Messrs/Mmes.
    FROM:
EXTENSION:
  SUBJECT:   Trust Fund Transfer of Responsibility and Hand-over Notes


             This is to confirm that as of mm/dd/yyyy, I am transferring the TF management responsibility of the following Trust
             Fund:

             TF Number              TF Name

             TF------

             Attached is a copy of the financial statement of the trust fund. This statement provides the new TTL with an
             assurance of the validity of the status of commitments and disbursements or expenses as of the date when she/he
             takes on the assignment.

             Furthermore, I confirm that I have briefed the person to whom responsibility is to be transferred and have given
             her/him all the necessary documentation, such as the legal agreement and/or proposal or request for the trust
             fund activity, outputs and any special guidelines that may apply to the above trust funds.

             Signature: _________________________

             Name: ____________________________

             Date: _____________________________

             ------------------------------------------------------------------



             For the New TF TTL:

             I confirm that I have been briefed by ------------------------------------------ and have reviewed the relevant TF
             documentation. I fully understand my fiduciary obligations in managing the abovementioned trust fund.

             Signature: _________________________

             Name: ____________________________

             Date: _____________________________




                                                                                  20
