                                                     97273




                 Approach Paper:
Program for Results (PforR)—IEG Process Evaluation




                                                May 21, 2015
Table of Contents


Background and Context                                               1

Purpose, Objectives, and Audience                                    7

Evaluation Questions and Coverage/Scope                              8

Evaluation Design and Evaluability Assessment                        11

Quality Assurance Process                                            13

Expected Outputs and Dissemination                                   14

Annex 1: References                                                  15

Annex 2: Evaluation Design Matrix                                    16

Annex 3: Methodology Note for Review of the Bank’s PforR Portfolio   18

Annex 4: Outline of Evaluation Report                                26

Attachment 1: Management Comments                                    27
                                  Approach Paper
                Program for Results (PforR) – IEG Process Evaluation


                                          May 21, 2015

Background and Context
1.      The PforR Instrument. The Bank introduced three years ago a new instrument –
Program for Results (PforR) – as per the Board paper of December 29, 2011.1 As
foreseen in the Board paper, World Bank Management has now provided a review of
the first two years of operation (document dated March 17, 2015).2 This review assessed
the early experience with the design and implementation of PforR operations and the
challenges faced by borrowers, development partners, and Bank staff. Board members
have requested an early IEG evaluation, and this was reiterated in the CODE discussion
of the two-year review on October 24, 2014 and the Board discussion on April 9, 2015.
This process evaluation will respond to that request.

2.     The PforR instrument is intended to provide a new dimension to Bank
operational support. With PforR , the Bank now has three complementary financing
instruments: project support through investment project financing (IPF), policy and
institutional support through development policy financing (DPF), and program
support through PforR. PforRs will support the implementation of government
programs, using the government’s own fiduciary, environmental and social safeguard
systems. Bank management expects this new instrument to be central to delivering the
Bank priorities around results, scaling up in poorer countries, and strengthening
country systems.

3.     Management’s Two-Year Review. The review addressed the initial experience
of PforR operations from the management perspective. It summarized the Bank’s
experience, drawing on a literature and desk review organized thematically and with
participation of task teams and managers who had worked on the instrument, internal
and external surveys, structured interviews with government officials and senior Bank
managers, and consultations with key stakeholders.




1A New Instrument to Advance Development Effectiveness: Program-for-Results Financing. December
29, 2011, OPCS, Washington, DC: World Bank.
2   Program-for-Results: Two-Year Review, March 17, 2015, OPCS, Washington, DC: World Bank.


                                                1 
4.     The two-year review concludes that the PforR instrument has been successfully
rolled out across a broad range of countries and sectors, policy requirements have been
met, with implementation broadly on track for all but one of the approved operations.
On this basis the paper finds that no major changes in the design of the instrument
appear to be necessary, but identifies some adjustments and areas for improvement. In
this regard the report recommends that the five percent cap on PforR commitments (as
a percentage of total Bank commitments) should be increased to 15 percent, although
the volume of approved operations has not yet reached the five percent level, and that
limited exceptions should be permitted to the procurement exclusions. The paper also
suggests other editorial and technical changes to OP 9.00, the Anti-Corruption
Guidelines and BP 9.00.

5.      The planned IEG evaluation of the PforR instrument will provide an
independent assessment of the early experience with the PforR instrument. It will make
use of the two-year review, but go beyond it in several respects, most importantly
through a careful desk review of all approved PforR projects supplemented by selected
field reviews.

6.     The evaluation will follow the OECD-DAC description of a program-based
approach that has also been used in the Board paper: “…a way of engaging in
development cooperation based on the principle of coordinated support for a locally
owned program of development. It includes four elements: leadership by the host
country organization; a single program and budget framework; donor coordination
and harmonization of procedures; and efforts to increase the use of local procedures
over time with regard to program design and implementation, financial management,
and monitoring and evaluation.”

7.     Prior to the introduction of the PforRs, the Bank was supporting government
programs in a number of ways, primarily through programmatic-type investment
lending operations such as sector-wide approaches, conditional cash transfers, output-
based aid, results-based financing in health, and operations under the Education for
All-Fast Track Initiative (now Global Partnership for Education). Annex A of the 2011
Board paper discussed the experiences of the Bank and other development partners
with these other types of operations, finding that the numbers of program-based
approaches had been increasing in response to a stronger focus on results and to
demand from clients. While the Bank’s programmatic investment lending operations
have not been coded separately, management samples indicated that such operations
had performed as well as the overall lending portfolio. The Board paper also reported
findings from development partners that performance-based and program-based
financing can incentivize progress on results, but that flexibility in instrument design is
important. Also, keeping project/program designs as simple as possible improves


                                             2
operational focus and the ease of implementation. IEG has used this material, and in
particular the issues identified by Bank management, as one input in designing the
issues and questions for the PforR evaluation.

8.       The PforR operations have the following key features:

        They will finance and support borrowers’ programs, which can be ongoing or
         new, sectoral or sub-sectoral, national or subnational, as well as community
         development programs.
        They will disburse upon achievement of program results, as determined by the
         achievement of monitorable and verifiable indicators rather than by inputs.
         Advances are allowed up to 25 percent of outstanding commitments. Together
         with funds from other sources, Bank disbursements will finance a borrower’s
         expenditure program rather than being linked to individual transactions.
        The operations will thus provide support for the use of a government’s own
         systems to implement the program, including for financing plan, procurement,
         anti-corruption, and environmental and social standards.
        They will provide assurance that Bank financing is used appropriately and that
         the environmental and social impacts of the programs are adequately
         addressed. The Bank will to this end assess a program’s fiduciary,
         environmental and social management systems, and agree as necessary with a
         borrower on any additional measures to provide assurance that potential
         impacts to the environment and affected people are adequately addressed.
        The operations will focus on strengthening the institutional capacity needed
         for programs to achieve their desired results, thereby enhancing development
         impact and sustainability. The strengthening of capacity to implement a
         program will be a priority area for both preparation and implementation
         support.
        In addition, the Board paper also sets out the expectation that PforRs would
         enhance the Bank’s ability to partner with other development organizations by
         pooling resources and focusing directly on capacity building and institutional
         strengthening.
        Finally, the Board paper states that PforRs will support improvements in
         governance and transparency by making program information publicly available
         and monitoring the achievement of results, including through enhancing the role
         of beneficiaries and civil society organizations.

9.      As of mid-May 2015, the Board had approved 25 PforR operations, providing
$4.6 billion of Bank financing to support a total of $11.7 billion in government programs
(Table 1 and 2). The total volume of approved operations at the end of the PforR’s initial
two years after approval was $1.8 billion or 2.6 percent of total IBRD/IDA
commitments over that period. Since inception, there has been a steady increase in the


                                             3 
share of PforR commitments from $0.4 billion in FY12 (1.1 percent) to $1.7 billion in
FY14 (4.2 percent) 3. In addition, as of May 19, 2015, nineteen operations are at an early
stage of preparation (i.e., have completed the concept stage), totaling $4.9 billion in
Bank financing.

Table 1. IBRD/IDA Lending, Total and for PforR Operations, FY12 to FY15 (US$ billion)
Commitments                                                             FY12        FY13         FY14          FY15 estimates
PforR - IBRD lending                                                     0.3         0.1          0.5               0.90
PforR - IDA lending                                                      0.1         0.7         1.2               1.27
Total PforR - IBRD/IDA lending                                           0.4         0.8         1.7               2.17*
IBRD lending                                                             20.6       15.2         18.6               20.4
IDA lending                                                              15.1       16.3         22.2               16.6
Total IBRD/IDA lending                                                   35.6       31.5         40.8               37.0
Source: Program-for-Results: Two-Year Review (March 18, 2015) and Business Intelligence (May 17, 2015).
* As of May 15, 2015 a total of $1.7 billion PforR projects have been approved for FY15. Among them $900 million are for IBRD
countries and $822 million for IDA countries.


10.    All regions have at least two approved PforR operations; the Africa region leads
the way, with ten operations (Figure 1). PforR operations cover most of the key sectors
in which the Bank traditionally provides financing. In terms of global practices, health,
nutrition and population; social, urban, and rural; and finance and markets are the
leading practices (Figure 2).

    Figure 1. PforR Portfolio by Region (by amount as of May 15, 2015)
              50%          44%
              45%
              40%
              35%
              30%                                                                          26%
              25%
              20%
              15%                       10%                              9%
              10%                                                                                        7%
               5%                                        3%
               0%
                           AFR          EAP              ECA             LCR               MNA           SAR



    Source: Business Intelligence




3   Program-for-Results: Two-Year Review, March 17, 2015, OPCS, Washington, DC: World Bank.


                                                               4
11.     Conceptual Aspects of the Evaluation. This will be a real time process
evaluation of an instrument for which there are as yet no completed operations and
thus no available IEG-validated data on final outcomes, and only partial data on
disbursements, results and outputs. Through a review of the projects approved by end-
FY15 the evaluation will assess project designs and – as possible – the early
implementation experiences against the stated expectations (in the 2011 Board paper)
and in particular the key issues highlighted in CODE and Board discussions:
institutional capacity building, expected results, management of fiduciary risks,
environmental and social aspects, and eventual evaluability.4 On this basis, the overall
additionality so far of this instrument for the Bank and its borrowers will be compared
to that of the other Bank lending instruments.

    Figure 2. PforR Portfolio by Global Practice (by amount as of May 15, 2015)

           40%                                                                    37%
           35%
           30%
           25%
                                                             18%
           20%
           15%                              11%
           10%                                                                               7%                   8%
                                                   6%                   5%
            5%        2%        3%                                                                      3%
            0%




    Source: Source: Business Intelligence




4As per the 2011 Board paper, all individual operations will in due course (separately from the present study) be evaluated upon
completion. This self-evaluation by Bank teams (to be followed as usual by IEG validations and selective Project Performance
Assessment Reports) will at completion stage analyze the results of each operation as well as efforts to achieve institutional
capacity building (building on the various assessments and their outcomes). The self-evaluation will also look at the
performance of the Bank and the borrower in carrying out their respective roles.




                                                               5 
               Table 2. Summary of Approved PforR Operations (as of May 15, 2015 and US$ million)

                                                                                                                           Total      Assoc
                                                          Board                            IDA/      Bank      Other
   Country                Program name                               Global Practice                                     Program       gov.
                                                         approval                         IBRD    financing   donors
                                                                                                                           cost      program
             Revenue Mobilization Program for
Bangladesh                                                5/9/14       Governance         IDA        60          0          73          73
             Results: VAT Improvement Program
             Strengthening Service Delivery for
             Growth, Poverty Reduction and                              Trade &
Brazil                                                   11/21/13                         IBRD      315          0         416         477
             Environmental Sustainability in the State               Competitiveness
             of Ceará
             Health System Quality and Efficiency                   Health, Nutrition &
Croatia                                                   5/8/14                          IBRD      103          0         248         409
             Improvement Program                                        Population
Egypt        Inclusive Housing Finance Program            5/5/15    Finance & Markets     IBRD      500          0        1,982       1,482
             Health Millennium Development Goals                    Health, Nutrition &
Ethiopia                                                 2/28/13                          IDA       100         556        676         4610
             Program                                                    Population
             Local Government Development II                          Social, Urban,
Ethiopia                                                  5/2/14                          IDA       380          0         557         557
             Program                                                Rural & Resilience
             Third Maharashtra Rural Water Supply
India                                                    3/12/14            Water         IDA       165          0         235         2100
             and Sanitation Program
                                                                    Social Protection &
Kenya        National Integrated Safety Net Program      7/23/13                          IDA       250         261        952         952
                                                                           Labor
             Oaxaca WSS Sector Modernization                          Social, Urban,
Mexico                                                    6/6/14                          IBRD       45          0         93.5        800
             Program                                                Rural & Resilience
                                                                    Health, Nutrition &
Moldova      Health Transformation Program               5/22/14                          IDA       28.7         0         114        1,964
                                                                        Population
             National Initiative for Human                            Social, Urban,
Morocco                                                  6/28/12                          IBRD      300          0         1115        2100
             Development (INDH) Phase II                            Rural & Resilience
                                                                    Health, Nutrition &
Morocco      Improving Primary Health in Rural Areas     4/24/15                          IBRD      100         111       226.2        15.2
                                                                        Population
             Public Financial Management for Results
Mozambique                                               6/24/14       Governance         IDA        50          0        130.6       287.6
             Program
             Results-Based Bridges Improvement
Nepal                                                    6/28/12     Transport & ICT      IDA        60          0         148        1,250
             Program
             Program to Support Saving One Million                  Health, Nutrition &
Nigeria                                                  4/23/15                          IDA       500          0         1052        552
             Lives                                                     Population
             Punjab Governance Reforms for Service
Pakistan                                                 11/14/13      Governance         IDA        50          0          77         407
             Delivery
             Transformation of Agriculture Sector
Rwanda                                                   10/31/14       Agriculture       IDA       100         800        1200        1200
             Program
Rwanda       Public Sector Governance Program            10/31/14      Governance         IDA       100         30         172         250
                                                                      Social, Urban,
Tanzania     Urban Local Government Strengthening        10/23/12                         IDA       255          0         255         620
                                                                    Rural & Resilience
Tanzania     Big Results in Education                    7/10/14        Education         IDA       122         130        416         416
             Urban Development and Local                              Social, Urban,
Tunisia                                                  7/24/14                          IBRD      300          0         363         751
             Governance Program                                     Rural & Resilience
             Support to Municipal Infrastructure                      Social, Urban,
Uganda                                                   3/28/13                          IDA       150          0         160         341
             Development                                            Rural & Resilience
Uruguay      Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance         11/13/12    Transport & ICT      IBRD       66        160.5       510         1127
             Results-Based Rural Water Supply and
Vietnam                                                  11/1/12            Water         IDA       200          0         260        1,313
             Sanitation
                                                                     Social, Urban,
Vietnam      Northern Mountains Urban Program             6/5/14                          IDA       250          0         300         300
                                                                    Rural & Resilience
                                              Total                                               4,549.70    2,048.50   11,731.30   24,353.80




                                                                        6
12.    Links to Previous Evaluations and Existing Literature. The first PforR projects
were approved in the second half of FY12, so for this evaluation there will be no
completed projects, and therefore no IEG ICRRs or PPARs. Other evaluation links will
be very modest – there have been no previous evaluations on this instrument and only
modest IEG evaluative material is available pertaining to other programmatic
instruments. However, as background the evaluation will draw on any identified
project validations/evaluations for other programmatic investment projects to the
extent that these might indicate similarities of some issues, including in the health
sector.5 The only ongoing IEG evaluation that could be of some relevance for the PforR
evaluation would be the Systematic Country Diagnostic and Country Partnership
Framework Process Evaluation (SCD/CPF) (a concurrent process evaluation addressing
the new World Bank Group approach to country engagement).

13.      IEG will seek to make use of possible synergies with other ongoing evaluations.
E.g., if there should be any field visits (meetings with governments or development
partners) under the parallel SCD/CPF evaluation, we would arrange for appropriate
questions to be asked also regarding PforR. Such synergies will also be sought for
country visits under other IEG activities.

Purpose, Objectives, and Audience
14.     Purpose: This evaluation is being undertaken at the request of the Board, and
will provide early feedback on how the PforR instrument is working and its adherence
to the stated objectives and intentions in the Board paper. On this basis it will identify
any progress achieved, opportunities and issues, and will present lessons and
recommendations relevant for the use and possible improvements of this instrument. It
will also help lay the foundation for subsequent evaluations of individual operations
upon their completion. Since this is a new and untested instrument, the evaluation will
also pay significant attention to possible risks – in particular the fiduciary,
environmental and social risks that have been in the forefront during discussions so far.

15.   Objectives: PforR is a new lending product. It is therefore expected that this
evaluation will provide the Board, management, and staff with an assessment, findings
and recommendations that will be useful to underpin any future decisions on the PforR

5 IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2009. Do Health Sector-Wide Approaches Achieve Results? Emerging Evidence and
Lessons From Six Countries. IEG Working Paper 2009/4. Washington, DC: World Bank.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group. 2011. “Results-Based Health Programs in Argentina and Brazil: Project Performance
Assessment Report.” Report No. 62571. Washington, DC: World Bank.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2014. World Bank Group Support to Health Financing. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                           7 
instrument including if relevant improving or developing the instrument. The IEG
report will also address key questions previously raised in CODE and Board
discussions.

16.     Audience: Specific audiences are the Board, which is guiding the rollout of this
new instrument, Bank senior management, which is implementing the instrument, and
client country stakeholders, who would stand to benefit from the appropriate use of the
instrument. The evaluation is also expected to be helpful to inform future Board
decisions on the mainstreaming of this instrument. In addition, the evaluation should
be useful for program task teams engaged in the identification, preparation, and
supervision of PforR operations.

Evaluation Questions and Coverage/Scope
17.    The key evaluation questions are designed to explore the extent to which the
features of this new instrument are delivering value to clients. These features include
support for government programs, capacity building, results-based disbursements,
employment of the country systems used for the program, and assurances for
appropriate resource use, as detailed in para 8 above. The evaluation questions will
necessarily cut across the areas of program emphasis. For example, the assessment of
institutional capacity strengthening will be informed by that of the program action
plans, results frameworks, monitoring and evaluation and disbursement linked
indicators (DLIs) (all under Question 1), that of the quality of technical assessments
(under Question 2), and that of risk assessments (under Question 3).

18.    Key Evaluation Questions:

  Question 1: What has been the overall experience to date with the design,
  preparation and early implementation of PforR operations and the opportunities and
  challenges in that regard?

          Relevance of PforR operations to Bank Group country programs.
          Quality, strength, relevance and use of program action plans in relation to
           the underlying assessments.
          Quality, relevance and use of DLIs as incentives for strengthening the
           results orientation of institutions and country programs.

  Question 2: What is the quality of the program assessments, including the
  technical, fiduciary systems, and environmental and social assessments?

          Quality of fiduciary systems assessments including identification of key
           financial and procurement issues.


                                           8
          Quality of environmental and social assessments including identification of
           key issues.
          Quality of technical assessments including their coverage of governance
           issues.
          Quality and use of the assessment of institutional capacity.
          Comparison on all of these aspects between PforRs and other recent
           projects in the same sector and country.

  Question 3: How effective has the PforR instrument (including policies, procedures,
  guidelines and their application) been in identifying, assessing and mitigating critical
  risks?

          Identification and responsiveness to fiduciary risks.
          Identification and responsiveness to social and environmental risks.
          Identification and responsiveness to technical and other program risks
           including resource availability.
          Identification and responsiveness to governance risks.
          Identification and responsiveness to political and partnership risks.
          Appropriateness and use of the integrated risk rating.

   Question 4: To what extent is the PforR instrument being used to strengthen
   national systems for financial management, procurement, environmental and social
   safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation?

          How does the use of country systems in PforRs compare with other
           operations in each country?
          To what extent are PforRs ringfenced, and to what extent do they use the
           same systems as the broader program being supported?
          Has the Bank’s analytical work provided an adequate understanding of the
           extent to which the level of country system capacities could affect the
           programs’ implementation?
          How adequate are the provisions for building the programs’ institutional
           capacity, particularly with respect to low income countries with weaker
           systems?

19.    Based on the findings, and recognizing the limitations posed by the early stage of
the PforR operations, the evaluation will seek as far as possible to draw some overall
conclusions regarding:


          How successfully is the instrument achieving so far the objectives and
           expectations in the 2011 Board document including focus on institutional


                                            9 
           capacity building, progress towards results, managing fiduciary risks,
           incentives for learning and innovation?
          What are the key parameters for appropriate, successful PforR operations?
          What are the critical risks and how have these been managed so far?
          How and why has the demand for PforRs developed in IBRD compared
           with IDA countries?
          What are the issues for the evaluability of PforR operations (monitoring of
           results etc.)?
          How do PforR operations compare with earlier projects in the same
           countries and sectors, including investment project financing (IPF) using
           DLIs?
          How does the existence of the PforR instrument provide additionality to
           the Bank’s set of instruments for clients and for the Bank, compared to the
           other existing lending instruments?

20.     Scope. The newness of the program and its short implementation experience set
clear limitations for the evaluation. As of mid-May, 2015, twenty-five projects had been
approved by the Board, and 20 of these operations are now effective. Few projects will
have any significant results during the evaluation period, and none is likely to be
closed. This evaluation will therefore not be able to discuss final results, but will
describe and assess the objectives, structures, risks identified and addressed during
preparation, and (where possible) early performance of the approved PforR projects –
also paying attention to differences in the structure and operational modalities with
respect to the Bank’s other instruments.

21.     It is expected that the PforR evaluation report will include a substantial amount
of descriptions of approaches, processes and practicalities, given the newness and
unfamiliarity of the instrument. The report will also provide a systematic presentation
of the key overlaps with and differences from other Bank instruments, for a better
understanding of the possible additionality that this instrument may provide to Bank
clients and to the Bank, and as an input for the preparation of further guidance material.

22.     The evaluation will also devote special attention to the quality, relevance and use
of the results framework and DLIs, including the verification protocols. It will assess the
extent to which the programs’ monitoring indicators have been integrated into a logical
results chain and appropriately designed and specified to incentivize the improvement
of institutional performance and the achievement of the desired results. To the extent
possible, given the limited implementation experience with PforRs, where there are
predecessor operations (same country, sector and direction of objectives), the evaluation
will also seek to identify strengths and risks of the PforR instrument and how it might
complement other instruments and the extent to which the DLIs have been effective in



                                            10
strengthening the programs’ results orientation, performance and outcomes. Finally,
the evaluation will also review the extent to which PforRs are helping build a national
system for the monitoring of results.

23.     Evaluation Criteria: The evaluation will (as far as possible given the limitations)
assess relevance, efficacy and effectiveness of this new instrument, and its contribution
to a stronger Bank results focus, against the expectations and criteria of the 2011 Board
document.

24.    Assessing Performance: This is an evaluation of a specific instrument, based
primarily on a real-time assessment of ongoing PforR operations. Accordingly, the
evaluation will not rate Bank or borrower performance – neither at the aggregate nor at
the level of the individual operations – although it will take into consideration the
ratings in Implementation Status and Results Reports of ongoing PforR operations.

Evaluation Design and Evaluability Assessment
25.       Analytical Framework:      The evaluation will consist of the following activities:

         Systematic assessment of approved PforR projects. This is currently expected
          to cover all projects approved by end FY15 – such a 100 percent sample is
          possible and desirable because of the small number of projects. The assessment
          will be undertaken on a desk review basis by the evaluation team based on a
          standardized approach to focus clearly on the new aspects of PforR projects and
          their implications (see Attachment 3). The evaluation team will meet with key
          team members, and create a data base to facilitate analysis of DLIs and their
          classification (process, outputs, interim results and outcomes).
         Field visits will be carried out, tentatively to six countries with PforR
          operations approved in FY2012-14. Their main purpose will be to seek the
          views of government counterparts and relevant other donors on the various
          aspects of their PforRs, what works well or not so well, and how they see
          advantages and disadvantages compared to other Bank lending instruments.
          The visits will also serve as a cross-check of the desk-based assessments. While
          additional field visits would have been useful, we believe that visits to six
          countries – one per region - will give an acceptable level of cross-checking of
          the findings from the desk reviews, as we plan to select the country visits
          systematically to cover a variety of regions, sectors, and types of program
          issues. To the extent possible, the visits will also seek findings from the early
          implementation experience.
         Calculation of budgetary costs of PforR operations, based on available cost
          data.



                                              11 
      Systematic consultations within the Bank, including with focus on experiences
       with PforR projects not yet approved or dropped.
      Literature survey of relevant material concerning the results focus for
       development activities, the use of country systems, and political economy
       issues. This will include a review of literature from/about relevant program
       initiatives of other multilaterals (in particular IDB and ADB) and leading
       bilateral aid agencies (including DfID and the Millennium Challenge
       Corporation).
      Brief Overview of other relevant Bank approaches to support programs,
       results-focus and use of country systems. This will draw primarily on any
       available IEG evaluative material and relevant Bank documents.

26.    Answering the Questions: The bulk of the evaluation work will consist of the
systematic assessment of approved projects together with the field visits – and the
aggregation of the project-level findings for this process evaluation. This will provide
the answers to the four main evaluation questions (para 18 above). It will also validate
the findings of the two-year review.

27.    Sampling Strategy: It is planned to review all of the operations approved by
end FY15 – at most 30 of which 25 had been approved by mid-May 2015. This review of
the universe of approved projects is possible because of the relatively small number of
approved operations under the review period – but the projects approved in CY15 may
be assessed using a simplified template (these projects would also not have an
implementation history at the time of review). The countries to be visited will be
selected to ensure a mix of countries (IBRD versus IDA) and regions (one visit per
region), with preference for countries with PforRs that have been effective for some
time, and for countries with more than one PforR. Brazil, Nepal, Morocco, Tanzania
and Vietnam are among the countries being considered. Any country with only PforRs
not yet effective would not be visited.

28.   Data Requirements: There will be no special data requirements for this
evaluation, since most of the inputs will come from the project reviews (primarily the
PADs and the underlying assessments, ISRs and aide memoires) together with
information collected in the field (views of governments, counterparts and development
partners), and from cost and processing data available in the Bank’s systems.

29.     Design Strength and Limitations: The evaluation will cover the universe of
approved projects in sufficient detail and depth. But as noted above, the evaluation
cannot assess final results since none will be available. The evaluation will be cautious
in trying to project final results from early indications, but may be able to provide some
indications from the assessment of project designs and early implementation. The



                                            12
absence of final results will inevitably make difficult any discussion of project
effectiveness, for which reason the focus of the evaluation will be on the design and
early implementation of the PforR projects.

Quality Assurance Process
30.    The evaluation will be overseen by Nick York, Director, IEGCC and Geeta Batra,
Manager, IEGCC. Peer reviewers are Alison Evans (Incoming Chief Commissioner of
the Independent Commission for Aid Impact, UK), Anis Dani (former IEG Lead
Evaluation Officer), Louise Fox (Woodrow Wilson International Center and Visiting
Professor at University of California at Berkeley, former World Bank staff member), and
Joanne Salop (former Vice President for OPCS). The critical skills required for this
evaluation include a deep understanding of lending instruments including the PforRs,
macro-economic and country knowledge, substantial prior operational and evaluation
experience, and in-depth knowledge on environmental and social impacts, fiduciary,
anti-corruption and governance policies. The highly experienced evaluation team
possesses all these skills.

31.     The team will be led by Ismail Arslan (extensive country, operational and
evaluation experience including as task team leader for several substantial IEG
evaluations). The core team includes Monika Huppi (focus on evaluation design;
extensive operational and evaluation experience with a broad range of instruments,
including first-hand knowledge of experience with instruments similar to PforRs in
another multilateral institution); Nils Fostvedt (focus on evaluation design and
preparation of the final report; extensive operational, country and evaluation
experience); Xue Li (focus on economic and portfolio analysis; advanced skills in
statistical methods and in data research and portfolio analysis); Albert Martinez (focus
on program assessments; broad experience in assessments of quality at entry and of
supervision, regional and sector portfolio reviews and economic and sector
assessments); Andres Liebenthal (focus on environmental and social aspects; extensive
operational and evaluation experience with environment, infrastructure, safeguards,
natural resource policies and projects, and economic and sector work); and Clay
Wescott (focus on fiduciary and anti-corruption aspects; wide-ranging experience in
public sector management, public financial management, capacity development,
governance and anti-corruption, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and project
management). The team would be supplemented by a procurement specialist on an as-
needed basis.




                                           13 
Expected Outputs and Dissemination
32.    The output will be in the form of a process evaluation report for CODE and the
Board. There will be separate write-ups on the individual project assessments that will
be shared directly with the relevant project teams for their information and comments.
The final evaluation report will be disclosed in the normal manner. The demand for
special internal or external dissemination will be assessed at a later stage.

Resources
33.    Timeline and budget. Work on project assessments has started based on an
assessment template (see Attachment 3) that has been prepared and tested. The project
assessments will be undertaken during the period up to October 2015 to have room for
the assessment of any projects approved in the first half of 2015. Six field visits are
planned between July and December 2015. The draft report will be shared with IEG
management for a one stop review meeting in March 2016 and finalization during
April-May 2016. The proposed budget is $750,000 (of which $ 257,000 in FY15)
including dissemination.




                                           14
Annex 1

References
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2009. Do Health Sector-Wide Approaches Achieve
       Results? Emerging Evidence and Lessons From Six Countries. IEG Working Paper
       2009/4. Washington, DC: World Bank.
____. 2011. Results-Based Health Programs in Argentina and Brazil: Project Performance
       Assessment Report. Report No. 62571. Washington, DC: World Bank.
____. 2014. World Bank Group Support to Health Financing. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank. 2011. A New Instrument to Advance Development Effectiveness: Program-for-
Results Financing. December 29, 2011, OPCS, Washington, DC: World Bank.
____. 2012. Program-for-Results Financing: Interim Guidance Notes to Staff on Assessment.
June 18, 2012, OPCS, Washington D.C. World Bank
____. 2014. Program-for-Results: Two-Year Review, March 17, 2015, OPCS, Washington,
DC: World Bank.




                                            15 
Annex 2

Evaluation Design Matrix
1.    Purpose: This evaluation will provide early feedback on how the new PforR
instrument is working and its adherence to the stated intentions in the 2011 Board
paper. The report will address the key questions previously raised in CODE and Board
discussions, such as regarding the fiduciary and environmental and social aspects.

                    Question                                                Data Sources
 Q1: What has overall been the experience to
 date with the design, preparation and early
 implementation of PforR operations and the
 opportunities and challenges in that regard?
 - Relevance of PforR operations to Bank                         PADs, country strategy documents
 Group country programs.
 - Quality, strength, relevance and use of                 Program action plans, PADs, technical, fiduciary
 program action plans in relation to the                    and environment/social assessments, ISRs and
 underlying assessments.                                      aide memoires, field visits and Bank staff
                                                                             interviews
 - Quality, relevance and use of DLIs as                     Program action plans, PADs, ISRs and aide
 incentives for strengthening the results                  memoires, field visits and Bank staff interviews
 orientation of institutions and country
 programs.
 Q2: What is the quality of the program
 assessments, including the technical, fiduciary,
 and environmental and social assessments?
 - Quality of fiduciary assessments including              Fiduciary assessments, ISRs and aide memoires,
 identification of key financial and procurement                field visits and Bank staff interviews
 issues.
 - Quality of environmental and social                     Environmental and social assessments, ISRs and
 assessments including identification of key                  aide memoires, field visits and Bank staff
 issues                                                                      interviews
 - Quality of technical assessments including              Technical assessments, ISRs and aide memoires,
 their coverage of governance issues                            field visits and Bank staff interviews
 -Quality and use of the assessment of                      Technical assessments, program action plans,
 institutional capacity.                                   PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
                                                                         Bank staff interviews
 - Comparison on all of these aspects between              PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
 PforRs and other recent projects in the same                            country case studies.
 sector and country.
 Q3: How effective has the PforR instrument
 (including policies, procedures, guidelines and
 their application) been in identifying, assessing
 and mitigating critical risks?



                                                     16 
- Identification and responsiveness to fiduciary        PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
risks                                                              Bank staff interviews
- Identification and responsiveness to social           PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
and environmental risks                                            Bank staff interviews
- Identification and responsiveness to technical        PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
and other program risks including resource                         Bank staff interviews
availability
- Identification and responsiveness to                  PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
governance risks                                                   Bank staff interviews
-Identification and responsiveness to political         PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
and partnership risks                                              Bank staff interviews
- Appropriateness and use of the integrated             PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
risk rating                                                        Bank staff interviews
Q4: To what extent is the PforR instrument
being used to strengthen national systems for
financial management, procurement,
environmental and social safeguards, and
monitoring and evaluation?
-How does the use of country systems in                 PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
PforRs compare with other operations in each                       Bank staff interviews
case study country?
-To what extent are PforRs ringfenced, and to           PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
what extent are they subject to mainstream                         Bank staff interviews
national systems?
-Has the Bank’s analytical work provided an             PADs, ISRs and aide memoires, field visits and
adequate understanding of the extent to which                      Bank staff interviews
the level of country system capacities could
affect the implementation of programs?
- How adequate are the provisions for building          PADs, desk reviews, field visits and interviews.
the programs’ institutional capacity,
particularly with respect to low income
countries with weaker systems




                                                   17
Annex 3

              Methodology Note for Review of the Bank’s PforR Portfolio

Guidance Questionnaire

1.      The design of the Guidance Questionnaire (template) is based on the 2011 Board
PforR Board Paper,6 BP/OP 9.0 Program-for-Results Financing, and the guidance to
staff.7 It also takes into account the findings and issues raised in the 2014 PforR two-
year review. The Guidance Questionnaire will enable panelists to systematically come
up with an overall assessment of the PforR programs with the following measures:

                 Likelihood of Achieving Development Objectives (Highly Likely, Likely,
                  Moderately Likely, Moderately Unlikely, Unlikely, Highly Unlikely); and
                 Integrated Risk Rating (High, Substantial, Medium, Low).

2.    In addition, the following key risk categories will be rated (Low, Medium,
Substantial, High):

                 Operating environment risks
                 Country risk (the report will identify which were the main factors
                  contributing to country risk, e.g. governance, macroeconomic, security etc.)
                 Stakeholder risk (e.g. vested interests)

3.       Program risks

                 Technical risk (program design and governance, institutional capacity,
                  sustainability, and M&E arrangements and capacity)
                 Fiduciary risk (program fiduciary system and performance monitoring,
                  including audit arrangements and capacity)
                 Environmental and social risk (potential environmental and social impacts
                  and ability of program systems to manage these)
                 Disbursement-linked Indicators risk (results framework, selection of DLIs,
                  and verification protocols)
                 Other risks (to be identified, if any, by reviewers)



6 World Bank. 2011. A New Instrument to Advance Development Effectiveness: Program-for-Results Financing. December 29,
2011, OPCS, Washington D.C. World Bank
7 World Bank. 2012. Program-for-Results Financing: Interim Guidance Notes to Staff on Assessment. June 18, 2012, OPCS,

Washington D.C. World Bank



                                                          18 
4.     The above ratings for Likelihood of Achieving Development Objectives and
various risks will be based on information available up to the time of the review and
will be informed by the a more detailed assessment of various program components
across the following dimensions, with governance as a cross-cutting theme:

          Strategic Relevance
          Technical Aspects
          Fiduciary and Fraud and Corruption Aspects
          Environment and Social Aspects
          Risk Assessment
          Program Implementation (for programs that are in the implementation stage)

5.    An important part of the program review is an assessment of the interplay
between the program and its operating environment, e.g., the program’s environment
and social systems vs. the national systems. The main dimensions or sections of the
Guidance Questionnaire are discussed below. The Guidance Questionnaire is attached
as Annex 1, and covers the following dimensions.

6.      Strategic Relevance. This dimension assesses the strategic relevance of the
program from different perspectives: government, Bank corporate and relevant GP
priorities. The case for government action or intervention is also examined in this
dimension. In addition, the program contribution to partnership coordination is also
assessed. Borrower ownership is also reviewed; for programs under implementation,
there is more evidence of the degree of Borrower ownership and commitment (see also
Box 1.3 of the PforR Guidance Notes for illustrative indicators for assessing Borrower
commitment) based on actual implementation experience. Finally, Bank value added
will be reviewed.

7.      Technical Aspects. This dimension assesses the technical soundness of the
program – its structure, implementation arrangements, results framework, monitoring
and evaluation framework, and capacity to implement and monitor the program. This
dimension also includes an assessment of: the economic evaluation of the program; the
quality of the DLIs and the associated verification protocols; the quality of the Program
Action Plan; and the appropriateness of the program conditionalities and the technical
risk rating. The main sources of information will be the Technical Assessment as well
as the actual implementation experience and ISRs for programs under implementation.

8.     Fiduciary and Fraud and Corruption Aspects. This dimension assesses the
fiduciary system including procurement, financial management, compliance with the
Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines (ACG), and capacity for implementation and



                                           19
monitoring. With respect the ACG, reviewers will use Bank Guidelines on Preventing
and Combatting Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing in February
2012, as well as Attachment 1 of the PforR Interim Guidance Notes. The reviewers will
also use actual implementation experience, where applicable, in assessing this
dimension.

9.     Environment and Social Aspects. This dimension assesses the program
arrangements for managing environment and social effects consistent with OP/BP 9.0.
Unlike in an ILF operation where the client bears full responsibility for managing all
environment and social consultations with stakeholders, for PforR, the Bank is
responsible for managing the consultation process for the program-specific
environment and social systems (see Attachment 4.4 of the PforR Guidance Notes). The
reviewers will also use actual implementation experience, where applicable, in
assessing this dimension.

10.     Risk Assessment. This dimension assesses the appropriateness of the integrated
risk rating and the ratings for various operating environment and program risks. In
addition, the impact on risk to DO of various fiduciary, environment and social
exclusions are assessed.

11.    Program Implementation. This dimension assesses the quality of program
implementation for PforR operations that are in the implementation stage. Reviewers
will use supervision documents, including ISRs, as main sources of information. In
assessing program implementation, the reviewers will identify the various factors
contributing to implementation issues, both program-related and those outside the
scope of the program.

12.    Ratings. The reviewers will use a six point rating scale (Highly Satisfactory,
Satisfactory, Moderately Satisfactory, Moderately Unsatisfactory, Unsatisfactory,
Highly Unsatisfactory) for the above dimensions. Risk ratings will follow the IEG scale
(Low, Medium, Substantial, High).

Panel of Reviewers

13.    Each PforR operation will be reviewed by a panel consisting of the following
areas of expertise: (i) the lead reviewer with expertise in the relevant GP area; and (ii)
one specialist to cover fiduciary aspects, including anti-corruption; (iii) one specialist to
cover environment and social aspects. Governance will be a cross-cutting area that will
have to be assessed by the reviewers.




                                             20 
14.    The lead reviewer will be responsible for the assessment of the operation with
the specialists providing inputs in their specific areas. The choice of the lead reviewer
for each operation will be dependent on the content of the operation. However, the
specialist reviewers will cover several operations to ensure consistency of the
assessments.

15.    An IEG staff/consultant will oversee the portfolio review, including quality
control of the individual assessments and consistency of basis for ratings. The IEG
staff/consultant will consolidate the individual PforR program assessments into a
report of findings that would include lessons learned and recommendations for
improving various aspects of the PforR instrument.

16.    The reviewers will have to be familiar with the PforR instrument, guidelines, and
issues, in addition to having extensive operational experience. Reviewers will be
provided with all relevant materials on the PforR instrument, including the PforR Board
reports, BP/OP 9.0 Program-for-Results Financing, Interim Guidance Notes to Staff on
Assessments, and Bank Guidelines On Preventing and Combatting Fraud and
Corruption in Projects.

Documentation

17.   An IEG staff assistant will provide the relevant documents for the portfolio
review. While most of these are in the Bank system, there may be need for getting in
touch with the task team for some documents, especially correspondence that may not
have been included in the document system. The main documents are the following:

             Background Documents
                   o Country Assistance Strategy (or similar instrument)
                   o Sector Strategy (or similar GP document if available)
                   o Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (for IDA countries)
                   o Relevant ESW (the staff assistant will generate the list of ESW during
                     the past five years and the reviewers will determine which outputs
                     are relevant, e.g., Public Expenditure Reviews)
                   o Operational documents for operations with links to the PforR
                     operations (the staff assistant will generate the list of Bank lending
                     operations during the past five years and the reviewers will
                     determine which operational documents are relevant)
                   o Other documents (e.g. evaluations) that the reviewers may find
                     relevant
             PforR Operation Document



                                            21
                  o Program Concept Note and supporting documents
                  o Project Information Document
                  o Management Decision Meeting minutes
                  o Program Appraisal Document
                  o Legal Agreements
                  o Negotiation Minutes
                  o Technical Assessment
                  o Fiduciary Systems Assessment
                  o Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
                  o Program Action Plan
                  o Implementation Support Plan
                  o ISRs
                  o Audit Reports
                  o Relevant Communications within Bank and between Bank and
                    Borrower

Interviews with Management, Staff, Borrower, Stakeholders, and Partners

18.     After a desk review and an initial assessment of the PforR program, the
reviewers will identify the information gaps and determine whether interviewing
specific persons is necessary, specifying the proposed agenda and questions. The
interview can take the form of emails, phone calls, face-to-face meetings, or short
questionnaires. A limited number of operational reviews will benefit from a country
visit by a PforR team. The task manager of the PforR evaluation will approve all
interviews.

Quality Assurance of PforR Program Assessments

19.   The IEG staff/consultant overseeing the portfolio review will be responsible for
the quality of the assessments. There will be a peer review of the individual
assessments; peer reviewers will be from the set of panelists used for the portfolio
review.




                                          22 
Project Name and Number
Lead Reviewer
Fiduciary Reviewer
E&S Reviewer


Table 1. PforR Review Guidance Questionnaire

 Summary Assessment                                 Comments   Rating
 Likelihood of Achieving DO
 Overall Program Risk
 Assessment Dimensions                              Comments   Rating
 1. Strategic Relevance
 2. Technical Aspects
 3. Fiduciary and Fraud and Corruption
 Aspects
 4. Environment and Social Aspects
 5. Risk Assessment
 6. Program Implementation
 7. Bank Performance at Entry
 8. Bank Performance during Supervision
                                                    Comments   Rating
 1. Strategic Relevance
 1.1 Program rationale
 1.2 Clarity, realism, and scope of program
 objectives
 1.3 Appropriateness of partnership
 arrangements with donors
 1.4 Borrower ownership
                                                    Comments   Rating
 2. Technical Aspects
 2.1 Appropriateness of program structure
 and implementation arrangements,
 including Borrower capacity

 2.2 Appropriateness of the program
 expenditure framework, including
 financial sustainability and funding
 predictability
 2.3 Quality of the economic evaluation of
 the program



                                               23
2.4. Quality of the results framework and
M&E arrangements, including capacity
2.5 Quality of the disbursement linked
indicators and verification protocols
2.6 Adequacy of Program Action Plan and
conditionalities
                                                  Comments   Rating
3. Fiduciary and Fraud and Corruption
Aspects
3.1 Adequacy of program procurement
system
3.2 Adequacy of program financial
management system
3.3 Adequacy of program-specific system
to handle issues relating to fraud and
corruption based on the Bank's Anti-
Corruption Guidelines
3.4 Adequacy of stakeholder involvement
in program implementation and oversight,
including verification of disbursement
linked indicators and establishment of a
complaint and grievance mechanism

3.5 Level of transparency in program
decision making processes and
performance reporting
3.6 Appropriateness of measures for
strengthening program's fiduciary system
and governance, including in the area of
anti-corruption

3.7 Appropriateness of exclusions
                                                  Comments   Rating
4. Environment and Social Aspects
4.1 Adequacy of program systems for
managing environmental and social effects
4.2 Appropriateness of measures for
improving program systems for managing
environmental and social effects
4.3 Appropriateness of exclusions
4.4 Adequacy of national systems for
managing and environmental and social
effects of government programs



                                            24 
                                                    Comments   Rating
5. Risk Assessment
5.1 Appropriateness of the program
integrated risk rating
5.2 Appropriateness of technical risk rating
5.3 Appropriateness of fiduciary risk rating
5.4 Appropriateness of environment and
social risk rating
5.5 Appropriateness of DLI risk
5.6 Appropriateness of other program
risk(s) if any
5.7 Appropriateness of country risk
5.8 Appropriateness of stakeholder risk
5.9 Appropriateness of risk mitigation
measures
5.10 Adequacy of assessment of impact on
risk to DO of fiduciary, environment, and
social exclusions, if applicable

                                                    Comments   Rating
6. Program Implementation
6.1 Quality of overall program
implementation
6.2 Quality of implementation of fiduciary
systems
6.3 Quality of implementation of
environment and social systems
6.4 Quality of implementation of Program
Action Plans
6.5 Quality of partnership engagement
during program implementation
6.6 Appropriateness of stakeholder
engagement and program transparency
during implementation
Notes:




                                               25
Annex 4

Outline of Evaluation Report
                             Outline of Evaluation Report

Executive Summary

Background and Evaluation Approach

Results-based lending before the PforRs – inside and outside the World Bank

Overview of Progress

       The PforR Portfolio – Status and Trends
       World Bank Engagements (relations to other lending instruments and country
        programs, relations to previous and parallel operations, packages of
        preparation and implementation support, resource requirements)

Experience with Key Features of PforR Operations

       Technical assessments
       Fiduciary assessments including procurement
       Environmental and social assessments
       Capacity building
       Results frameworks and DLIs
       Program Action Plans
       Partnerships
       World Bank additionality

Key Issues, Conclusions and Findings

Recommendations

Annexes to include:
    PforR portfolio
    Program analysis
    Summaries from country visits and partner consultations.




                                         26 
Attachment 1

Management Comments on IEG Approach Paper: Program for Results (PforR) – IEG Process
Evaluation

Management thanks the members of the Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE) and
the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) for the opportunity to contribute to CODE’s
discussion of the IEG Approach Paper Program for Results (PforR). In addition to direct
interactions with IEG, management would like to share the following points with the members
of the Committee on Development Effectiveness.

First, IEG’s process evaluation will add to our collective knowledge about how the PforR
instrument is working in practice, including the design and implementation of PforR operations
in a broad range of countries and sectors. It is almost a year since much of the analysis for the
PforR Two-Year Review was completed, which included desk reviews of each of the
dimensions of PforR, internal and external surveys, and structured interviews with government
officials and senior Bank managers. In this context and in the spirit of the adaptive learning
approach to PforR endorsed by CODE, management believes that further valuable lessons can
be provided through IEG’s process evaluation.

Second, management believes that it is important to be realistic with respect to the objectives
and expectations for the evaluation and to ensure that any objectives can be adequately
supported by evidence. As the approach paper notes, “This will be a real-time process
evaluation of an instrument for which there are, as yet, no completed operations and thus no
available IEG-validated data on final outcomes, and only partial data on disbursements, results
and outputs.” Indeed, there has been a steady increase in the number of PforR operations since
the inception of the instrument; all regions have now approved at least two operations, and
PforR operations cover most of the key sectors in which the Bank traditionally provides
financing. Nonetheless, as of early June 2015 there were still only 27 approved PforR
operations, and no PforR operation is expected to be completed before June 2016. In this
context, management believes that it is very important that the process evaluation is careful to
avoid coming to premature conclusions that cannot be supported by adequate evidence at this
stage, for example, with respect to the “key parameters for appropriate, successful PforR
operations” and PforR’s “additionality ….compared to other existing lending instruments”
(para 19 of the approach paper).

Finally, management notes the importance of grounding the evaluation in a thorough
understanding of the nature and dimensions of the PforR instrument. This is not easy,
especially given the newness of the instrument and the fact that relatively few people have
direct experience with it. During the PforR Two-Year Review, management received clear
feedback from a broad range of stakeholders, including in client countries, as well as from Bank
managers and staff, of the desire to learn from teams with direct PforR experience in order to
better understand the instrument. In these circumstances it is important that the IEG core team
has the opportunity for a full exchange of knowledge and perspectives with Bank staff and
counterparts in country who have worked directly on the instrument, and management stands
ready to work with IEG to facilitate such interactions.

                                                27
