The Socio-Economic Impacts of Ebola in Sierra Leone
          Results from a High Frequency Cell Phone Survey

                             Round 3

                           June 15, 2015
This note was prepared by Kristen Himelein (Senior Economist / Statistician, GPVDR), Mauro Testaverde
(Economist, GSPDR), Abubakarr Turay (Statistics Sierra Leone), and Samuel Turay (Statistics Sierra
Leone). The data collection was conducted by Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL) with field support from Ning
Fu (Social Protection Consultant, GSPDR) and data support from Rosa Vidarte (Research Analyst, GSPDR).
The team benefitted from useful advice and comments from Rachel Glennerster at Innovations for
Poverty Action, and from World Bank Group colleagues, including Nina Rosas (Social Protection
Specialist, GSPDR), Kathleen Beegle (Program Leader, AFCW1), Timothy J. Bulman (Senior Economist,
GMFDR), Hardwick Tchale (Senior Economist, AFADR), Francisca Ayodeji Akala (Senior Health Specialist,
GHNDR), and Kaliope Azzi-Huck (Senior Operations Officer, GEDDR).




                              Vice President                  Makhtar Diop
                              Country Director                Yusupha Crookes


                              Poverty
                              Senior Director                 Ana Revenga
                              Practice Manager                Pablo Fajnzylber
                              Task Manager                    Kristen Himelein


                              Social Protection
                              Senior Director                 Arup Banerji
                              Practice Manager                Stefano Paternostro
                              Task Manager                    Nina Rosas




                                                                                                          2
                                              Overview
As of June 7, 2015, Sierra Leone had reported more than 12,900 cases of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD), and
over 3,900 deaths since the outbreak began. In recent months, substantial progress has been made, with
a maximum of 15 new cases per week reported following a nationwide lockdown and information
campaign at the end of March.

The Government of Sierra Leone, with support from the World Bank Group, has been conducting mobile
phone surveys with the aim of capturing the key socio-economic effects of the virus. Three rounds of data
collection have been conducted, in November 2014, January-February 2015, and May 2015. The survey
was given to household heads for whom cell phone numbers were recorded during the nationally-
representative Labor Force Survey conducted in July and August 2014. Overall, 66 percent of the 4,199
households sampled in that survey had cell phones, although this coverage was uneven across the
country, with higher levels in urban areas (82 percent) than rural areas (43 percent). Of those with cell
phones, 51 percent were surveyed in all three rounds, and 79 percent were reached in at least one round.
The results for the third round of the survey, which contacted 1,715 households, focus mainly on
employment, agriculture, food security and prices, and health service utilization, covering predominantly
urban areas where cell phone coverage is highest, but including rural areas as much as possible given the
sample available.

Based on the third round of data collection in early May 2015, the economic situation in Sierra Leone
continues to improve, with employment levels among respondents returning to levels seen in the July-
August 2014 Labor Force Survey baseline. This is particularly good news in Freetown, which had seen a
nine percentage point decline in employment at the height of the outbreak in November 2014, and in
other urban centers outside Freetown, which have experienced even higher levels of recovery. Those who
are self-employed, including a disproportionate number of youth in Freetown, have seen improvement;
more people re-entered than exited this sector between rounds 2 and 3.

The economy has not, however, fully recovered. Despite returns to work, the hours that people work are
still below baseline levels, and in rural areas, even though land preparation and rice planting has begun in
many parts of the country, this is even more acute. Additionally, despite the encouraging news in self-
employment, for those operating non-farm household enterprises—nearly one-third of the country’s
workforce—revenues remain markedly lower than they were at the baseline in July-August 2014, signaling
that recovery in this sector is lagging. Moreover, even though the share of households reporting having
closed a business in the last six months has slowed down, the reasons cited for business closure show
substantial differences from those experienced immediately after the initial outbreak. In round 1 the
crisis impacted business operations mainly through channels directly related to EVD and measures put in
place to slow infection, in round 2 and even more so in round 3, knock-on effects related to the economic
slowdown are dominant. Lack of capital is the most common reason cited for business closure in round 3
(57 percent), compared to 9 percent in round 1 and 29 percent in round 2.

Agriculture is showing positive signs as the new planting season begins. Yields for the 2014 harvest were
comparable to previous harvests, and the accompanying sales and hiring of seasonal labor indicate that


                                                                                                          3
rural commodity and temporary labor markets are returning to normal. Across all three rounds of data
collection, approximately two-thirds of households surveyed were food insecure, but the frequency of the
use of individual coping strategies to mitigate food insecurity decreased, pointing to improving conditions.

Use of basic social services continues to increase. Maternal health care service utilization in particular has
shown signs of improvement; for example, the share of households reporting that a member gave birth
in the two months prior to the survey and did so in a hospital or clinic increased from 28 percent in
November 2014 to 64 percent in January/February 2015, and then to 89 percent in May.

A majority of school-aged children, meaning those between ages 6 and 17, have returned to school. Of
those households surveyed, both rural and urban, that include at least one school-aged member, 87
percent report that all of those children are attending. For those students not attending, only less than
two percent of households said that the school was unsafe or still closed due to Ebola. In addition, despite
schools being open, more than 70 percent of households with school-aged children indicate that at least
one child is still listening to educational programs on the radio, and of households in which at least one
child is out of school, nearly 85 percent reported listening to school on the radio.

While the main focus of the government and its partners remains on getting to zero cases of Ebola in
Sierra Leone, this third round of data collection highlights the most urgent socioeconomic concerns and
important lingering impacts of Ebola on households across the country, with a view toward the country’s
eventual economic recovery.




                                                                                                            4
Map




      5
Background
Since the initial appearance of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in rural Guinea in December 2013, the virus
has caused more than 11,000 deaths with over 27,000 cases in the region.1 Sierra Leone has reported
the highest level of cases of the three most affected countries, with 12,901 infections as of June 7, 2015,
and 3,915 deaths. Substantial progress, however, has been made in recent months in controlling the
outbreak. A second nationwide lockdown and information campaign took place from March 27 to March
29, and following this, a maximum of 15 new cases per week have been reported. The trajectory of the
outbreak has also evolved. While the initial epicenter was in the Kenema and Kailahun districts, the total
number of cases in these districts by May 2015 was below average. Kenema had only five confirmed cases
between February 1 and June 7, and there were no cases in Kailahun over this period. The areas which
have seen the largest number of cumulative cases are in the Western region, including Freetown and its
environs, and in Bombali and Port Loko districts. In the week preceding June 7, there were new cases in
only Port Loko and Kambia districts, and most, though not all, were within the contact tracing system.
This also marked the first week since August 2014 in which there were no new cases in Freetown.

In response to the improving epidemiological situation, many of the restrictions in place to slow the
spread of EVD were lifted by May 2015. Nearly all schools reopened on or close to April 14th, with the
exception of a small number of private schools in Freetown, which decided to wait until the next academic
year beginning in September. Restrictions on gathering for social or religious reasons have also been
lifted. Certain obstacles to transportation, however, still remain. Restrictions continue on the number of
passengers permitted per vehicle. While the Figure 1: Total and recent (since February 1 2015)
international land border was reopened by incidence of EVD
Liberia on February 23, the border with
Guinea was closed on March 30 in response
to a number of new cases in border regions.2
Three international carriers have service to
Sierra Leone as of May 2015, Brussels
Airlines, Royal Air Maroc and Air Côte
D'Ivoire, with service from Kenya Airways
scheduled to restart in June.

In addition to the EVD crisis, the Sierra
Leonean economy has also been impacted
by falling prices for iron ore, its main
international export. The two main iron ore
mines are currently idle. The Tonkolili mine       Source: World Health Organization Situation Report June 3,
ceased production in December 2014,                2015. Grey shading represents the incidence of the total
though most workers are still being paid a         number of cases and the red circles and figures indicate the
                                                   number of cases from February 1 – June 7, 2015.

1
  These figures are from June 10, 2015, WHO Situation Report, available at: http://apps.who.int/ebola/en/current-
situation/ebola-situation-report-3-june-2015
2
  http://www.usnews.com/news/world/articles/2015/03/30/guinea-shuts-border-with-sierra-leone-in-effort-to-
end-ebola

                                                                                                                  6
reduced salary. The Marampa mine, in Port Loko district, ceased production in April 2015, with the
majority of workers being laid off. Though the direct impact on employment of these mines is limited,
affecting up to 7,500 employees, a large number of businesses that were suppliers to the mining
operations have also been adversely affected. According to the most recent IMF Country Report, the
Sierra Leonean economy is projected to suffer a substantial contraction in 2015, with the magnitude
largely dependent on the iron ore sector. Estimates range from 13 percent, in a scenario where operations
resume in the near future and return to full capacity quickly, to almost 25 percent if operations do not
resume in 2015. The contraction has implications both for employment, with more limited opportunities
in a smaller overall economy, and for government revenues to meet the expanded needs in the wake of
the EVD crisis.

 Figure 2: Number of infections per week and periods of data collection




 Source: World Health Organization Situation Reports. Orange shading identifies dates of data collection.



Objectives & Methodology
To monitor the socioeconomic impacts of the EVD crisis, the Government of Sierra Leone conducted a
series of cell phone surveys. With funding provided by the World Bank, three rounds of data collection
were conducted by Statistics Sierra Leone: the first from November 12 to November 25, 2014; the second
from January 22 to February 4, 2015; and the third from May 1 to May 12, 2015. This report provides
results from the third round of these surveys.

The survey was given to household heads for whom cell phone numbers were recorded during the
nationally-representative Labor Force Survey (LFS) conducted in July and August 2014. Overall, 66 percent
(2,764) of LFS households had cell phones, although this coverage was uneven across the country, with
higher levels in urban areas (82 percent) than rural areas (43 percent). Of those with cell phones, 69
percent were reached during round 1, 68 percent in round 2, and 62 percent in round 3. Fifty-one percent
of LFS households were surveyed in all three rounds, and 79 percent were reached in at least one round.
Throughout the report, LFS data presented are for those who responded either in at least one of the cell
phone survey rounds (see the methodology appendix for more detail).

The report is structured in eight sections covering employment, agriculture, food security and prices,
social assistance, remittances, migration, education, and health facility utilization. As in the previous
report, the main level of disaggregation is into three groups: rural areas, Freetown, and other urban
areas.

                                                                                                            7
Employment3
Employment rates in Sierra Leone have returned to pre-EVD levels. As documented in the previous
reports, a large number of Sierra Leoneans stopped working during the EVD crisis. But as the health
crisis wanes, people are returning to work, and as of May 2015, national employment rates are very
similar to those recorded by the Labor Force Survey in July-August 2014. In both Freetown, the area
most affected in terms of employment by the EVD outbreak, and in rural areas, which were the least
affected parts of the country, employment rates in round 3 are statistically equivalent to the 2014 LFS.
This represents a substantial recovery for Freetown as the employment rate fell to nine percentage
points below the baseline at the peak of the outbreak. In other urban centers, which also suffered large
declines in employment rates, there has been a statistically significant increase in employment above
both the peak of the outbreak and the baseline, from 76 percent in the LFS to 82 percent in round 3.

    Figure 3: Employment rates
                                                Working           Not Working

                             LFS                           83%                                    17%
           Overall




                         Round 1                       78%                                    22%
                         Round 2                       79%                                    21%
                         Round 3                           85%                                    15%


                             LFS                            87%                                    13%
           Rural




                         Round 1                           84%                                    16%
                         Round 2                           84%                                    16%
                         Round 3                             89%                                    11%


                             LFS                   71%                                     29%
           Freetown




                         Round 1               62%                                    38%
                         Round 2                64%                                    36%
                         Round 3                     72%                                    28%
           Other Urban




                             LFS                      76%                                    24%
                         Round 1                 67%                                    33%
                         Round 2                   71%                                     29%
                         Round 3                         82%                                     18%

                                   0%   20%            40%               60%         80%                 100%

    Source: Sierra Leone LFS (July-August 2014) and cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014), round 2
    (January-February 2015) and round 3 (May 2015).

3
 Estimates for round 1 and 2 in this report are slightly different from those in the previous reports because of: (i)
the additional households added to the sample in round 3, which are then also added to LFS baseline estimates,
and (ii) a slightly revised geographical classification.

                                                                                                                        8
More respondents returned to work than exited since round 2, particularly men and wage workers.
Among the respondents working in LFS and present in all three rounds of the cell phone survey, 91 percent
report being employed in round 3, a significantly higher share than in round 1 (84 percent) or round 2 (86
percent). The majority of workers in the LFS, 72 percent, were employed in all three rounds, while 19
percent returned to work by round 3 after reporting being out of work in either round 1 or round 2, and
7 percent stopped working in rounds 2 or 3 and never re-entered. Only two percent report not working
in any of the three rounds. Male respondents are more likely to be working than female respondents, 95
percent compared 80 percent. By round 3 the same percentage of respondents were working across the
wage, non-agricultural and agricultural self-employment sectors. Despite substantial initial losses in the
sector, 30 percent of wage workers who left work in round 1 or 2 have resumed working by round 3, while
approximately 9 percent remain out of work. Also around nine percent of those who reported being self-
employed in agriculture in the baseline report not working in round 3, but overall it appears there was
less of a drop in agricultural work as virtually no one in this sector reports not working in all the three
rounds (Figure 4). It is not possible, however, to judge how unusual this level of movement into and out
of work is in non-crisis years as no nationally representative surveys on labor market outcomes had been
conducted in almost 30 years prior to the LFS in 2014.

Figure 4: Employment inflow and outflow by sector
     Resumed work by round 3 after stopping in round 1 or 2   Continually working
     Stopped working between rounds 1 and 3                   Not working across three rounds

                          Not working Working
                  Wage

Non-ag self employment

    Ag self-employment

                Unpaid

                       -20%           0%            20%           40%               60%         80%            100%
Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014), round 2 (January-February 2015), and round 3 (May 2015).
An individual’s sector is defined by their sector of employment in the LFS.


Main reasons for temporary absence in round 3 are similar to pre-crisis levels. In round 1, Ebola
specifically was the most commonly cited reason for a temporary absence from employment. In round
2 the main reason cited was “strikes, stayaways, and lockouts,” many of which were closures related to
EVD. One-quarter and one-third of those absent from work during the week before the survey cited one
of these two reasons in round 1 and round 2, respectively. In round 3, only seven percent cite one of
these two as the primary reason for temporary absence. Overall the reasons cited in round 3 are similar
to those found in the LFS baseline. Health reasons are cited by approximately 20 percent of the
respondents in round 3, similar to the share in the LFS, and unlikely to be related to EVD as there were
less than 15 cases reported nationally during the round 3 data collection period. Seasonal work is cited

                                                                                                               9
 Figure 5: Top reasons for temporary absence from work in the past week

       90%
       80%
       70%                                                                             Ebola

       60%                                                                             Strike/Stayaway/Lockout
                                                                                       No Jobs
       50%
                                                                                       Lack of Capital
       40%
                                                                                       Seasonal Work
       30%
                                                                                       Temp Layoff
       20%
                                                                                       Health
       10%
        0%
             LFS               Round 1               Round 2               Round 3

 Source: Sierra Leone LFS (July-August 2014) and cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014), round 2 (January-
 February 2015), and round 3 (May 2015).

by nine percent, substantially lower than the LFS, but this may be related to the onset of the labor-
intensive planting season. Other important reasons for absence mentioned in round 3 are lack of capital
(16 percent), temporary layoffs (8 percent), and lack of jobs (8 percent), but these shares are all very
similar to those reported in the LFS. Overall the results indicate that by round 3 the Sierra Leonean
workforce saw the reason for temporary absence to be mainly unrelated to EVD and instead cited
reasons more common to the pre-crisis economy.

Despite the return to work, hours remain lower, particularly in rural areas. After the initial drop from
47 hours per week in the LFS to below 40 hours in round 1, the overall average number of hours remain
lower than in the LFS. In urban
                                      Figure 6: Hours worked last week among those employed
areas outside Freetown, after
                                      60
progressive drops to a low of 40                Baseline     Round 1       Round 2       Round 3
hours in round 2, average hours       50
worked per week increased to 46
hours in round 3, but remain below    40
the 49 hours found in the LFS. The
increase between rounds 2 and 3 is    30
driven by the wage sector, in which
working hours in May 2015 were        20

the same (in statistical terms) as
                                      10
the LFS. Respondents engaged in
self-employment and unpaid work,        0
however, continue to work fewer                 Rural       Freetown      Other Urban      Overall
hours in round 3, similar to the Source: Sierra Leone LFS (July-August 2014) and cell phone surveys
results in the previous rounds. round 1 (November 2014), round 2 (January-February 2015), and
                                         round 3 (May 2015).

                                                                                                                 10
Consistent with the above findings and the high prevalence of self-employment, workers in rural areas
continue to work fewer hours, despite the start of planting activities in many areas. Hours in Freetown
remain statistically similar to the LFS and to previous rounds.

Earnings among wage workers remain substantially lower than in the baseline. Though the wage
employment sector represented only a small portion of the Sierra Leonean workforce, six percent
according to the 2014 LFS, these jobs were comparatively higher paid positions in public and non-farm
private sectors (83 percent of wage employment). Among wage workers responding in all three rounds
of the cell phone survey, average monthly nominal earning declined from 698,000 Leones (USD 159) in
the LFS to 527,000 Leones (USD 120) in round 3.4 While the decline could be explained by the recent job
losses and wage reductions in the mining sector, this accounts for only approximately seven percent of
total wage employment. Indirect effects of the general economic slowdown related to EVD and the
decline of the mining sector are more likely to be the root causes of lower earnings.

The non-farm household enterprise sector continues to be disrupted. The share of households
reporting having closed a business in the last six months increased progressively from 4 percent in the
LFS to 13 percent in round 1 and then to 22 percent in round 2. Although the rate of closure has slowed
to 13 percent in round 3, fewer respondents report operating a business in the six months preceding the
survey, decreasing to 58 percent from 69 percent in round 2. The reasons cited for business closure
show substantial differences from those experienced immediately after the initial outbreak. In round 1
the crisis impacted business operations mainly through channels directly related to EVD and measures
put in place to slow infection, with respondents citing the outbreak of Ebola and a lack of labor as the
main constraints. In round 2 and even more so in round 3, knock-on effects related to the economic
slowdown are dominant. Lack of capital is the most common reason cited for business closure in round
3 (57 percent), compared to 9 percent in round 1 and 29 percent in round 2. This suggests during the
crisis some households depleted their productive capital to meet immediate needs and are now having
difficulties finding resources to restart businesses, which may be additionally compounded by low
demand (lack of customers) that makes reopening more risky.

Revenues from non-farm household enterprises remained significantly below the pre-crisis levels. The
drop in business revenues seen in round 1, equivalent to an almost 65 percentage decrease, and round
2, was statistically unchanged in round 3. Average monthly revenues among non-farm household
businesses declined from approximately 1.6 million Leones (USD 336) in the LFS to 570,000 Leones (USD
131) in round 3.5



4
  As with many similar surveys, the cell phone survey had high attrition among top earners. Of the top one percent
of wage earners in the LFS, 100 percent responded in round 1, 68 percent in round 2, and 32 percent in round 3. This
is likely reflective of the increasing opportunity cost of their time as they return to work. The survey therefore does
not report cross sectional estimates of earnings, which would be biased by the loss of the top earners. By using only
the panel data, the overall trends are likely to be robust as attrition was more uniform across the remainder of the
distribution.
5
  The decline is robust to different definitions of business revenues. See details in Methodological Appendix.

                                                                                                                    11
 Figure 7: Reasons for closures of non-farm household enterprises
  100%
   90%                                                                                  Other
   80%                                                                                  Lack of capital
   70%
                                                                                        Ebola
   60%
   50%                                                                                  Illness/care for relative
   40%                                                                                  Input supply problems
   30%
                                                                                        Labor not available
   20%
   10%                                                                                  No customers
    0%                                                                                  Seasonal closure
     Round 1                            Round 2                            Round 3

 Source: Sierra Leone LFS (July-August 2014) and cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014), round 2 (January-
 February 2015), and round 3 (May 2015).

Many workers in non-farm self-employment in the LFS are working in different sectors in round 3. For
those working in both LFS and during round 3, overall 35 percent were working in a different sector in
round 3 than in the LFS. Among those in non-farm self-employment in the LFS almost half reported
working in a different sector in round 3. Twenty-four percent are employed in agricultural self-
employment, 19 percent in the wage sector, and the remaining 6 percent in unpaid activities. Switching
sectors was less common for workers in wage employment and agriculture self-employment. The most
common shift for those in wage employment was to non-farm self-employment (15 percent) and for
agricultural self-employed workers was to unpaid activities (15 percent). The large shifts for the self-
employed likely represent a combination of the seasonal rise in agricultural casual labor for the planting
season and the need to seek out other employment amid continuing declines in household enterprise,
but it is not possible to determine from the cell phone survey data the extent to which this is linked to
the EVD crisis or economic slowdown as this type of sector switching is common in places with largely
informal economies.

Youth employment has rebounded but revenue from youth-owned non-farm enterprises remains low.
Although overall youth employment rates did not change significantly since the LFS in previous rounds,
youth (ages 15-35) in Freetown experienced a decline in employment from 76 percent in the LFS to 60
percent by round 2. By round 3, however, there are no statistically significant differences in youth
employment rates compared to the LFS either within or outside Freetown. While the percentage of young
respondents reporting a household enterprise no longer operating decreased from 25 percent in round 2
to 9 percent in round 3, monthly revenue is well below the LFS levels and showed no signs of improvement
between rounds 2 and 3. Depending on the definition used (see details in the Methodological Appendix),
revenues in round 3 are between 50 and 65 percent lower than in the LFS for both youth- and non-youth
operated businesses. Also similar to the wider population, the average number of hours worked per week
among youth in round 3 remains lower (41 hours) than the pre-crisis level (48 hours). This trend is mainly
driven by a substantial drop in hours worked by youth in rural areas, from 48 hours in the LFS to 39 hours
in round 3, though average hours worked in round 3 in Freetown (44 hours) and in other urban centers
(46 hours) were similar to the LFS.

                                                                                                                    12
Agriculture
The 2014 rice harvest has been completed and total harvests are comparable with previous data. Of
those households cultivating rice in the previous season, 95 percent said that the harvest was complete
by May 2015. The overall production for these households is estimated at 632 kilograms in round 3, which
is slightly higher than the 605 kilograms in round 2, though this difference is not statistically significant.
The value is also similar to the 697 kilograms per household estimated by the Agriculture Household
Tracking Survey (AHTS), collected in 2010. A possible reason for higher totals in round 3 is delays in
completing the harvest due to abnormal rainfall, as 70 percent of households with rice still in the field in
round 2 indicated the rice was not yet ready for harvest. Alternatively, extra time may have been needed
to complete larger harvests due to labor shortages, cited as the second most common reason for not
completing the harvest in round 2.

Rice sales have increased with completion of harvesting activities. The percentage of households selling
at least some portion of their crop increased from 16 percent in November to 26 percent in January and
then to 36 percent in May. The average household indicated having sold about half of their total rice crop,
to traders (58 percent), neighbors (26 percent), weekly markets (8 percent), and relatives (7 percent). In
the 2010 AHTS, the percentage selling to traders was higher, approximately 70 percent, but the limited
sample size in the cell phone survey means the difference is not statistically different. Rice-growing
households in Bo, Tonkolili, and Bombali districts are most likely to sell to traders in round 3, while those
in Moyamba, Kenema, Pujehun, Bonthe, Koinadugu, and Kono districts are most likely to sell to neighbors
or relatives. Sales at luma (or periodic markets) are relatively rare nationally but most common in the
frontier district of Kambia, the traditional center of trade with Guinea, and in Pujehun and Kailahun, both
bordering Liberia, which has experienced higher rice prices during the EVD crisis. The above results,
however, should be interpreted with caution as those responding in the cell phone survey are likely to be
less remote and thus more connected to markets, and may also be wealthier or larger producers than
non-respondents.

New rice planting activities did not appear to be disrupted by the EVD crisis. Of the households which
planted rice last year, less than two percent said that they would not plant in the upcoming season. For
this small percentage, the majority cited reasons related to labor shortage, either in the household or the
wider community. Labor markets, however, did appear to be functioning, as nearly 40 percent of
agricultural households indicated hiring labor in the last two weeks to assist with rice planting. Of those
that planned to cultivate rice in the coming season, approximately 15 percent had already planted, mainly
in Tonkolili and Port Loko districts. In addition, there are substantial new entrants into cultivation. Of the
one-quarter of agricultural households that did not cultivate rice in the previous season, over half said
they would cultivate this season. The cause of the increased number of rice farming households cannot
be clearly determined from the cell phone data. While the majority of new farmers were Kono, Tonkolili,
and Western rural districts, about 20 percent were in Kenema and Kailahun, areas in which the first
infections in May 2014 coincided with the planting season. These households could therefore be those
which generally plant rice but did not last year due to EVD, though there were less than 50 total cases in
Sierra Leone by mid-June 2014. For those in other districts, increased prices for rice in rural areas and in
neighboring countries may lead to increased planting. Also, agricultural households may plant rice, either

                                                                                                           13
instead of or in addition to cash crops, as a means of reducing risk and guaranteeing food sources if the
economic slowdown persists.

There continues to be no evidence of disruption in cocoa markets. As the cocoa season generally goes
from August to January, nearly three-quarters of the limited sample of 91 cocoa farmers have not
harvested any cocoa in the current season. Of those that have harvested, most of the cocoa had been
dried, with a small portion still in pods. All of the respondents with dried cocoa indicate at least some of
the harvest had been sold, as had the majority of those whose harvest is still in pods. The high percentage
of off-season sales may be attributed to higher international prices following a poor harvest in nearby
Ghana. This supports evidence from the first round that showed minimal disruption to the cocoa trade,
with no differences between quarantine and non-quarantine districts in cocoa sales, and the second
round, which showed increasing sales among those that had harvested.

Access to agricultural support services has been limited. Of agricultural households, about eleven
percent indicate receiving aid or advice from agricultural business centers (ABC), NGOs, farmer-based
organizations (FBO), cooperatives, or other providers in the previous six months. One-quarter of these
households are in the Kailahun district, which was one of the districts that was initially most impacted by
EVD, but also had the highest incidence of involvement with extension agents in the 2010 AHTS, and it is
therefore difficult to attribute the relative impacts. With regard to different types of interventions,
around seven percent indicated receiving agricultural inputs, including seeds, nearly all of which are
distributed by NGOs. A large percentage of those receiving seeds are in the Kailahun district, as well as
smaller percentages in Koinadugu, Port Loko, Kenema, and Western rural districts. Just under four
percent of agricultural households indicate receiving agro-processing equipment or tools, again mainly
distributed by NGOs in Kailahun with smaller percentages in Kono, Kenema, and Western rural districts.
Just over ten percent of agricultural households indicate receiving extension advice, with the largest
percentage in Kailahun and Port Loko districts. Similar to agricultural input distribution, NGOs provide the
majority of extension services, though ABCs and FBOs contribute as well. Of those receiving support or
services, more than half of households indicate receiving more than one of the above services.

Food Security and Prices
Households used food insecurity coping strategies less frequently in round 3. Overall, about one-third
of households report using at least one strategy to cope with insufficient food in the week prior to the
survey, a figure that remains unchanged since rounds 1 and 2. In round 3, in the previous week 49 percent
of households ate less expensive or less preferred foods, 49 percent of households reduced portion size,
43 percent reduced the number of meals they ate, 34 percent restricted consumption by adults in order
for small children to eat, 31 percent had to sell assets to buy food, and 19 percent borrowed food, and
more may have taken other actions not specifically included in the questionnaire. These percentages
were virtually unchanged from round 2, and since comparable baseline data does not exist, it is not
possible to tell how much of this would have taken place even in the absence of EVD. The frequency of
use of these negative coping strategies, however, has decreased. The number of days in the last seven in
which the household used a given food coping strategy significantly decreased for all categories except
selling assets to buy food (Figure 8). This suggests marginal improvements in food security levels likely

                                                                                                         14
related to the combination of factors, including completion of the harvest in rural areas, the improving
employment situation in urban areas, and ongoing food distribution efforts.

 Figure 8: Frequency of households using food coping strategies

                                                          round 1    round 2     round 3

                  2.0
  days per week




                  1.5

                  1.0

                  0.5

                  0.0
                        Eat less expensive Reduce portion Reduce number of Sell assets to buy    Restricted          Borrow food
                         or less preferred      size        meals eaten           food         consumption by
                               foods                                                          adults in order for
                                                                                               small children to
                                                                                                      eat

 Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014), round 2 (January-February 2015) and round 3 (May 2015).

Despite the completion of the harvest, rice prices have risen since November outside of Freetown.
Historic data from the national Consumer Price Index shows the lowest prices for local rice in January,
which then steadily rise to a peak in July and August before declining again, while prices for imported rice
are more steady throughout the year. Though the cell phone survey does not distinguish between local
and imported rice, the median price in Freetown is constant at 3200 Leones across the three rounds,
consistent with most rice consumed there being imported. Outside Freetown, where households are
more dependent on historically more
expensive local supplies, there have been Figure 9: Median price for one kilogram of rice
increases since November. The median price                                            Round 1     Round 2     Round 3
for a kilogram of rice increased from 3200                           3700
Leones in rural areas in November to 3600
                                                                     3600
Leones in January - February, and remained
constant in May. In urban areas outside                              3500
Freetown, the price increased from 3200                              3400
Leones to 3400 Leones between rounds 1 and
                                                                     3300
2, then further increased to 3600 Leones by
round 3. The unseasonably high prices in                             3200
round 2 are likely related to the late harvest                       3100
and to transportation restrictions and market                        3000
closures that disrupted commerce. Further                                         Rural           Freetown          Other Urban
data collection will be necessary to determine
                                                                    Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014), round
if price have now returned to normal seasonal                       2 (January-February 2015) and round 3 (May 2015).
patterns.

                                                                                                                                   15
Remittances
The share of households receiving remittances              Figure 10: Households receiving remittances
remains unchanged from round 2, but the average                                              Round 1    Round 2
value has decreased. In the month preceding                20%
round 3, 13 percent of households surveyed
reported receiving remittances from either                 15%
domestic or international sources in the month
prior to the survey. This is not statistically different   10%
from the previous two rounds. The average value
of remittances for those household which received
                                                            5%
them is 330,000 Leones, compared to 400,000
Leones in round 2 and 275,000 Leones in round 1.
                                                            0%
The decrease between rounds 2 and 3 can
                                                                                     Rural         Freetown   Other Urban
potentially be attributed to holiday giving, captured
in round 2, and an appreciation in the exchange            Figure 11: Value of remittances
rate since January, though values remain well                                    7
above those in round 1. Without historical data on
                                                                                 6
the seasonal giving patterns, it is difficult to
attribute the increases to EVD, though it is possible                            5
                                                            100,000s of Leones



that the higher amounts were related to the                                      4
ongoing crisis. In addition, different households
                                                                                 3
received remittances. Of the households in all
three rounds, about 20 percent reported receiving                                2
remittances in at least one round, but of those                                  1
receiving, less than 10 percent received in all three
                                                                                 0
rounds.                                                                              Rural         Freetown   Other Urban
                                                           Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014),
                                                           round 2 (January-February 2015) and round 3 (May
Migration                                                  2015).
Migration into and out of districts appears to be
temporary and not systematically related to the incidence of EVD. Overall 93 percent of respondents
indicate living in the same district as in the LFS, of whom six percent reported having lived in a different
district in either round 1 or round 2 of the cell phone survey but returning to their original LFS district by
round 3. The Western Urban district, comprising Freetown, has both the highest number of cases and
positive net in-migration. Other districts show net out-migration despite having a comparatively
moderate number of cases. The district with the largest percentage of out-migration is Tonkolili, where
the major iron ore mine ceased production in December. This supports the hypothesis that most
migration was economic in nature rather than related to the fear of infection. It should be noted though
that the remote nature of the cell phone survey makes the measure of migration challenging because
respondents do not always accurately self-report their location (see round 2 appendix for details). In
addition, the sample sizes for individual migration patterns within districts are very limited, and therefore
the trends should be taken only as indicative of the overall patterns.

                                                                                                                            16
 Figure 12: Migration by district and number of Ebola cases
                                      migrated out   remained   left temporarily   migrated in   total cases

                                16%
                                14%
    percentage of respondents



                                12%




                                                                                                               total cases of EVD
                                10%
                                8%
                                6%
                                4%
                                2%
                                0%
                                -2%
                                -4%



 Source: Labor Force Survey (July-August 2014), cell phone survey round 3 (May 2015) and Ebola Situation
 Report June 3, 2015 (World Health Organization).



Social assistance
Social assistance continues to be mostly non-poverty targeted in-kind transfers, and there is little
evidence beneficiaries paid fees in return for the support. In the six months prior to the round 3 survey,
national coverage of social assistance remained unchanged, with eight percent of households reporting
receiving any social assistance either in the form of cash transfers, cash for work, food for work, free food,
or subsidized food. Nearly all of this assistance was in the form of free food, with cash assistance, including
cash for work, comprising less than two percent of households. The incidence of social assistance was
highest outside Freetown (nine percent compared to two percent of households in Freetown), but there
is no difference between urban and rural areas outside of Freetown. In addition, many households report
receiving in-kind support. Overall 22 percent of households received hygiene products (soap, chlorine,
and other and disinfectant products), and 14 percent received medicine or medical supplies. In-kind
support was most common in Freetown, with 33 percent of households receiving one or both types of
aid, compared to 23 percent outside Freetown. Also, there were no statistically significant differences in
the proportion receiving assistance between poor and non-poor groups, as defined by the median score
of a wealth index, for either cash, food, or in-kind support. This estimate may be biased, however, if the
poor are systematically missed by the cell phone survey due to lower cell phone coverage. Additionally,
nearly all those receiving assistance (98 percent) report that they did not have to pay any fees, even if
small, to receive cash or in-kind support.




                                                                                                                                    17
 Figure 13: Percentage of households receiving social assistance in the last 6 months
                      Cash   Food      Medicine / Medical supplies       Hygiene products      Any assistance


       Overall

         Rural

    Freetown

  Other urban

         Poor

    Non-poor

                 0%          5%             10%           15%             20%           25%           30%              35%

 Source: Cell phone survey round 3 (May 2015).


The majority of food distribution continues to be carried out by non-governmental organizations. Of
households receiving food assistance, 82 percent report receiving food distributed by an NGO, 26 percent
report receiving food from district or other government officials, and about 3 percent from other sources
(including traditional leaders, faith- and community-based organizations). Nineteen percent indicate
receiving food from multiple sources, possibly indicating over-coverage of food distribution in certain
areas.

 Figure 14: Source of food assistance (conditional on receiving support)
                       NGO    District or other government official      Other source       Multiple sources

  100%
   90%
   80%
   70%
   60%
   50%
   40%
   30%
   20%
   10%
    0%
                 Overall            Rural          Freetown           Other Urban           Poor            Non-Poor

 Source: Cell phone survey round 3 (May 2015).




                                                                                                                             18
Health Facility Utilization
Utilization of maternal care
                                     Figure 15: Pregnancy related visits for mothers of babies born
services continues to rise. The
                                     within two months of interview date
share of households reporting a
member gave birth in the two                       DHS 2013       Round 1        Round 2      Round 3
months prior to the survey and       100%
                                       90%
did so in a hospital or clinic
                                       80%
increased from 28 percent in
                                       70%
November 2014 to 64 percent in         60%
January/February 2015, and then        50%
to 89 percent in May. This is          40%
compared to 71 percent among           30%
households owning a cell phone         20%
in the 2013 Demographic and            10%
Health Survey (DHS). The return         0%
                                               Pre-Natal Care Birth in Clinic Post-Natal Care  No Care
to health care facilities by
expectant mothers is likely Source: Households with cell phones only, DHS (2013) and cell phone
driven by declining infection surveys round 1 (November 2014), round 2 (January-February 2015), and
                                     round 3 (May 2015).
rates, particularly among health
professionals, improved triage, and by a continued reduction in health worker’s fears of infection during
deliveries due to improved training and supplies. Similarly, pregnant women who received at least one
prenatal visit increased from 56 percent in November to 71 percent in January/February to 97 percent in
May, compared to 84 percent in the DHS, and postnatal care visits among those who have given birth in
the last two months increased from 50 percent in November to 63 percent in January/February to 89
percent in May. This is compared to 60 percent in the DHS. The increase from round 2 to round 3 is due
to sharp increases in the use of these facilities in rural and other urban centers outside Freetown, while
use in Freetown remained statistically unchanged. The round 3 levels outside Freetown are now
substantially higher than both previous rounds and the 2013 DHS, though the explanation for these
increases cannot be determined from the data. One possibility is that expanded access though the Free
Healthcare Initiative and greater awareness of health issues following EVD have increased usage rates
above the DHS baseline. There is also likely an element of selection bias in the respondents as even among
cell phone owning households, those which respond are likely to be better-off than average as they have
sufficient resources to keep phones charged and numbers active. This would be particularly true outside
Freetown, where electricity is scarce.

There is no evidence in round 3 of a change in the reliance on government health care facilities for the
treatment of diarrhea among children under five. The percentage of children under 5 reporting
experiencing diarrhea in the previous two weeks increased from seven percent to nine percent between
rounds 2 and 3. Of these 97 percent were treated in round 3, compared to 100 percent in round 2, though
all round 3 cases in Freetown were treated. The location of treatment shows continued reliance of
government facilities (including district hospitals and government clinics), though none of the differences
above are statistically significant due to the limited sample size.

                                                                                                        19
 Figure 16: Source of treatment for symptoms of diarrhea

                                  Public   Private     Shop   Other   No Treatment



            DHS 2013                         65%                            5%              28%
  Overall




             Round 2                             73%                                 9%      10%        7%



             Round 3                                   83%                                  6%     7%    3%


                       0%   10%   20%      30%       40%      50%     60%    70%      80%        90%     100%

 Source: Households with cell phones only, DHS (2013) and cell phone survey round 2 (January-February 2015) and
 round 3 (May 2015).


Education
A large majority of school age children have returned to classrooms. Nearly 90 percent of households
report having at least one school age member (age 6 – 17), and of these households, 87 percent report all
children are attending. This percentage is consistent across urban and rural areas. In less than one
percent of households the head indicated that none of the children were attending. For those students
not attending, the main reasons given is that the child was too young (38 percent), followed by not being
able to afford school (29 percent), and working / learning a trade (12 percent). Less than two percent of
households said that the school was unsafe or still closed due to EVD. As with the health findings above,
it is likely that there was some selection bias towards better-off households, and that the percentage of
children attending nationwide is lower. Additionally, despite the reopening of schools, more than 70
percent of households indicate that at least one child is still listening to the educational programs on the
radio. Of households in which at least one child is out of school, nearly 85 percent reported listening to
school on the radio.


Conclusions
The economic situation in Sierra Leone continues to improve following the sharp reduction in new cases
in recent weeks. Overall employment levels, as measured from May 1 to May 15, 2015, have returned to
levels similar to those found in the July-August 2014 LFS baseline. Employment in Freetown, which had
suffered the largest decline in employment rates, rebounded to LFS levels, after having declined by nine
percentage points at the peak of the outbreak in November 2014. Other urban centers outside Freetown
have even higher levels of recovery. Non-farm self-employment activities, the sector most impacted by
the crisis, also show increasingly positive signs with more people re-entering than exiting between rounds
2 and 3. This is particularly important for youth in Freetown, which work disproportionately in self-
employed activities and had seen high job losses at the height of the crisis.

                                                                                                                20
There are, however, signs that the economy has not yet fully recovered. Hours worked per week remain
below baseline levels. This is particularly true in rural areas even though land preparation and rice
planting has begun in many parts of the country. Also, despite encouraging news in non-farm self-
employment, those households which have not yet reopened businesses are more likely to cite a lack of
capital than prior to the onset of EVD. If business owners were forced to consume their working capital
to meet basic needs in the initial stages of the crisis, they may find it difficult to reopen even as the
economy continues to improve. Revenues for operating non-farm household enterprises also remain
significantly below baseline levels, indicating this sector, which employs one-third of the country’s
workforce, is yet to achieve full recovery.

Agriculture shows increasingly positive signs as the new planting season begins. Between rounds 2 and
3, the 2014 harvest was completed, with total harvests being comparable to previous yields. Higher levels
of sales accompanying the completion of the harvest and a large percentage of households hiring
additional labor to assist in the planting indicate rural commodity and temporary labor markets are also
normalizing. A substantial percentage of agricultural households that did not grow rice in the previous
year indicate planning to plant in the coming season, which may be related to higher rice prices in rural
areas or greater diversification against the risk of an uncertain economic situation. The overall incidence
of food insecurity remains high at approximately two-thirds of households across all three rounds of data
collection, but the frequency of use of individual strategies decreased, pointing to improving conditions.

Social support continues to have relatively low coverage in round 3. Social assistance reached less than
10 percent of respondents, and most of this assistance was in the form of medical or hygiene supplies
distributed by NGOs. Less than 15 percent of households report receiving remittances in the month
preceding the survey, and the average value of these remittances decreased since round 2. Overall,
migration remains limited with only seven percent of respondents reporting living in a different location
than in the LFS, with a further six percent relocating temporarily in either rounds 1 or 2, but returning to
their original district by round 3.

Utilization of basic social services appears to be increasing, with substantial increases in the percentage
of pregnant women and new mothers seeking medical care and the stabilization of the share of
households seeking treatment at public facilities for children under five with diarrhea. The percentage of
households that indicate school-age children have returned to class is also quite high. Also those that are
not using health or education services cite financial reasons rather than the fear of infection. These
findings, however, may be impacted by selection bias resulting from those who are the poorest and most
remote being the least likely to use health or education services, as well as the least likely to respond to
the cell phone survey.




                                                                                                         21
Methodological Appendix
The third round of the high frequency socio-economic impact of Ebola survey was conducted by Statistics
Sierra Leone (SSL), with funding and technical assistance from the World Bank’s Poverty and Social
Protection Global Practices, to estimate the impact on well-being of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) crisis.
The first round was conducted from November 12 to November 25, 2014, the second round from
January 22 to February 4, 2015, and the third round from May 1 to May 15, 2015. This note describes
changes in the survey methodology since round 2 and any comparability concerns between the baseline
and subsequent rounds.

Questionnaire
Agriculture – Questions on whether households had received any services or support from agricultural
extension agents in the previous six months, and if so, what was the nature of the service / support and
who provided the service / support. Additional questions were also included on the planting season,
including whether the household planned to plant rice, whether planting had yet begun, and if any labor
had been hired for the planting.

Social Assistance – The social assistance section was expanded to include further disaggregated
categories on the type of assistance received and how the assistance was distributed.

Education – Questions on school attendance were added.

Trust – The trust questions were dropped in the third round as they were unlikely to have moved
substantially between rounds.

Tracking – Questions were added on additional re-contact information for the household beyond the
phone number for the household head.

Response Rate
Round 3 contacted 1,715 (67.9 percent) of the 2,764 households which provided cell phone numbers in
the LFS and 40.8 percent of the total LFS households. Of these 1,405 households appeared in both
rounds. Of the households reached, 93.6 percent were household heads in round 1, 92.3 were
household heads in round 2, and 90.1 were household heads in round 3. If the respondent was not an
original household member, the call was ended and an incorrect number was recorded. Table A2 shows
the distribution of employment and geographic locations for the three rounds of the cell phone survey
respondents and the original LFS sample.

Weights
Note that there are a number of different sets of weights. There is a set of weights for each repeated
cross section of data used in this report, i.e. four sets, one each for LFS, cell phone survey round 1, cell
phone survey round 2, and cell phone survey round 3. There is a separate set of weights for the 4 period
panel of households (i.e. the set of households that are in all three rounds of LFS, cell phone survey
round 1, cell phone survey round 2, and cell phone survey round 3).

                                                                                                           22
Definitions
Eligible households – For most of the report, the LFS and the three rounds of the cell phone survey are
used as repeated cross sections and not as a panel. To be as consistent with the round 1 report as
possible, the repeated cross sections were created as follows. The round 1, round 2, and round 3
households are the full sample of households for which cell phone survey data was collected in
November 2014, January – February 2015, and May 2015, respectively. The LFS cross section includes
all the households that were surveyed in any of the three cell phone rounds, even if not in all rounds.
This means that for the employment section, the sample is slightly different in each of the three reports.
There are some household heads in the cell phone survey for whom there is no employment data in LFS
dataset as they were considered not part of the labor force during the LFS. In this report, for the
employment section, the round 1, round 2, and round 3 samples are restricted to those household heads
for whom employment data was collected in the LFS. Most of the results in the employment section are
based on using repeated cross sections, except for two sub-sections where the sample is restricted to
being the panel sample of households across all three rounds (i.e. the sample of households that are in
LFS, round 1, round 2, and round 3). The two sub-sections where the panel sample is used are those on
employment transitions and earnings.

Employment Definition – Given the high frequency nature of the four surveys used and the nature of the
EVD crisis, a slightly modified definition of employment was used in the analysis. Households heads were
categorized as in the labor force in any given round of the surveys if they were working, looking for work
or expected to return to work. For the round 1 report, if a household head was in the labor force in
either the LFS or round 1 of the cell phone survey, he was categorized as in the labor force in both
rounds. This was done because both rounds of the survey were conducted within three months or less
of the previous round and it is unlikely that someone who was working in the LFS suddenly decided to
exit the labor force rather than become unemployed due to EVD. Such high frequency labor force
surveys are contrary to most other employment surveys and thus necessitate different definitions of
labor force participation. In this report, to be consistent with the round 1 and round 2 report’s approach
and because of the high frequency nature of these employment surveys, a household head was
categorized as in the labor force in all four rounds of surveys if they were in the labor force in any one
round. As a result, none of the changes observed in employment rates are due to changes in the
composition of the labor force.

Calculation for monthly wage earnings – Most wage workers report earnings in monthly terms, and
therefore results associated with wage earnings are reported this way. For respondents who report
wage income in other time units, the analysis translates their wages into monthly terms under the
assumption they work at a standard capacity, i.e., 8 hours a day, 22 days or 4.3 weeks a month, and 12
months a year. The earnings data was not collected in round 1 in a way that allowed direct comparison
to the LFS, which is the reason only LFS and round 2 are compared. Since earnings data tend to be noisy
and a few large outliers can have a big impact on average wages, the figures reported here exclude
earnings for the highest 5 percent. As a robustness check, median earnings were also analyzed and the
same trends held.


                                                                                                         23
Correction of outliers in household enterprise revenues – Business revenues are noisy so the main results
in the report have the top percentile of revenues trimmed. As LFS has the highest revenues a large
fraction of the outliers are from LFS. For this reason this report presents results based on an alternative
approach, i.e. the top 1 percent of revenues in each round is trimmed. As a robustness check, revenues
have also been calculated by excluding the top 1 and 5 percent. Same trends emerged from the analysis
of these alternative measures.

Pregnancy definitions in the DHS - In the DHS each woman in the household was interviewed individually
whereas in the cell phone surveys the respondent was the household head. It is possible that the cell
phone survey underreports utilization if household heads are not always aware of clinic visits made by
household members. It is also possible that the cell phone survey over reports pregnancies if the
household head misremembers dates of birth and include pregnancies and child births that took place
more than 2 months prior to the interview. A final difference is that while the DHS reports on current
pregnancies and births in the last 2 months the cell phone survey captures anyone who was pregnant in
the last two months i.e., the cell phone survey also captures visits from those who had miscarriages or
abortions in the last 2 months while these are not include in the DHS utilization figures.

Table A1: Geographical Distribution of LFS and Sample



                        Labor Force Survey          % of LFS   % of LFS           % of LFS
                                                    Found in Found in Jan-        Found in
                                                    Nov 2014   Feb 2015           May 2015
                        Freq.          Percent
 Kailahun                210             5.0           17.6          19.1            19.0
 Kenema                  420            10.0           51.0          49.8            48.1
 Kono                    420            10.0           58.1          56.0            51.9
 Bombali                 330             7.9           47.6          47.3            43.3
 Kambia                  181             4.3           32.6          37.6            33.7
 Koinadugu               180             4.3           31.1          29.4            30.6
 Port Loko               179             4.3           27.4          28.5            24.6
 Tonkolili               180             4.3           25.6          25.6            22.2
 Bo                      421            10.0           43.9          44.7            39.0
 Bonthe                  269             6.4           42.0          37.9            37.2
 Moyamba                 180             4.3           34.4          40.0            32.8
 Pujehun                 180             4.3           24.4          28.3            25.0
 Western Rural           288             6.9           51.7          37.9            40.6
 Western Urban           761            18.1           63.2          64.3            56.1
 Total                  4,199           100.0          45.2          44.7            40.8




                                                                                                          24
Table A2: Employment Status Distribution of LFS and Sample

                                              Employment       Employment      Employment       Employment
                                              Status in LFS    Status in Nov   Status in Jan-   Status in May
                                                                   2014          Feb 2015           2015
                                              Freq.       %             %           %                 %
 Employee regular                              535      17.1          22.7        22.4              24.1
 Employee, casual or seasonal                  119       3.8           7.8         7.2               8.9
 Self-employed, without regular employee      2,165     69.4          58.7        53.2              56.9
 Self-employed, with regular employees         98        3.1           5.3         5.4               3.9
 Member of producer's cooperative               7        0.2           0.1         0.1               0.1
 Help without pay in own or another house      29        0.9           1.2         3.1               2.0
 Help without pay in own or another house      137       4.4           2.5         6.3               2.7
 Paid apprenticeship                           30        1.0           0.7         1.2               0.8
 Unpaid apprenticeship                          2        0.1           1.4         1.0               0.9
 Total                                        3,122     100            100         100               100




                                                                                                   25
