                                                                                            97401

How Does Knowledge on Public Expenditures
Integrate with the Design of Development
Policy Operations?




IEG Learning product


May 27, 2015




This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without
authorization.
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................................................. III

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ......................................................................................................................... V

OVERVIEW........................................................................................................................................... VII

1.          INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................ 1

2.          THE APPROACH ...................................................................................................................... 3

3.          KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW ........ 5
            Trends in the volumes, numbers, IBRD/IDA, and geography of DPOs ..................................................................... 5
            Trends in public expenditure knowledge products .................................................................................................... 8
            How does knowledge of public expenditure inform DPOs? .................................................................................... 11


4.          SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES .......................................................................... 17
            Examples of successful contribution of public expenditure work in the design of DPOs ........................................ 19
            Examples of missed opportunities .......................................................................................................................... 23


5.          CONCLUSIONS....................................................................................................................... 27

REFERENCES...................................................................................................................................... 29

APPENDIX A. COUNTRIES IN WHICH DPOS WERE PRECEDED BY A PER .................................. 31

APPENDIX B. LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS .................................. 37

APPENDIX C. THE ROLE AND INFLUENCE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS ON DPO
DESIGN (TABLE 2 OF 2) ..................................................................................................................... 51

APPENDIX D. DPOS AND PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS AT THE SUBNATIONAL LEVEL .... 57


Boxes
Box 2.1. A Systematic Representation of the Focus (top row) and Analytical Approaches ..................... 3




                                                                                                                                                                         i
CONTENTS


Tables
Table 3-1 Top ten countries by commitments and number of operations (closed operations 2004-2013)
 ............................................................................................................................................................... 7
Table 3-2. Top ten countries with PERs, 2000-14 .................................................................................. 9
Table 3-3. Number and share of DPOs preceded by PER ....................................................................12
Table 3-4 Similarity index of DPOs and PER, using theme codes .........................................................15
Table 4-1 Integration of PERs with DPOs: Select findings from the case studies (Also see detailed table
in Annex 3). ...........................................................................................................................................17


Figures
Figure 3-1 Commitments and numbers of DPOs by lending instrument and region (closed DPOs, 2004-
2013) ...................................................................................................................................................... 6
Figure 3-2 Trends in IBRD and IDA DPOs and average commitments (closed DPOs 2004-2013) ........ 7
Figure 3-3 Distribution and trend of DPOs managed by Networks and Sector Boards (closed operations
2004-2013) ............................................................................................................................................. 8
Figure 3-4 Trend and regional distribution of public expenditure knowledge products (2000-2014) ......10
Figure 3-5 Percentage of PERs with specific themes (2000-2014); (n=191) .........................................11
Figure 3-6 Numbers and shares of DPOs with PERs within four years, by world region .......................13
Figure 3-7 Trends in the numbers and shares of DPOs with PERs .......................................................13
Figure 3-8 Comparison of the trend in performance of DPOs with/without a PER .................................14
Figure 3-9 Number of MTEF related prior actions (operations closed 2004-2013) ................................16




     Evaluation Managers
        Caroline Heider                                    Director-General, Evaluation
        Nick York                                          Acting Director, Independent Evaluation Group, Public Sector
        Mark Sundberg                                      Manager, Independent Evaluation Group, Public Sector
        Zeljko Bogetic                                     Task Manager


ii
Abbreviations
AFR   Africa
CEMs Country Economic Memoranda
CPIA Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
DPL   Development Policy Loan
DPOs Development Policy Operations
ECA   Europe and Central Asia
ESW Economic and Sector Work
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICR   Implementation Completion and Results Report
IDA   International Development Agency
IDPL Infrastructure Development Policy Loan
IEG   Independent Evaluation Group
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MENA Middle East and North Africa
MOF Ministry of Finance
MTEF Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
OPCS Operations Policy and Country Services
PEFA Public Expenditure and Financial Assessment
PEMSP Public Expenditure Management Strengthening Programme
PER   Public Expenditure Review
PFM   Public Financial Management
PPAR Project Performance Assessment Report
PPP   Public Private Partnerships
PRSC Poverty Reduction Support Credit
RETFs Recipient Executed Trust Funds
SAR   South Asia Region
SPF   State and Peace Building Fund




                                                              iii
Acknowledgments
This IEG Learning Product was prepared by under the general direction and
guidance of Mark Sundberg, Manager, Independent Evaluation Group (IEG).

This paper is part of a series of Learning Products (LP) that primarily synthesize
existing evaluative material with the aim of gaining new insight into the effectiveness
and design of development policies and interventions supported by the Bank from an
operational perspective. In this series the focus of the LP is on factors that influence
design, policy implementation, and performance of Development Policy Operations
(DPOs). This particular report aims to assess the extent of integration of knowledge on
public expenditures with the design of DPOs using a combination of portfolio review,
case studies, and descriptive statistical analysis to derive insights, lessons, and good
practices that could inform the future design of DPOs.

The database, analysis, and draft report were prepared by an IEG team consisting of
Zeljko Bogetic (team leader), Javier Bronfman, Malathi Jayawickrama, Marko
Klasnja, Aghassi Mkrtchyan, Moritz Piatti, Marcelo Selowsky, and Jesse Torrence.
The team leader would like to express appreciation to Mark Sundberg for
substantive guidance and advice in all stages of this study. Peer reviewer comments
from Ismail Arslan, Pedro L. Rodriguez, Shahrokh Fardoust, as well as comments
and discussions with Linda van Gelder, Ed Mount field, Manuela Francisco, Peter
Moll, and Jasmin Choker are gratefully acknowledged.

Much appreciated are important individual contributions of team members who
provided building blocks of the complete analysis presented in the report. They are
as follows: Moritz Piatti (management, improvements and revisions of the
Development Policy Operation (DPO) and Public Expenditure Review (PER)
databases based on the early database developed by Jesse Torrence); detailed
portfolio analyses of both DPOs and PERs; the author of one case study, and
working closely with the team leader and Marko Klasnja on statistical analysis);
Malathi Jayawickrama (author of several case studies who also prepared draft
synthesis of case studies related to public expenditures and DPOs analyzed in this
paper), Marcelo Selowsky (author of several case studies), Javier Bronfman (author
of several case studies, who also synthesized case studies for the accompanying
paper on macro-fiscal framework), Aghassi Mkrtchyan (author of several case
studies), Marko Klasnja (who developed the similarity index between PERs and
DPOs and also supported data work and parts of the portfolio analysis), and Jesse
Torrence (who developed an early version of database of DPOs and PERs). Team
assistance by Aline Dukuze and Yezena Zemene Yimer is gratefully acknowledged.



                                                                                           v
Overview
Integration of knowledge with lending is an enduring theme in World Bank
strategies at the corporate and country levels. The Bank lending instruments could
be more relevant and produce better results if they incorporate key analytical,
country-level knowledge. The goal of this learning product is to contribute modestly
to the understanding of how this knowledge-lending integration works in practice
and raise questions for further research.1

It examines the extent to which an important type of Bank knowledge—on public
expenditures—informs the design of Development Policy Operations (DPOs). It is
hoped that this preliminary analysis can provide the IEG and the Bank with useful
lessons as it evolves toward an integrated “solutions Bank” and the twin goals. The
analysis is not just retrospective. It also seeks to inform the ongoing and future
efforts toward integrating knowledge and lending, Systemic Country Diagnostics
(SCD), and the design of DPOs. It also aims to inform the OPCS 2015 DPO
Retrospective.

Public expenditure knowledge for the purpose of this learning product, is identified
as the body of Bank knowledge products specifically referred to in their titles as
Public Expenditure Review, whether they are multi-sector or sector public
expenditure reviews, but they also include other economic and sector work (ESW)
which directly or mostly deal with public expenditure issues. This broad definition
should capture much of the public expenditure-related analytical work at the Bank.
Arguably, efficiency and allocation issues important in the design of DPOs and
reforms they support can only be addressed by such integrative, not partial or silo-
type knowledge of specific subsector expenditures.




1 This paper is part of a series of Learning Products (LP) that primarily synthesize existing evaluative
material with the aim of gaining new insight into the effectiveness and design of development
policies and interventions supported by the Bank from an operational perspective. In this series the
focus of the LP is on factors that influence design, policy implementation, and performance of
Development Policy Operations (DPOs). This particular report aims to assess the extent of integration
of knowledge on public expenditures with the design of DPOs using a combination of portfolio
review, case studies, and descriptive statistical analysis) to derive insights, lessons, and good
practices that could inform the future design of DPOs



                                                                                                     vii
OVERVIEW


Six broad messages emerge from this review.

First, the Bank has been producing a considerable volume of knowledge on public
expenditure, which increased in recent years, and that knowledge was available to
inform the majority of DPOs in the majority of countries with DPO operations. The
analysis of the 390 DPOs and 404 public expenditure knowledge products (PERs,
broadly defined), which were the subject of this review, suggests that there appears
to be a solid degree of timeliness, availability, and thematic overlap as well as
integration between PER knowledge and DPOs. There is also evidence of continuity
of policy dialogue from PERs to DPOs in many cases. This is a reassuring
conclusion. It implies that the country-based Bank model which integrates
knowledge and lending is working well, in the case of PER knowledge and DPOs.
There are good practices worth highlighting as well as weaknesses that offer
opportunity for reflection and lessons for the future.

Second, public expenditure knowledge informs DPOs largely in the areas of public
sector governance, followed by social development, and human development.
Macroeconomic and tax policies, in particular, tend to show comparatively smaller
overlaps, but this may be because some of the macroeconomic policy agenda is
taken up more directly in the macro-fiscal framework as elaborated in the
accompanying report. There is a tentative question whether tax policy is an area in
which the World Bank has “left the field,” perhaps to the national authorities and
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and whether that should be revisited.

Third, deeper dives into case studies of recent DPOs show some good practices.
These good practice examples of integration of PER knowledge and DPOs tend to
show a continuity of policy dialogue, from PER to DPO, with DPO design directly
and explicitly using PER policy recommendations in its prior actions. Such DPOs
also tend to have stronger elements of DPO design such as macro-fiscal framework,
as shown in the accompanying paper on macro-fiscal frameworks. And they often
have better IEG ratings.

Fourth, more broadly, good practice DPOs in terms of the integration of PER and
DPO knowledge tend to be situated in an environment of long-term Bank
engagement and continuous, high-quality policy dialogue (knowledge and lending)
based on a relationship of trust. Sound PERs with candid recommendations hitting
clearly on important issues stand a better chance of informing DPO and policy
reform. Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks (MTEF), budgeting, Public
Financial Management (PFM) issues tend to be some of the common areas in which
PERs substantially informed the DPOs, but the policy areas cover the entire
spectrum of governance and other thematic areas.


                                                                                  viii
                                                                             OVERVIEW


Fifth, examples of missed opportunities in integrating PER knowledge with DPOs
tend to reflect breaks in institutional memory on the Bank and the government, as
well as breaks in the policy dialogue which can come about for many reasons
(passage of time between the PER and the DPO, changes in staff on the Bank and the
client side, changes in government and political priorities, etc.). One lesson here is
that the Bank should pay greater attention to DPO-led reengagements with
countries and new DPOs after a longer period of no core diagnostics on public
expenditures or prior dialogue and DPOs, and ensure that all relevant Bank
knowledge fully informs those DPOs.

Sixth, there may be a potential knowledge gap and an opportunity for the Bank to
intensify knowledge engagement on public expenditures at subnational levels, both
as part of the knowledge and policy dialogue and as a contribution to future DPO
development.

Finally, in follow up to this learning product, which is focused on the limited
questions around the integration of knowledge and DPOs, there is a need for a
systematic analysis of the quality of the Bank’s AAA knowledge products. An
evaluation of the public expenditure reviews, in particular, would potentially shed
further light on how the Bank can continue improving the quality, relevance, and
integration of its knowledge products.




ix
1. Introduction
1.1     Integration of knowledge with lending is an enduring theme in World Bank
strategies at the corporate and country levels. It rests on the widely shared proposition
that Bank lending instruments could be more relevant and produce better results if they
incorporate key analytical, country level knowledge. To be successful, development
interventions must be informed by evidence, and evidence comes from knowledge. This
is the idea behind Bank as a “solutions bank,” integrating financial instruments and
knowledge products into “development solutions” that deliver results. A recent
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) evaluation suggests that the Bank’s broad
economic and sector work and technical assistance strongly informs Bank lending
strategies (IEG 2008).

1.2     The goal of this learning product is to help inform the understanding of how this
integration works in practice and to raise questions for further research. Specifically, it
seeks to examine the extent to which one, albeit important type of Bank knowledge--on
public expenditures--informs the design of DPOs, a key lending instrument. This
question is relevant primarily for the quality of design of DPOs and their performance.
But it also has broader implications for how well the Bank combines knowledge and
lending to influence policy, poverty, and distributional outcomes. Finally, it should be
noted that this learning product does not evaluate the quality of the Bank’s knowledge
on public expenditure per se; it is concerned, instead, with the integration of that
knowledge into the design of DPOs.2

1.3    This is not the first IEG learning product focused specifically on the role of the
Bank knowledge in development lending.3 It is also limited in scope in that it takes a
fresh look at the interactions between one class of the Bank’s core diagnostic reports—

2   Only in the limited number of in-depth case studies, the team has looked at aspects of relevant PER quality.
3 Martin Ravallion has pointed out in recent paper (“Knowledgeable Bankers? The Demand for Research in World
Bank Operations,” Policy Research Working Paper 5892, World Bank, December 2011
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/3674/WPS5892.pdf?sequence=1) that the knowledge
of operational staff within donor agencies is likely to be important for the quality of development aid. He provides
evidence that the stock of prior analytic work by the Bank on a recipient country is a strong predictor of the
subsequent quality of its lending operations to that country (Deininger, Squire and Basu, 1998; Wane, 2004) and that
the quality of prior analytic work matters to the quality of its projects (Fardoust and Flanagan, 2011). Other related
studies analyze aspects of Bank core diagnostic knowledge. For example, Deolalikar (2008) reviews 60 PERs in
2000-07 and identifies common problems and solutions for greater impact and improved effectiveness and equity of
public expenditure. An IEG Project Performance Assessment Report (2010) analyzes growth diagnostics in four
African countries. A 2008 IEG evaluation of economic and sector work and technical assistance (“knowledge”) in
the 2000-06 period finds that the Bank’s knowledge informs the Bank’s lending strategies and the clients even more
than through the direct impact of knowledge on the clients. This suggests important synergies in Bank services
between knowledge and lending.



                                                                                                                    1
1.INTRODUCTION


the public expenditure review (PER), broadly defined—and a key lending instrument,
and it is mainly focused on understanding the scope and sectoral and thematic nature
of their integration. It is hoped that even preliminary answers to these questions can
provide IEG and the Bank with useful lessons as the Bank evolves toward an integrated
“solutions bank.”

1.4     PERs, for the purpose of this learning product, are identified as Bank knowledge
products with a specific reference in their titles as Public Expenditure Review, whether
they are multi-sector or single sector public expenditure reviews. They also include
other analytical documents which deal with public expenditure issues, be they public
finance reviews, studies of specific expenditure and debt issues, and even Country
Economic Memoranda (CEMs) with a special focus on public expenditures. This broad
definition should capture much (though not all) of the public expenditure-related
analytical work at the Bank. Arguably, efficiency and allocation issues important in the
design of DPOs and the reforms they support can only be addressed by such
integrative, not partial or silo-type knowledge of specific subsector expenditures (e.g.,
tertiary education expenditure review).




2
2. The approach
2.1     The preliminary analysis in this paper combines several approaches (Box2.1).


 Box 2.1. A Systematic Representation of the Focus (top row) and Analytical Approaches




 Source: IEG.


2.2    The IEG team analyzed all DPO that were closed in the FY2004-13; a total of 390
DPO’s were analyzed. Also, it analyzed all Public Expenditure Reviews and closely
related country diagnostics as per the Governance global practice database of public
expenditure reviews (the total of 404 public expenditure knowledge products) during
the period 2000-13. For the purpose of this analysis, it is assumed that PER knowledge
products may inform a DPO if it precedes the DPO effectiveness by no more than four
years.

2.3    The structure of the paper is the following: first, it provides elements of a
portfolio review of Development Policy Operations (DPOs) insofar as they relate to the
knowledge on public expenditure reviews.

2.4    Second, it documents basic but important metrics of the integration of Public
Expenditure Reviews (PERs) and DPOs. For example, how many PERs (defined broadly)
precede DPOs in the same and the previous three years in various countries? This
indicates the timeliness and synchronization of PER knowledge and DPOs, and
identifies those PERs that are most relevant for the design of corresponding DPOs.
Essentially, this metric answers some basic questions: in how many and in which DPOs



                                                                                         3
2. THE APPROACH AND MAIN MESSAGES


is there an analytical knowledge on public expenditures prepared by the Bank?4 What
types of DPOs tend to be more informed by PERs? And do these DPOs show better
integration of knowledge with their policy frameworks and greater success in
implementation as measured by rating outcomes.

2.5    Third, the paper answers the question in which thematic and policy areas do
PERs inform DPOs. Are there areas of particularly strong interest to DPOs? Are there
policy areas that appear to be underrepresented given the policy agenda in many
DPOs? Statistical tools measuring the degree of correspondence or similarity are also
used to assess the thematic “proximity” of PERs and DPOs.

2.6    Fourth, for deeper insights into how this integration works in practice, the report
synthesizes insights and lessons from 15 DPO desk case studies; this represents a third
of the DPOs closed in FY11-13 and for which there are completed Implementation
Completion Report (ICR) reviews. The case studies aim to distill some lessons from
good and not so good practice that could inform better integration of PER knowledge
and DPOs in the future. They include insights from the recent Project Performance
Assessment Reports (PPARs) on long DPO series (Tanzania, Vietnam, and Uganda).

    .




4The paper considers only the World Bank-prepared public expenditure country focused diagnostics. It
does not consider non-Bank knowledge products.



4
3. Knowledge on Public Expenditure and DPOs:
A basic portfolio view
3.1    This section provides an overview of Development Policy Operations (DPOs),
the World Bank's public expenditure knowledge work, and an assessment of how
public expenditure knowledge products may have informed and contributed to DPOs.

3.2   This section is structured as follows: first it provides a review of the DPOs in the
time period of 2004-2013. Second, it reviews the World Bank's portfolio of knowledge
work on public expenditure in the same period.5 And third, the DPOs and public
expenditure knowledge products are analyzed jointly to assess the extent to which
DPOs may have been informed by Public Expenditure Review (PER)-type knowledge.


Trends in the volumes, numbers, IBRD/IDA, and geography of DPOs
3.3    Data and method. For identification purposes, the detailed Bank project theme
report (2c.2.1 lines) was downloaded and customized from Business Warehouse in
August 2014. Only DPOs were retained from the database. Independent Evaluation
Group (IEG) Implementation Completion Report Review (ICRR) outcome ratings were
merged and matched with the DPO database. Observations for DPOs without an IEG
ICRR were dropped. Based on this selection process, 390 DPOs were identified for the
period of 2004-2013. Next, a database of prior actions was received from Operations
Policy and Country Services (OPCS) matching 387 of the 390 DPOs identified through
Business Warehouse. Thematic codes were further reviewed manually by the IEG team
and broken down into a few subtopics to improve the granularity of the analysis of
macroeconomic management issues in DPOs. Two main limitations apply to the
underlying data. First, administrative data for a given project are typically recorded at
an early stage of preparation, and the record is unlikely to be changed even if there may
be significant changes later on. While the thematic focus of projects is typically expected
to remain robust between preparation, concept, and board approval, this may lead to
some inaccuracies when the project focus was significantly changed during preparation.
Second, the number of observations for recent years is significantly lower, as there is a
delay in the review of the closed projects. The reader should keep this in mind,




5The period of PERs data spans four years prior to that of DPOs to allow for an analysis of how many
DPOs have been preceded by a PER. DPOs cover the period 2004-2013.



                                                                                                       5
3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


especially for the analysis of trend data which, on average, includes fewer observations
in the last three years.

3.4   Volume, numbers, and regional distribution. Two Regions, Europe and Central
Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, have received most DPO lending
commitments in terms of volume (almost $18 billion each). Most were International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) countries. This is followed by East
Asia and the Pacific which has proportionately more International Development
Association (IDA) countries. Next is the Africa Region, with mostly IDA countries.6

3.5   In terms of number of DPOs, the Africa Region has more DPOs than any other
Region, partly reflecting the large number of countries. The average size of a DPO (in
terms of US$) in the Africa Region, however, is significantly lower than that of other
Regions, reflecting the comparatively smaller size of African economies and their
absorptive capacity (figure 3.1).

Figure 3-1 Commitments and numbers of DPOs by lending instrument and region (closed DPOs,
2004-2013)




Source: IEG DPO database.

3.6    The average lending amount for IDA countries has remained largely constant
over time, but increased dramatically for IBRD countries in the late 2000s. This increase
was a result of the global financial crisis when DPOs were used as a countercyclical
instrument in IBRD countries. The reversal of these trends in 2012 and 2013 in the


6 There were two recipient-executed trust funds (RETFs). One in Rwanda (2010) and one Burkina Faso
(2012), and eight DPOs (e.g. West Bank and Gaza and Burundi) using the state and peace building fund
(SPF). These constitute a minor part of the portfolio, both in terms of numbers and volume.



6
                             3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


figures may simply reflect the low number of observations (low number of operations
closed and reviewed) and should be taken with caution (figure 3.2).

Figure 3-2 Trends in IBRD and IDA DPOs and average commitments (closed DPOs 2004-2013)




Source: IEG DPO database.

3.7    The top recipients of DPO financing by volume are IBRD countries. Most notably
Mexico and Indonesia each received more than US$ 6 billion, followed by Poland and
Turkey, which received close to US$ 5 billion each. The countries that received the
largest number of DPOs were Pakistan (16 operations) and Colombia (14 operations)
(Table 3.1).

Table 3-1 Top ten countries by commitments and number of operations (closed operations 2004-
2013)
 #    Top ten countries by        Total            Top ten countries by no of      No of
      commitment                  commitment       operations                      operations
                                  (US$ millions)
 1    Mexico                      6,916            Pakistan                        16
 2    Indonesia                   6,250            Colombia                        14
 3    Poland                      4,996            Mexico                          13
 4    Turkey                      4,900            Morocco                         13
 5    Colombia                    3,650            Vietnam                         11
 6    Pakistan                    2,760            Indonesia                       11
 7    Vietnam                     2,175            Bangladesh                      10
 8    Ukraine                     1,701            Ghana                           9
 9    Morocco                     1,638            Peru                            9
 10   Romania                     1,514            Mozambique / Tanzania           8
Source IEG DPO database.

3.8  The majority of DPOs (70 percent) were managed by the Poverty Reduction and
Economic Management (PREM) Network, followed by Human Development (HD) (12


                                                                                                7
3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


percent) and the Sustainable Development Network (SDN) (10 percent). Within PREM,
most DPOs were managed by economic policy. The Poverty (POV) and Public Sector
(PS) practices each managed 12 percent of all DPOs.

3.9    There does not appear to be substantial variation over time regarding the
networks managing DPOs. This may reflect, on the demand side, the thematic focus of
reforms supported by DPOs, typically concentrated in economic policy and governance
issues and, on the supply side, the Bank’s institutional tendency towards a relatively
constant division of labor among networks. The notable reduction of PREM-led DPOs
from 2011 onward, however, reflects the low number of closed and reviewed operations
rather than a trend in the reduction of approvals (Figure 3.3).

Figure 3-3 Distribution and trend of DPOs managed by Networks and Sector Boards (closed
operations 2004-2013)




Source IEG DPO database.


Trends in public expenditure knowledge products
3.10 Methods of identifying PERs. This review draws on a data collection effort by
the Public Sector Governance Global Practice (GP) on public expenditure knowledge
products. All reports between 2000 and 2014 were drawn from a PER Business
Intelligence and Image Bank query, supplemented by economic and sector work (ESW)
that were not specifically classified as PERs but may also be focused on other aspects of
fiscal and expenditure management, such as debt sustainability and macro-fiscal issues.
Examples include (but are not limited to) public finance reviews, country economic
memoranda, health expenditure and finance studies, and various policy notes with
substantial public expenditure content. The Public Sector Governance GP cast the net


8
                                    3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


relatively wide so the total number of reports may appear large. Reports included are
all those that have a unique identification number in Image Bank. Excluded are reports
written in languages other than English, and supplementary volumes. All thematic
codes of reports were reviewed, double-checked, and cleaned manually as necessary by
the IEG team to allow for the interpretation of the data.

3.11 Volume, numbers, and regional distribution. Over the period of 2000-2014 there
have been 404 knowledge products on public expenditures. The longer period is used
compared to DPOs to account for linkages with PERs that preceded DPOs in 2004 by
four years; those earlier PERs could, presumably, inform the design of DPOs three to
four years later. There has been a steady upward trend in the number of PERs delivered
over the years. The average number delivered between 2000 and 2009 was 22.3, which
then increased to 36.2 per year delivered between 2010 and 2014.

3.12 The largest share of these knowledge products (35 percent) was produced in the
Africa Region followed by Europe and Central Asia (27 percent) and East Asia and the
Pacific (16 percent). South Asia and the Middle East and North Africa trail notably with
five and four percent, respectively. There has been a concentration of PERs in a small
number of countries with extensive Bank engagement (Table 3.2).

Table 3-2. Top ten countries with PERs, 2000-14
 Country                                                  Number of reports
 Indonesia                                                29
 Tanzania                                                 15
 Tajikistan                                               13
 Uganda                                                   11
 Ethiopia                                                 10
 Kyrgyz Republic                                          9
 Philippines                                              8
 Africa, region wide                                      8
 Russian Federation                                       8
 Ghana                                                    7
Source: IEG DPO and PER Database.

3.13 The 404 reports were conducted across 127 countries. The top ten countries with
the most reports are listed in table 3.2: Indonesia scores highest with 29 reports,
followed by Tanzania (15), and Tajikistan (13). The number of reports has increased
significantly from the late 1990s until 2010. The majority of PERs in the Africa Region
may reflect the emphasis on basic public expenditure policy trade-offs, poverty,
distributional and allocation issues, as well as the need to underpin DPOs by a public
expenditure analysis in an environment of limited availability and quality of data



                                                                                                     9
3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


(figure 3.4). By contrast, in many IBRD countries, such data and analyses may be
available on a more regular basis, including analyses by country authorities, perhaps
obviating the need for full-fledged or frequent PERs.

Figure 3-4 Trend and regional distribution of public expenditure knowledge products (2000-2014)




Source: IEG review of Public Sector Governance PER monitor.

3.14 Most PER-type knowledge products reviewed were thematically coded for
public sector governance (figure 3.5). Of the 404 reports, 191 were coded for 81 themes
by the task team leader. Summarizing these into clusters, close to 90 percent contain
public sector governance as thematic cluster. The social development, gender, and
inclusion cluster was coded 35 percent of the time, followed by the human development
cluster, which was coded in 18 percent of all reviews. In terms of the actual themes of
interest in the present analysis, macroeconomic management was coded in 15 percent of
documents, tax policy and administration in seven percent, and social safety nets7 in six
percent of all reports.8




7   “Macroeconomic management” is included in the “economic management” cluster. “Tax policy and
administration” is in the “public sector governance” cluster. And “social safety nets” is in the “social
protection and risk management” cluster.
8   Note that reports may receive up to five themes, thus totals exceed 100 percent.



10
                                    3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


Figure 3-5 Percentage of PERs with specific themes (2000-2014); (n=191)




Source: IEG review of Public Sector Governance PER monitor.

3.15 Importantly, these PER codes are the same theme codes used in the thematic
coding of DPOs and prior actions. This allows a relatively accurate “matching” of
themes between PERs and DPOs. The notable difference is that operations and ESW are
coded by the task team leaders, while prior actions were retro-fitted with codes by
OPCS manually.


How does knowledge of public expenditure inform DPOs?
3.16 This section uses portfolio data on both DPOs and PERs to identify the overlaps
and linkages between the two and ascertain whether PERs could potentially have
played an informative role regarding resource allocation issues and policy frameworks
in DPOs. Specifically, the analysis of the portfolio tells us how many DPOs were
preceded by a PER within an adequate time period, and whether there was thematic
overlap between the PER and the prior actions used by the DPO. An in-depth review of
whether and how PERs have informed recent DPOs was taken up in the case studies
(see chapter 4).

3.17 A total of 390 DPOs and 404 PER knowledge products were analyzed for
potential thematic overlaps as follows: if a DPO had a public expenditure knowledge
product within four years before DPO project effectiveness, it was considered relevant9.
Using this rule, of the 390 DPOs, exactly 265 were preceded by a PER knowledge
product, about 68 percent. DPOs were conducted in a total of 103 countries. In 75 (73
percent) of those countries, a knowledge product was potentially informative to the


9 Reports released five years or longer before DPO project inception were deemed too dated to credibly
inform the operation, especially since reports use data from two or more years prior to dissemination.



                                                                                                         11
3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


operation. These numbers suggest that the Bank’s knowledge on public expenditures is
highly relevant and could inform the design of operations in the majority of DPOs and
countries under analysis. Table 3.3 provides a breakdown of these figures.

Table 3-3. Number and share of DPOs preceded by PER
                                                             Number          Share
 Total No of DPOs                                            390             100%
 DPOs with PER                                               265             68%
 Total countries with DPOs                                   103             100%
 Countries w/ DPO and PER                                    75              73%
 Countries w/ DPO but w/o PER                                28              27%
Source: IEG assessment of DPO and PER data.

3.18 Another way of looking at these data is to view the countries with DPOs
matched by recent PERs as those with relatively substantial policy dialogue. PERs are not
just policy oriented research products. They are also a process of consultation,
discussion, and dialogue that can inform policy reforms underpinning DPOs on a
variety of public expenditure issues (e.g., subsidies, wage bill, public investments,
budgeting and execution, pro-poor expenditures, equity). Neither PER-type knowledge
products nor DPOs can be done without an explicit request from and collaboration with
the country authorities—collaboration which evolves through a dialogue on policy
reforms, their objectives, policies, trade-offs, and outcomes. And it is through this policy
dialogue that knowledge products translate, directly or indirectly, into policy reforms
and outcomes.

3.19 Further, while on average, 68 percent of DPOs were potentially informed by a
PER, there is considerable regional variation. Europe and Central Asia has the most
DPOs with PERs at close to 80 percent, followed by the Africa Region and East Asia and
the Pacific, which have 76 percent each. On the other end of the spectrum is the Middle
East and North Africa, where only 23 percent of all DPOs have a PER as an analytical
underpinning (see figure 6). The Middle East and North Africa Region covers about
eight percent of all DPOs, but only constitutes four percent of PERs (see figure 4). As
indicated, these figures may also reflect not only the demand for the Bank’s knowledge
and DPOs but also the relative breadth and strength of the policy dialogue on policy
reform and public expenditure issues in the respective Regions.




12
                                   3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


Figure 3-6 Numbers and shares of DPOs with PERs within four years, by world region




Source: IEG assessment of DPO and PER data.

3.20 There has been a downward trend over time in the number of DPOs preceded by
a PER (Figure 3.7). Between 2004 and 2007, more than 70 percent of DPOs had a
relevant PER as an analytical underpinning. This share declined since then to less than
60 percent since 2012. While observations of DPOs were few in 2012 and 2013, this trend
was already pronounced in the years prior. Interestingly, there is a spike of DPOs with
PERs in 2009-2010 when a number of DPOs were extended in the context of the global
financial crisis. Apparently, many of the DPOs in those years had PERs available.

Figure 3-7 Trends in the numbers and shares of DPOs with PERs




Source: IEG assessment of DPO and PER data.




                                                                                                   13
3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


3.21 The trend in the performance of DPOs with PERs (IEG outcome rated
moderately satisfactory or higher) has been mixed. There has been a decline in IEG
ratings of DPOs with PERs between 2004 and 2008, and in most of these years the
performance has been slightly under that of DPOs without a PER. Since 2008, however,
the performance of DPOs with a PER improved markedly so that in recent years DPOs
with a PER outperformed those without by a small margin (figure 3.8).

Figure 3-8 Comparison of the trend in performance of DPOs with/without a PER




Source: IEG calculations using Business Warehouse data and the PER monitor.

3.22 Matching DPOs and knowledge products varies by “similarity” of themes.
Another way to obtain a metric of thematic integration of PER themes with DPO policy
content represented in DPO prior actions uses the statistical-descriptive concept of
“similarity.” In other words, we ask the question: to what extent do policy
themes/topics in the PER match those in the policy framework in the prior actions of
DPOs? To this end, the IEG team developed a “similarity index,” constructed to show
the extent to which the portfolio of DPOs match with the respective portfolio of PERs
using the themes of DPO prior actions and the first theme (where available) of the PER.
This similarity measure ranges between -1 (no similarity) and 1 (high similarity), with
higher values indicating greater similarity.10

3.23 Using this approach, the match between DPOs’ policy frameworks in prior
actions and PERs is generally quite high with an overall similarity measure of 0.69
(table 3.4) compared with 1.0 indicated “perfect” thematic similarity. Interestingly,

10The similarity index is based on the concept of Euclidian distance. The similarity measure employed is
the cosine similarity, which measures the similarity between two vectors showing frequencies of thematic
codes in DPOs and PERs. In this case, the prior action theme vector is the vector that counts the number
of instances of each theme among all prior actions of a DPO. The PER theme vector does the same for all
the themes of the matching PERs. In other words, these vectors capture theme frequencies. The measure
then compares the distance between these vectors with smaller distances indicating greater similarity.



14
                               3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


stand-alone operations are somewhat more closely related to the PER than
programmatic DPOs, but the difference is small and both types of DPOs have quite
high similarity indices.11

Table 3-4 Similarity index of DPOs and PER, using theme codes
                                                        Similarity measure
 All                                                    0.69
 Stand-alone DPO                                        0.74
 Programmatic DPO                                       0.52
 Below-average size DPO                                 0.72
 Above-average size DPO                                 0.45
 Econ. Policy sector board                              0.67
 Other sector board                                     0.60
Source: IEG calculations.

3.24 A number of DPOs feature explicit medium-term expenditure framework
(MTEF) content in prior actions. To ascertain such DPO-PER linkages at a more
granular level, we also looked at some broad public expenditure policy areas relevant in
many countries, such as medium-term expenditure frameworks. A relatively small
fraction of DPOs analyzed explicitly mention the medium-term expenditure framework
(MTEF) in their prior actions. Out of the 387 operations, 59 cited an MTEF at least once
in a prior action, which is about 15 percent of total. In terms of the total numbers of
prior actions, MTEF-related ones are much fewer, making up less than two percent of
the total. In addition, there appears to be a downward trend of MTEF-related actions
over the years, as shown in figure 3.9. This, however, could be interpreted in light of a
general reduction in the number of prior actions and, possibly, progress with
completion of past MTEF reform actions. Or, it could reflect a reduction in multi-sector
operations with multiple MTEF related prior actions.12


11Further, DPOs with higher ICR review ratings appear less closely matched to PER analytical work than
DPOs with lower ratings. This may, in part, be explained by a larger number of reports being produced
in large countries, not all of which need to be aligned with a DPO and some of which were more aligned
with non-DPO instruments (e.g., the count of PERs in Indonesia is 29 and not all can be expected to be
related to the 11 DPOs —especially given that many sectoral reports were produced).
                in only one prior action was a public expenditure review explicitly mentioned, directly
12 Interestingly,

linking the policy recommendation of the PER with DPO policy action. The 2007 LAO PRSC III operation
required that the “[Ministry of Finance] approved an updated Public Expenditure Management
Strengthening Programme (PEMSP) and implementation plan based on 2005/6 PER analysis and
demonstrated ongoing progress with its implementation and capacity building .” Interestingly, that
particular operation, as with some other DPOs in that country, scored highly on the macro-fiscal
consistency index in assessing the quality of the macro-fiscal framework (See the accompanying report on
the quality of macro frameworks in DPOs, IEG 2015). So this is the case of a DPO and country where
there is clearly a high-quality macro-fiscal framework coupled with a relevant PER knowledge product
that was directly and explicitly used in the design of the DPO policy framework.



                                                                                                     15
3. KNOWLEDGE ON PUBLIC EXPENDITURE AND DPOS: A BASIC PORTFOLIO VIEW


Figure 3-9 Number of MTEF related prior actions (operations closed 2004-2013)




Source: IEG review of OPCS prior action database.
Note: MTEF related prior actions are those that explicitly feature MTEF in their formulation, either as a process, document, or
Government decision regarding the preparation or implementation of MTEF.

3.25 Finally, a very preliminary review of the portfolio or subnational DPOs and PERs
(Appendix 3) for the period 2000-13 (PER) and DPOs (2004-13) suggests that those
DPOs have taken place in a small number of large, federated countries.13 By far, the
largest number of subnational DPOs in this period took place in only one country:
Brazil. PERs and DPOs generally tend to overlap in a very small number of countries.
Given the importance of the subnational fiscal and development agenda, this may
suggest a potential knowledge gap and an opportunity for the Bank to intensify
knowledge engagement at subnational levels, both as part of the knowledge and policy
dialogue and as a contribution to future DPO development.




13There were other subnational DPOs in other countries in the period preceding 2004 (e.g., India,
Pakistan).



16
4. Select findings from case studies
4.1     This section draws on 15 in-depth case studies (including programmatic series;
25 if counted as individual operations) that were written against a common protocol to
provide an understanding of where and how knowledge on public expenditures has
contributed to the design of Development Policy Operations (DPOs). Case studies were
drawn from all Regions and a variety of DPO types that were closed in FY11-13 and had
a completed Implementation Completion Report (ICR) review. Although the case
studies cover a third of all DPOs meeting the periodicity and ICR review criteria, the
intention is to maximize learning and gain in-depth insights rather than fully represent
the portfolio regionally and globally. A summary of select findings of these case studies
is provided in table 4.1.

4.2    Overall, in most of these cases, there is a Public Expenditure Review (PER) or a
related product addressing public expenditure issues related to the content of the DPO.
In one case where there is no recent PER—St. Lucia—there is a related poverty
assessment closely thematically related to the social sector focus of the DPO. In the case
of Brazil, there is no evidence of a PER or a related work, and in Albania, the PER was
dated although related to the content of the DPO. Interestingly, in each of these cases
where there is no recent DPO, the macro-fiscal frameworks had identifiable weaknesses
(see the accompanying report on the macro-fiscal frameworks in DPOs).

Table 4-1 Integration of PERs with DPOs: Select findings from the case studies (Also see detailed
table in Annex 3).
 Country, DPL, Fiscal Year           Coverage          Was there a PER? What was           Other Analytical Work
                                     (single           the focus? (specific/general)       on Public Expenditure
                                     tranche;                                              Allocation
                                     series; sector;
                                     general)
 Albania Social Sector Reform DPL,   One-Tranche       No recent PER.                      Some intra-sectoral
 one-tranche, US$25m, FY11           Social Sector     Extensive PER in 2006               analysis on shifting
                                                       covered public debt, social         expenditure
                                                       insurance system, the health        allocations to the poor
                                                       finance environment including       through targeting, but
                                                       the health insurance institute      no discussion of
                                                       (HII). Although PER was dated,      composition or
                                                       issues of targeting in the social   adequacy of
                                                       protection system and need for      expenditure
                                                       HII reforms were relevant.          allocations to social
                                                                                           transfer programs and
                                                                                           health.
 Benin PRSC 4-6, series, FY07-10     Series            PER in 2004 focusing on social
                                     General           expenditure trends in the same



                                                                                                                 17
4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES

                                                             sectors of focus in the PRSC
                                                             series.
 Brazil (State of Rio Grande Do            One-tranche       No PER or state specific social
 Sul), Fiscal Sustainability DPL,          State only        sector reports to guide DPO.
 US$1.1 billion, FY09
 Cote d’Ivoire Post Reconstruction         One-tranche       PER in 2008. Emphasis on
 and Recovery Grant, US$150                General           macro and fiscal issues, exp.
 million, FY12                                               and revenue policies, PEFA,
                                                             and a review of Public
                                                             Procurement System.
 Indonesia Infrastructure DPL 4            Series of 4       PER in 2007                       Infrastructure
 (series of 4), amounts of                 Infrastructure                                      Framework for Policy
 US$200m, 200m, 250m and 200m,             Sector                                              and Action, 2004
 FY08-11
 Latvia Safety Net and Social              Series of 2       PER in 2007 (prepared for         IMF Program
 Sector Reform Program (series of          General           crisis)                           addresses long-term
 2). US$134.62m, FY10;                     (Global Crisis)   PER 2010 (on social sector        structural reforms in
 US$130.73m, FY11                          2008-10           reforms)                          social safety net
                                           response)                                           (SSN), pensions,
                                                                                               state-owned
                                                                                               enterprises
 Mexico Green Growth DPL,                  One-tranche       PER in 2009 (on agriculture
 US$1.503 billion, FY09                    Environment       and rural development)
                                           sector            PER in 2004 country-wide
 Peru Programmatic Fiscal                  Series of 4       PER in 2002                       CEM, CFAA, CPAR,
 Management and                            General           PER in 2007                       Investment Climate
 Competitiveness DPL, US$200m,                                                                 Assessment (ICA),
 370m (plus supplemental DDO of                                                                Poverty Assessment,
 US$330m), 150m and 100m, FY07-                                                                Sector Studies,
 11                                                                                            Financial Sector
                                                                                               Assess. Update,
                                                                                               PEFA in 2009
 Poland Energy Efficiency and              One-tranche       PER in 2010
 Renewable Energy Development,             Energy sector
 DPL, US$1.4 billion, FY11
 Romania Financial Management              Series            PER in 2006
 and Social Protection DPL 2 (in a         General           PER in 2010, in middle of
 series of 1-3, 2009-11), amounts of                         series as urgency due to global
 US$422m, 380m, 560m, FY11                                   crisis.
 St Lucia Economic and Social              One-tranche       No PER                            Poverty Assessment,
 DPL, US$12 million, FY10                  General                                             SSN Assessment,
 Tunisia Governance and                    One-tranche       No PER                            Health Sector Study in
 Opportunity DPL, US$500 million,          General                                             2006
 FY11
 Vietnam, Programmatic PRSC 10             Series            PER in 2005 covered resource      PEFA exercise in 2013
 (in a series of PRSCs 6-10),              General           allocation, PFM challenges.       to diagnose PFM
 US$152 million, FY10                                                                          issues.
Source: IEG team review of case studies.




18
                                                          4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


Examples of successful contribution of public expenditure work in the design of
DPOs
4.3   Some DPOs clearly show a high degree and relevant integration of PER
knowledge into DPO policy frameworks and prior actions. We highlight those cases
with emphasis on the specific policy areas and how they contributed to the formulation
of DPO design. Among the case studies reviewed, three operations stand out as
examples of good practice. Even there, however, there are areas where such integration
could have been more pronounced, which is also highlighted. These were the DPOs on
Romania, Peru, and Indonesia.

4.4    Romania. Financial Management and Social Protection Series (DPOs 1-3, closed
FY11). This DPO series is a good example of incorporating PER recommendations and
appropriately sequencing prior actions in the DPO series, and prior actions that are
substantive and binding.

4.5     Romania’s PERs in 2006 and 2010 were relevant. The 2010 PER was in the middle
of the DPO series and emphasized the urgency of the Bank’s response to the global
crisis. The findings of the PER were directly used in the DPO policy areas and prior
actions. Policy dialogue on the PER continued and intensified as policy dialogue on
DPO reforms.

4.6   The main areas where the Romania PER recommendations were used in the DPO
include the following:

       Medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF): Financial management was
        improved under the DPO by explicitly introducing an MTEF. This moved from
        administrative action in the first DPO, to preparation and discussion of
        legislation in Parliament in DPL2. The prior actions became increasingly more
        binding, eventually calling for parliamentary approval of the MTEF in DPL3.
       Public Sector Wages: The PER made recommendations for reforms in the
        structure of wages and the wage-setting process. Reforms in public sector pay,
        introducing more transparent mechanisms for adjustments in the structure of
        public sector wages, and merit increases were specific prior actions in the three
        operations.
       Education: The PER suggested more flexibility in allocating teachers according to
        demand. The second PER, going further, recommended per capitation formulas.
        The prior action included a submission to Parliament followed by legislation in
        place in capitation formulas in eight counties. This reform, however, was slow
        in implementation. It could have been approved a year earlier, particularly as




                                                                                          19
4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


         the population involved was small. The policy should have ideally been
         extended to the overall country by DPL2.
        Health: Both PERs raised the need to address bias in the allocation of resources
         toward hospitals versus preventive and primary care (outpatient care). Here, the
         DPO does not feature strong follow up. But DPL 2 included a prior action
         requiring a decision to update a Hospital Rationalization Strategy.
        Pensions: The PERs address the need to reform the system. The second PER is
         more forceful in flagging that the system is financially unsustainable. It also
         stresses the need to act on several fronts, from retirement age, privileges to
         certain groups, indexation, etc. The DPL includes a prior action on indexation
         reform.

4.7    Peru. This DPO series (Programmatic, Fiscal Management, and Competitiveness,
closed FY11) represents a case of well-timed, several PERs, well integrated into the
DPOs, a host of good economic and sector work (ESW) including a Public Expenditure
Financial Assessment (PEFA), and good data and analysis which informed the sound
design of a series of four DPLs. The operation also resulted in strong implementation.

4.8    Substantial PER-type work preceded the DPO. Peru had PERs in 2002 and 2007,
and a PEFA in 2009, in preparation for the Programmatic Fiscal Management and
Competitiveness DPL series of four loans in FY07-11. The first operation used the PER
directly as a basis for its design. This ensured the continuity of the policy dialogue from
the PER to the DPO. The third operation used the PEFA to inform its design (to inform
the reform process and indicative triggers). All three studies appear to have informed
country authorities and the Bank on the most important aspects of reform, and also
provided them with data and timely analysis, which made it possible to formulate DPO
prior actions and several indicators.

4.9     The DPOs selected policies on the basis of the analytical work that aimed to
determine key policies with a large development impact. Substantial diagnostic work
informed the design of the series. Some studies had been completed, while others were
underway at DPO preparation. For example, a completed Public Expenditure and
Financial Management Assessment and an (at the time) ongoing PER contributed to
inform the policy dialogue in the areas of Public Financial Management (PFM) and
fiscal transparency. Similarly, the Governance and Governability Nonlending Technical
Assistance (NLTA) supported policy analysis related to results-based transfers to
subnational governments, which underpinned the reforms supported by the series. On
the competitiveness agenda, the Informality ESW addressed the question of how
informality affects productivity and competitiveness of small and medium-sized
businesses. Overall, the lesson here is that a substantial amount of timely and good



20
                                                                4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


analytical work formed the basis for this successfully-designed DPL series, with robust
links in the results framework, and strong implementation.

4.10 As documented in the accompanying report, this operation also featured a high
quality macro-fiscal framework, which contributed to the quality of the overall design
and DPO rating.

4.11 Indonesia. Infrastructure DPO series, four operations, closed FY11. This sector
DPO series was based on PER findings. It set high reform expectations and it pushed
hard for sector reforms amidst challenges.

4.12 Indonesia’s comprehensive, multi-sectoral 2007 PER was timely. At the time,
Indonesia was expected to have significant additional fiscal resources to address
development needs following the post-crisis period. Although the macro-stability was
established, public infrastructure spending had remained at only 2 to 3 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP) for many years, well below the needs of a rapidly growing
economy and population. There was concern that poor infrastructure—electricity
shortages, road congestion, and low access to piped water and treated sewage—had
reduced the quality of life and the environment, and would ultimately hamper growth.
A major Bank study (2004) had analyzed the problem of infrastructure needs.14 The
PER focused on how to build on prior achievements and spend additional public
resources effectively and efficiently to improve the quality of social services and close
the infrastructure gaps.

4.13 The Indonesia DPL (I-DPL) Policy Matrix was clearly linked to the PER and the
2004 study. The four policy areas of the DPL series (national, subnational spending on
infrastructure; private sector financing through public-private partnerships (PPP); and
cross-cutting areas of land, environment, and fiduciary), and prior actions covered
several key policy proposals. This included expanding the supply of electricity to
unserved areas in a cost effective and equitable manner; reducing inefficient and pro-
rich fuel subsidies (one of the largest spending items on the budget); and reallocating
inefficient and pro-rich electricity subsidies from consumption towards connection to
encourage expansion of the electricity network (also recommended in the related Social
Impact Assessment).

4.14 Despite the long-standing tensions and turmoil over the policy direction in the
power sector, the inclusion of high profile outcomes (greater access and better subsidy




14   Indonesia: Averting an Infrastructure Crisis, A Framework for Policy and Action, 2004.


                                                                                                21
4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


targeting) in the policy matrix raised expectations for policy changes.15 Sector policy
dialogue was substantive, but ultimately implementation proved difficult. The policy of
providing electricity at rates below cost recovery was in direct conflict with the need to
increase the supply of and access to electricity at a time of fiscal restraint. Existing
consumption subsidies favored the wealthier over the poor. The lack of legislative
action to change tariff policy during the first three operations prevented the reform of
tariff pricing and limited progress on improving reliability and access to the power
supply.

4.15 In hindsight, the Bank overlooked some key factors—that parliamentary
approval was required to change below-cost tariffs and electricity prices and that
powerful vested interests could block the approval of the law.16 Although the
government began to revisit the electricity law to remove the monopoly power of the
state-owned electricity company in electricity supply and to allow regional
governments to set electricity tariffs, lobbying by some industry groups prevented tariff
increases. However, the IDPL continued to push for power sector reforms. Although
reforms did not occur during the first three IDPLs and performance targets were not
achieved, there was a final breakthrough in the end.

4.16 In mid-2010, during the last IDPL, revisions in electricity tariffs broke the long-
standing taboo and made a major reform step in the right direction. Simulations of the
social impact of the draft tariff scheme suggest that the top decile’s household
consumption share of the electricity subsidies will fall, while the bottom decile increases
their share—indicating a more pro-poor tariff structure. Proposed tariff increases would
not affect the poorest as they are concentrated in the lower capacity bandwidths.
Analysis also shows that the lowest capacity users represent the largest share of
residential users and the prospective subsidy changes in 2010 would shift the subsidy
emphasis from industry and business to low capacity households. This would suggest a
progressive tariff and subsidy scheme. Reforms supported by the series, despite delays
and difficulties, should play a role in extending access and reducing regressivity of
tariffs in Indonesia.




15Official household access to electricity was 55 percent in 2005 (PER, 2007). Residential
consumers who were connected at less than 900 watts received only 41 percent of the State
Electricity Company (PLN) subsidy.
16The government provides a subsidy to cover the difference between its costs and regulated
tariffs. A key part of the subsidy is received by residential consumers who are unlikely to be
poor (with connections greater than 900 watts) and by large industrial and commercial
consumers.


22
                                                          4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


4.17 This is an example of difficult, well-designed DPO reforms informed by PER
analysis that took time to deliver results. It would have been expedient to drop or soften
tariff reform from the reform agenda. But the Bank and the authorities’ persistence in
the face of difficulties paid off.

4.18 Finally, another lesson is criticality of complementary AAA on public
expenditure to drive implementation effectiveness, including political economy
analysis, poverty assessment, CEM, which is possible for a large, active Bank client
country.

Examples of missed opportunities
4.19 In contrast to the above good practice examples, in some DPOs, we identified
missed opportunities in the integration of PERs with DPOs. For example, public
expenditure knowledge that existed but was not used in the DPO dialogue and design.
Or difficult issues in the DPO that could have been resolved and for which there existed
a knowledge base, but they remained unaddressed. We highlight, in particular, the
operations in Latvia, Albania, Vietnam, and Benin.

4.20 Latvia. Social Safety Net and Social Sector Reform Program, series of two DPOs,
closed FY11. A missed opportunity here can be summarized with a question: Could
“indicative triggers” have been revised and new actions introduced following Board
approval of the first operation in a series if there is compelling new information or a
change of circumstances?

4.21 Latvia had two PERs in 2007 and 2010. The 2007 PER had limited overall
relevance to the DPL as it had focused on the long-term agenda of improving public
efficiencies in general. The subsequent global crisis resulted in major budget cuts in
2009. The Safety Net and Social Sector Reform DPL (FY10) commissioned a PER in the
same year to provide analytical underpinning, and to specifically focus on social sector
reforms in an environment of a substantially reduced budget envelope. The study
scrutinized the ongoing reforms on social protection, health, and education; provided a
thorough analysis of challenges in social protection, health, and education; and
provided a menu of options for policy action for the medium term. However, as policy
actions for the (second) DPL were already designed during first DPL (as indicative
triggers) — there was little flexibility to incorporate new actions and recommendations
arising from the PER.
4.22 As a result, some of the potentially important reform areas that came out of the
2010 PER that were not included in the first operation did not become reform actions
under the second program. For example, the 2010 PER suggested reforms in family state



                                                                                          23
4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


benefits that were not well targeted but constituted 37 percent of the social protection
budget as of 2010. The PER also suggested a number of reforms in social programs to
redirect resources from the nonpoor to the poor. However, this did not become part of
the reform program either. There was a de facto break in the continuity of the policy
dialogue from the PER to DPOs. And a missed opportunity to improve the composition
of public expenditures towards the poor at a time of general budget austerity.
4.23 Albania. Social sector reform DPL (standalone, closed in FY11) is a DPO that
does not use or mention a relevant PER. An in-depth PER in December 2006 covered the
same areas as the Social Sector Reform DPL in April 2011, and the PER provided a
thorough analysis on key social sector reforms. However, there is no mention of the
PER in the DPL program document. There is also no indication that PER
recommendations informed the DPO design. It is true that the PER was completed over
four years before the DPO and perhaps this and the associated break in the policy
dialogue may partly explain how the PER fell from the DPO radar screen. Personnel
changes in both the government and the Bank during this time also may have
contributed to the apparent loss of institutional memory. But the PER content was
highly relevant to the DPO and as such it should have been consulted.
4.24 The December 2006 PER may be dated; however, it covered key aspects and
issues in the social sector, which were relevant at the time of the DPL. For example, it
included the Ndihma Ekonomike Social Assistance Program, equity and efficiency of
health sector expenditures (including the Health Insurance Institute), education funding
levels and relative efficiency, and the pension program’s challenges. These overlap with
some of the main areas and objectives supported by the subsequent DPL, including,
policy changes to: improve the effectiveness of social safety nets and enhance the
efficiency and equity of health spending in a fiscally sustainable environment. Specific
policies under the DPO aimed at strengthening mechanisms to allocate funds and select
beneficiaries in the main social assistance program and enhancing the efficiency and
equity of health spending. Against this backdrop, the 2011 DPO program document
fails to mention the PER and its findings. The only reference to the “PER - Public
Expenditure Review” is in the list of acronyms.
4.25 Vietnam: The programmatic PRSC series, PRSC6-10 incorporates the critical
recommendations of a PER in its DPO policy matrix at entry. However, integration
proved of PER with the initial design of the PRSC was solid, it proved ineffective as the
political economy constraints to implementing the program were overlooked (IEG
PPAR, 2015, Vietnam PRSC6-10).
4.26 There was an “award-winning” PER in 2005, a major exercise that covered the
allocation of public funds and critical areas of public financial management (PFM). The
PRSC series included 10 of the key recommendations from the PER and the 2007
Vietnam Development Report in its design. Public expenditure and PFM were key


24
                                                          4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


policy areas in the series. Of the four prior actions in the first PRSC, three were public
expenditure/PFM and focused on the critical areas of improving independence of the
State Audit of Vietnam (SAV) and strengthening debt management. There were 10
indicative triggers in subsequent PRSCs 7-10. These were also critical to improving PFM
and derived directly from the PER. So what was the problem?
4.27 The policy matrix changed significantly as the dialogue and the series
progressed, introducing problems. The relevance and strength of policy actions
declined substantially. Key policy actions envisaged at entry in PRSC 6 were never
incorporated into the final policy matrix of the PRSC operations. In particular, proposed
key policy actions on integration of the MTEF into the budgeting process, reducing off-
budget expenditures, and introducing international standards in financial statements
were dropped from subsequent PRSC operations, ostensibly because of the lack of
reform momentum. The PRSCs continued even as weakening reform performance was
reflected in the Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) subcomponents on
fiscal management and PFM, which declined during the relevant period 2006-2013.
Why did the Bank progressively drop the policy actions in the DPOs? It is a question for
reflection within a broader context and discussion of the dialogue and Bank strategy in
that country. What is clear is that PRSC disbursements were made irrespective of the
clear weakening of the otherwise sound policy framework that was well integrated with
relevant analytical work. Resource transfer considerations dominated reform objectives.
4.28 The Vietnam Public Investment Reform (PIR) series was implemented in FY 09-
12 in parallel to the PRSCs and it took on some of the issues identified in the PER. The
PIR was to support reforms in public investments (identified as a major issue in the
PER). This had become a larger issue by 2009, due to problems in the expenditure
composition that neglected operations and maintenance expenditures. Although the
initial design of the PIR series included the law on public investments (to address this
issue) as an indicative trigger, it was dropped from the policy matrix and never became
a prior action.
4.29 The PIR series did not achieve any major results in the area of public investments
that were highlighted in the PER. The 2005 PER suggested frequent subsequent PERs;
however, the authorities indicated no interest in follow up PERs in the period 2008-
2013. There was apparently no interest or political will to delve into the diagnostics and
causes of expenditure inefficiencies and resulting recommendations. The 2013 Public
Expenditure Financial Assessment (PEFA) revealed that many of the challenges
identified in the 2005 PER remained. Despite the PIR, improvements in the public
expenditure policy since 2005 have not been substantial, except in the areas of PFM
information systems, public debt management, and state audit.




                                                                                          25
4.SELECT FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES


4.30 In sum, Vietnam is a case of strong public expenditure AAA, which was well
integrated into the initial design of the PRSC, but which produced limited results
because of weak implementation and ownership.
4.31 Benin. PRSCs 4-6, closed FY10. The DPO series aimed to improve Millennium
Development Goal (MDG) outcomes through increasing the efficiency of public
expenditures in water and sanitation, health, and education. A PER 2.5 years before
included an in-depth analysis of trends and policy issues in these three sectors critical
for the MDGs. Yet the PRSC program documents make no reference to the PER. The
DPO policy framework also does not take into account its analysis and
recommendations.
4.32 The 2004 PER focused on social expenditure trends in water and sanitation,
health, and education, the same areas of focus in the PRSC series. However, the PRSC 1
does not contain any quantitative analysis of the composition and direction of public
expenditures, how they evolved over time, and how well they targeted areas of
relevance to the MDGs, especially those MDGs where Benin was lagging. One would
have expected the first PRSC operation to at least have updated, main budgetary
information that was presented in the PER. But the PRSC makes no references to the
PER. This is a serious omission considering the PER’s sound analysis and candid
assessment that “the share of expenditures in five major health programs is driven by
the availability of foreign funds rather than by national priorities; some important
causes of child mortality and morbidity are not addressed,” and the fact that a PRSC
series explicitly focuses on improving MDG outcomes.
4.33 Other issues raised in the PER that were missed but could have strengthened the
policy framework and results of the PRSCs are:
        First, despite improvements, infant and child mortality remain high. Very little progress
         was achieved with maternal mortality and access to sanitation in rural areas. There are
         substantial differences across income groups in both access to education and child
         mortality.
        Second, special budget lines have increased significantly relative to the spending by
         health administrators at the regional and central levels. Major health programs are
         assessed as driven by the availability of foreign funds, rather than by national health
         priorities. This is a broader indication of the misalignment of the donors’ objectives from
         those of the government, as well as a missed opportunity to address priority areas such
         as child mortality and morbidity.
        Third, a similar issue is raised in the water sector where the PER notes that
         “[i]investment in water point is focused in a few regions, due to donor preferences.”
        Did the Bank raise the issue of apparently different priorities between the government
         and donors, at least informally, during the preparation of the series? It is not clear based
         on the document review. However, it is hoped that these issues were discussed with
         donors, which is a key point of the Paris Declaration.



26
5. Conclusions
5.1       Six conclusions emerge from this review.

         First, the Bank has been producing a considerable volume of knowledge on
          public expenditure, which increased in recent years, and that knowledge was
          available to inform the majority of DPOs in the majority of countries with DPO
          operations. The analysis of 390 DPOs and 404 public expenditure knowledge
          products (PERs, broadly defined), which were subject of this review, suggests
          that there is a solid degree of timeliness, availability, relevance, and thematic
          overlap as well as integration between PER knowledge and DPOs. Most DPOs
          (some 68 percent) had PERs prior to DPO effectiveness. In most countries with
          DPOs (73 percent), there are timely PERs preceding DPOs. There is also
          evidence of continuity of policy dialogue from PERs to DPOs in many cases.
          This is a reassuring conclusion. It implies that the Bank’s country-based model,
          which integrates knowledge and lending, is working well in the case of PER
          knowledge and DPOs. There are good practices worth highlighting as well as
          weaknesses that offer opportunity for reflection and lessons for the future.
         Second, public expenditure knowledge informs DPOs largely in the areas of
          public sector governance, followed by social development and human
          development. Macroeconomic and tax policies, in particular, tend to show
          comparatively smaller overlaps, but this may be because some of the
          macroeconomic policy agenda is taken up more directly in the macro-fiscal
          framework as elaborated in the accompanying report. There is a tentative
          question whether tax policy is an area in which the Bank has “left the field,”
          perhaps to the national authorities and the International Monetary Fund (IMF),
          and whether that should be revisited. Also, the decline in the frequency of
          MTEFs in the policy content of DPOs raises questions of the current state and
          the future of these medium-term reforms.
         Third, deeper dives into case studies of recent DPOs show some good practices.
          The DPO series in Peru and Romania are such examples. These good practice
          examples of the integration of PER knowledge and DPOs tend to show a
          continuity of policy dialogue, from PER to DPO, with the DPO design directly
          and explicitly using knowledge on public expenditures and policy
          recommendations in its prior actions. Such DPOs also tend to have stronger,
          other elements of DPO design such as macro-fiscal frameworks, as shown in the
          accompanying report on macro-fiscal frameworks. They often show better
          Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) ratings. There is a “virtuous circle,” from




                                                                                         27
5. CONCLUSIONS


         knowledge informing the design of lending, and lending based on knowledge
         producing results.
       Fourth, more broadly, good practice DPOs in terms of the integration of PER
         and DPO knowledge, tend to be situated in an environment of long-term Bank
         engagement and continuous, high-quality policy dialogue (knowledge and
         lending) based on a relationship of trust where there are no taboo topics for
         policy dialogue. Sound PERs with candid recommendations hitting clearly on
         important issues stand a better chance of informing DPO and policy reform.
         MTEF, budgeting, and PFM issues tend to be some of the common areas in
         which PERs substantially informed DPOs, but the policy areas cover the entire
         spectrum of governance and other thematic areas. However, even in cases of
         long-term engagement and solid initial integration between knowledge and
         DPO design, problems with political economy, ownership of reform and
         shifting policy priorities can undermine impact (as in the case of Vietnam).
       Fifth, examples of missed opportunities in integrating PER knowledge with
         DPOs sometimes reflect breaks in institutional memory in the Bank and the
         government, as well as breaks in the policy dialogue which can come about for
         many reasons (passage of time between the PER and the DPO, changes in staff
         on the Bank and the client side, changes in government and political priorities,
         etc.). One lesson here is that the Bank should pay greater attention to DPO-led
         reengagements with countries, and new DPOs after a longer period of no core
         diagnostics on public expenditures or prior dialogue and DPOs, and ensure that
         all relevant Bank knowledge fully informs those DPOs.
       Sixth, there appears to be a potential knowledge gap and an opportunity for the
         Bank to intensify knowledge engagement on public expenditures at subnational
         levels, both as part of the knowledge and policy dialogue and as a contribution
         to future DPO development. This will vary by country depending on the policy
         spcace to engage national authorities on subnational reform.
      Finally, in follow up to this learning product, which is focused on the limited
        questions around the integration of knowledge and DPOs, there is a need for a
        systematic analysis of the quality of the Bank’s AAA knowledge products. An
        evaluation of the public expenditure reviews, in particular, would potentially
        shed further light on how the Bank can continue improving the quality,
        relevance, and integration of its knowledge products.




28
References
Deininger, Klaus & Squire, Lyn & Basu, Swati (1998). "Does Economic Analysis Improve the Quality of
       Foreign Assistance?," World Bank Economic Review, World Bank Group, vol. 12(3), 385-418,
       September.


Deolalikar, Anil B. (2008). “Lessons from the World Bank Public Expenditure Reviews, 2000 -07, for
        improving the effectiveness of public spending,” Transparency and Accountability Project (TAP),
        Brookings Institution, Washington D.C.


Fardoust, Shahrokh and Ann Elizabeth Flanagan (2013). “Quality of Knowledge and Quality of Financial
       Assistance: Quantitative Assessment of the World Bank Experience in 2000-06,” unpublished
       draft paper (May).


IEG (2008). Using Knowledge to Improve Development Effectiveness, An Evaluation of World Bank
        Economic and Sector Work and Technical Assistance, 2000-06, IEG/World Bank, Washington
        D.C.


IEG (2010). World Bank Economic Reports on Growth Diagnostics in Four African Countries: Ghana,
        Nigeria, Mauritius, and Uganda, Performance Assessment Report (June).


IEG (2011). World Bank Support for Revenue Policy Reform in Eastern Europe and Central Asia with
        Performance Assessment Reports of ESW in Georgia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyz Republic, IEG.


IEG (2015). “The Quality of Macro-Fiscal Frameworks in Development Policy Operations,” IEG learning
        product, Independent Evaluation Group, The World Bank, Washington D.C. (May).


IEG PPAR (2015a). Vietnam: Project Performance Assessment Report of PRSC6-10, IEG (May).


IEG PPAR (2015b). Uganda: Project Performance Assessment Report of PRSC5-7 and PRSC8-9 series, IEG
       (May).


Ravallion, Martin (2011). “Knowledgeable Bankers? The Demand for Research in World Bank Operations,
        Policy Research Working Paper 5892, World Bank, (December).




                                                                                                      29
                                                                                       APPENDIX A
                                           COUNTRIES IN WHICH DPOS WERE PRECEDED BY A PER HEADING

Appendix A. Countries in which DPOs were
preceded by a PER
Region   Country           Year   Project Name                               Proj ID   Commitment (US$
                                                                                       million)
AFR      Benin             2007   BJ-PRSC 3                                  P083313   30
                                  BJ-PRSC 4 (New Series) (FY07)              P096928   40
                           2005   BJ-PRSC II                                 P074313   30
         Burkina Faso      2012   BF - EFA/FTI Grant (3rd tranche)           P127166   35
                           2006   BF-PRSC 6                                  P078996   60
                           2005   BF-PRSC 5 DPL (FY05)                       P078995   60
         Burundi           2010   BI - ERSGIII-Dev. Policy Loan DPL3         P113235   25
                           2009   BI - Food Crisis Response DP Grant         P113438   10
                                  BI- ERSG II DPL (FY09)                     P102508   30
         Cabo Verde        2009   CV-PRSC 4 -DPL                             P106502   10
                           2007   CV-PRSC 3 (last of 1st series)             P100807   10
                           2006   CV-PRSC 2 (FY06)                           P090875   10
         Central African   2011   CAR: EMGRG III DPO IV (FY11)               P120534   8.8
         Republic
                           2009   CAR: EMGRG II - DPO III (FY09)             P113176   5
                           2008   CAR: EMGRG 1 - DPO II (FY08)               P106458   7.9
         Congo, Dem.       2006   DRC - Transitional Support Credit (DPL)    P091990   90
         Rep.
         Cote d'Ivoire     2012   CI-Post-conflict Reconst. & Recov. Grant   P122800   150
                           2010   CI-EGRG-Econ. Gov. & Recovery 3            P117281   90
                           2009   Governance & Recovery Grant II             P112368   150
                           2008   Econ. Governance& Recovery Grant           P083583   308
         Ethiopia          2005   ET-PRSC 2 DPL (FY05)                       P077749   130
                           2004   ET-PRSC 1 (FY04)                           P074014   120
         Gambia, The       2009   GM-Budget Support -DPL                     P107398   7
         Ghana             2010   GH:Natural Resources Env Governance        P118188   10
                                  DPO3
                           2009   GH-EGPRC (fast-track)                      P113301   300
                                  GH-NREG DPO                                P113172   10
                           2008   GH-Environmental Governance (FY07)         P102971   20
                                  GH-PRSC 6 DPL (FY08)                       P103631   100
                           2007   GH-PRSC 5 DPL (FY07)                       P099287   110
                           2006   GH-PRSC 3 DPL (FY06)                       P078619   125
                                  GH-PRSC 4- DPL                             P095730   140
                           2005   GH-PRSC 2 DPL (FY05)                       P083246   125
         Guinea-Bissau     2011   Third Economic Governance Reform EGRG      P123685   6.4
                                  3
                           2010   GW-Econ. Gov. Ref. Grant - EGRG II         P114937   6
                           2009    GW-Economic Governance DPL1               P107493   8
         Liberia           2009   LR - RRSP2-Budget Support                  P113450   4
         Madagascar        2008   MG-PRSC 4 - 1st of New Series (FY08)       P099420   40
                                  MG-PRSC 5 (FY08) DPL                       P105135   50




                                                                                                         31
APPENDIX A
COUNTRIES IN WHICH DPOS WERE PRECEDED BY A PER
                         2007   MG-PRSC III DPL (FY07)                     P096102   40
                         2006   MG-PRSC 2 DPL (FY06)                       P083326   80
                         2005   MG-PRSC 1 DPL (FY05)/                      P070999   125
          Malawi         2013   Malawi - Rapid Response DPG                P126155   50
                         2010   MW-PRSC 3                                  P117238   54
                         2009   MW - PRSC 2                                P107303   30
                         2008   MW-PRSC-1                                  P099313   20
                         2004   MW-FIMAG SAL (FY04)                        P072395   50
          Mali           2011   ML-PRSC 5 - DPL                            P122483   70
                         2010   ML-PRSC 4 - DPL                            P117270   70.5
                         2009   Mali - PRSC-3                              P113451   65
                         2008   ML-PRSC 2 (FY08)                           P103466   42
          Mauritius      2008   MU-Dev.Pol.Loan (intermediate)             P106650   30
                         2007   MU-Development Policy DPL (FY07)           P101570   30
          Mozambique     2012   Moz PRSC VIII                              P126226   110
                         2011   MZ-PRSC 7 (second in series)               P122470   85
                         2010   MZ-PRSC 6 (first in new series)            P117234   110
                         2007   MZ-PRSC 3 DPL (07) - 1st in new series     P083459   70
                         2006   MZ-PRSC 2 (FY06)                           P056201   120
                         2005   MZ-PRSC (FY05)                             P075805   60
          Namibia        2009   NA-Support of ETSIP1 DPL2 (FY09)           P109333   7.5
                         2007   NA-Education & Training DPL (FY07)         P086875   7.5
          Niger          2007   NE-Rural & Social Policy DPL 2 (FY07)      P098963   50
                         2006   NE-Rural & Social Policy Reform I (FY06)   P096411   50
                         2005    NE-Pub Expend Reform Crdt (FY05)          P083275   40
                         2004   NE - PEAC II - (Pub.Exp.Adj.Cr.)           P069570   65
          Nigeria        2010   Fin Sec + Pub Fin Mgmt DPC                 P117088   500
          Rwanda         2010   RW:EFA-FTI Catalytic Fund Bridge Grant     P115816   35
                         2007   RW-PRSG III DPL (FY07)                     P098129   50
                         2006   RW-PRSC 2 DPL (FY06)                       P092944   55
                         2005   RW-PRSC 1 DPL (FY05)                       P085192   65
          Senegal        2009   SN-DPO fast-track-Public Fin. Support Cr   P107288   60
                         2008   SN-En. Sec. Recov. Dev Policy Financing    P105279   80
                         2007   SN-PRSC III DPL (FY07)                     P098964   20
                         2006   SN-PRSC 2 (FY06)                           P091051   30
                         2005   SN-PRSC 1 DPL (FY05)                       P074065   30
                         2004   SN-Priv Sec Adj Crdt (FY04)                P080013   45
          Seychelles     2011   SC-DPL 2                                   P120947   9
                         2010   SC DPL                                     P114822   9
          Sierra Leone   2010   SL:GRGC-3 Suppl.Credit (Crisis Window)     P121056   7
                                SL-GRG 3 DPL                               P107335   10
                         2007   SL-GRGG (DPG 1)-Programmatic Series        P095575   10
                         2005   SL-ERRG 4 (FY05)                           P083477   15
          Tanzania       2011   TZ-PRSC 8 (5th and last in 2nd series)     P116666   115
                         2009   TZ-PRSC 6 (3rd of 2nd series)              P101229   160
                                TZ-PRSC 7 (4th in 2nd series)              P101230   190
                         2007   TZ-PRSC 5 (2nd of 2nd series)              P095657   190
                         2006   TZ-PRSC 3 (last)                           P087256   150



32
                                                                                  APPENDIX A
                                              COUNTRIES IN WHICH DPOS WERE PRECEDED BY A PER

                           TZ-PRSC 4 DPL (1st of 2nd series)          P095509   200
                    2005   TZ-PRSC2 (intermediate)                    P074073   150
                    2004   TZ-Education Dev. Program II (FY04)        P083080   150
      Uganda        2008   UG-PRSC 7 (FY08)                           P101231   200
                    2007   UG-PRSC 6 DPL (FY07)                       P090219   125
                    2006   UG- PRSC 5                                 P090881   135
                    2005   UG-PRSC 4 (FY05)                           P074082   150
                    2004   UG-PRSC 3 (FY04)                           P074081   150
      Zambia        2012   Zambia PRSC-3                              P126349   30
                    2011   ZM-PRSC 2                                  P117370   30
                    2010   ZM-First Poverty Reduction Support Cr.     P107218   20
                    2008   ZM-Econ Mgmt & Growth Crdt 2               P074445   10
                    2005   ZM-Econ Mgmt & Growth Credit (FY05)        P040631   40
EAP   Cambodia      2010   KHSmallholder Ag & Social Protection Sup   P117203   5
                    2008   KH-Poverty Reduction and Growth-1 (DPL)    P071103   15
      Indonesia     2011   ID - Fourth Infrastructure DPL (IDPL4)     P118531   200
                    2010   ID - Third Infrastructure DPL (IDPL3)      P115102   250
                           Indonesia Sixth Development Policy Loan    P113638   750
                    2009   Fifth Development Policy Loan              P110191   750
                           ID-Second Infrastructure DPL (IDPL 2)      P111905   200
                           Public Expend. Supp. Facility (DPL-DDO)    P115199   2000
                    2008   Fourth Development Policy Loan             P105637   600
                           ID-Infrastructure DPL (IDPL)               P107163   200
                    2007   Indonesia-Third Development Policy Loan    P100327   600
                    2006   ID Second Development Policy Loan          P096594   400
                    2005   First Development Policy Loan              P092663   300
      Lao PDR       2011   Lao PDR PRSO 7                             P122847   10
                    2010   Lao PDR PRSO 5                             P110109   20
                           Lao PDR PRSO 6                             P118814   20
                    2008   Lao PDR PRSO4                              P107242   10
                    2007   LA - PRSO III                              P096710   10
      Mongolia      2011   Mongolia - Development Policy Credit 2     P117421   29.7
                    2009   MN-Development Policy Credit               P115737   40
      Philippines   2009   Philippines GFRP DPO ICR                   P113492   200
                    2007   PH- Development Policy Loan - DPL I        P100706   250
      Timor-Leste   2006   TP Consolidation Support Program (CSP) 1   P088181   0.5
                    2005   Third Transition Support Program           P083894   4.96
                    2004   Transition Support Program II              P082190   4
      Vietnam       2009   VN - PRSC 8                                P111164   350
                    2008   VN - PRSC 7                                P105287   150
                    2007   Vietnam PRSC 6                             P101724   175
                           VN - Program 135 Phase 2 Support Credit    P104097   50
                    2006   VN-PRSC V                                  P086361   100
                    2005   Vietnam - PRSC IV                          P086360   100
                    2004   Vietnam PRSC III                           P082759   100
ECA   Albania       2011   Social Sector Reform DPL                   P116937   25
                    2007   DPL                                        P096205   10
                    2005   PRSC 3                                     P083337   10



                                                                                         33
APPENDIX A
COUNTRIES IN WHICH DPOS WERE PRECEDED BY A PER
                           2004   PRSC 2                                    P077739   18
          Armenia          2007   PRSC 3                                    P093460   28
                           2006   PRSC 2                                    P093459   20
                           2005   PRSC                                      P078673   20
          Azerbaijan       2005   PRSC                                      P074938   20
          Bosnia and       2010   Public Expenditure Crisis DPL             P116951   111
          Herzegovina
                           2004   EMSAC                                     P071039   34
          Bulgaria         2009   SIR DPL2 (DDO)                            P102160   150
                                  SIR DPL3                                  P115400   200
                           2007   SIR DPL1                                  P094967   150
                           2005   PAL 3                                     P078675   150
                           2004   PAL 2                                     P081637   150
          Croatia          2010   Fiscal, Social and Financial Sector DPL   P117665   296.75
          Georgia          2006   PRSO                                      P088820   20
                           2004   REFORM SUPPORT                            P057814   24
          Kazakhstan       2010   DPL                                       P119856   1000
          Latvia           2011   2nd Safey Net and Social Sector Reform    P121796   142.08
                           2010   Financial Sector DPL (LATVIA)             P115709   282.65
                                  Safety Net & Soc. Sector Reform Program   P115732   143.9
          Macedonia, FYR   2010   Macedonia DPL 1                           P116984   30
                           2008   PDPL 3                                    P101296   25
          Moldova          2010   ECONOMIC RECOVERY DPO                     P112625   25
                           2008   PRSC 2                                    P103941   10
                           2007   PRSC                                      P099166   10
          Poland           2011   ENERGY EFFICIENCY DPL                     P115426   1114.5
                           2010   DPL 3                                     P117666   1331.3
                           2009   DEVELOPMENT POLICY LOAN                   P112765   1250
                                  Empl. Entrepreneurship & HCDP DPL         P116125   1300.24
          Romania          2012   DPL 3                                     P122222   560.6
                           2011   DPL 2                                     P117667   380.5
                           2010   DPL 1                                     P102018   422.99
                           2005   PAL                                       P008791   150
          Russian          2005   KAZAN MUNICIPAL DEVT                      P082018   125
          Federation
          Serbia           2010   YF PFDPL 2                                P115958   100
                           2009   PFDPL                                     P096711   50
                           2006   PPFDPC1(SERBIA)                           P089116   55
                           2005   SAC 2 (SERBIA)                            P078457   45
          Tajikistan       2009   PDPG 3                                    P106963   20
                           2008   PDPG 2                                    P096930   10
                           2007   TJ Prg. Development Policy Grant          P074889   10
          Turkey           2010   REGE DPL                                  P112495   1300
                           2009   CEDPL 2                                   P096840   500
                           2008   PPDPL 2                                   P088837   400
                           2007   CEDPL                                     P074181   500
                           2006   TR- PPDPL                                 P071052   500
                           2004   PFPSAL 3                                  P082996   1000
          Ukraine          2010   FIN REHAB DPL 1                           P115143   400



34
                                                                                  APPENDIX A
                                              COUNTRIES IN WHICH DPOS WERE PRECEDED BY A PER

                    2009   Ukraine DPL 3                              P107365   500
                    2008   DPL 2                                      P096389   300
                    2006   DPL                                        P079316   251.26
                    2004   PAL 2                                      P074972   250
LCR   Argentina     2004   AR-Prov. Maternal-Child Hlth Adj           P072637   750
                           PMCHSAL
      Bolivia       2005   BO-Social Sector Programmatic Credit II    P091365   15
                    2004   BO First Programmatic Bank and Corporate   P082781   30
                           BO-Social Sector Programmatic Credit       P087841   25
      Colombia      2009   CO 3rd Sust. Dev DPL                       P101301   450
                    2008   CO 3rd Business Prod & Efficiency DDO      P105029   550
                    2007   CO 2nd Business Product and Efficiency     P095213   300
                           CO 2nd Sustainable Dev DPL                 P095877   200
                           CO- 3rd Prog.Labor and Social Sector       P094097   200
                    2006   CO Business Product and Efficiency DPL I   P094301   250
                    2005   CO- 2nd Prog. Labor & Social Sector Ref    P082865   200
                           CO 2nd Programmatic FSAL                   P082597   100
                           CO Prog Dev Policy Ln for Sust. Dev        P081397   150
                           CO Prog Fiscal and Institutional SAL III   P084762   100
      Costa Rica    2009   CR Pub Fin & Compet. DPL/ DDO              P115173   500
      Dominican     2005   DO Power Sector Program Loan               P082712   150
      Republic
                    2004   DO Social Crisis Response Adjustment Loa   P085433   100
      El Salvador   2011   SV Public Finance and Social Progress      P122699   100
                    2010   SV Sustaining Social Gains                 P118036   100
                    2005   SV (CRL2) Program. Broad-Based Growth      P093133   100
                           DP
      Guyana        2006   GY Poverty Reduction and Public Mgmt.      P078703   9.6
      Haiti         2011   HT- Emergency DPO                          P118239   30
                    2010   HT 3rd Econ. Governance Reform             P117944   12.5
                           Operation
      Honduras      2012   HN 1st Progr. Reduc. Vulner. Growth DPC    P127331   86
                    2011   HN Emergency Recovery Dev Policy Credit    P121220   74.7
                    2005   HN First Prog Fin Sec Dev Pol Credit       P083311   25
                    2004   HN PRSC                                    P074758   58.8
      Jamaica       2009   JM Fiscal & Debt Sust. DPL                 P101321   100
      Mexico        2011   MX MEDEC Low-Carbon DPL                    P121800   401.002507
                           MX Strength. Business Env for EcoGrowth    P112264   751.8797
                    2010   MX DPL Adapt. Climate Change in WtrSct     P120134   450
                           MX Economic Policies DPL                   P118070   1503.75
                           MX Framework for Green Growth DPL          P115608   1503.75
                    2009   MX Environmental Sustainability DPL        P095510   300.75188
                    2008   MX Affordable Housing DPL III              P101342   200.51
                           MX Climate Change DPL/DDO                  P110849   501.25
                    2006   MX Aff. Housing & Urban Pov. Red. DPL II   P089852   200.51
                           MX Competitiveness DPL                     P098299   300.76
                           MX ENVDPL II                               P079748   200.51
                           MX Finance and Growth DPL I                P097159   501.26
                    2004   MX Afford.Housing & Urb.Pov.Prog. SECAL    P070371   100



                                                                                             35
APPENDIX A
COUNTRIES IN WHICH DPOS WERE PRECEDED BY A PER
          Nicaragua          2009   NI Development Policy Credit               P106747   20
                             2004   NICARAGUA PRSC I                           P082885   70
          Paraguay           2009   PY Public Sector DPL                       P113457   100
          Peru               2011   PE 4th Prog. Fiscal Mgmt DPL               P116214   100
                             2010   PE 3rd Prog Fiscal Mgmt DPL                P106720   150
                             2006   PE Third Progr. Decentral. & Compet. DPL   P089826   150
                             2005   PE PROGRAMATIC REFORM FOR                  P083949   100
                                    GROWTH II
                                    PE-Programmatic Social Reform Loan IV      P083968   100
                             2004   PE Program. Decent. & Competitiveness      P082871   150
                                    PE-Programmatic Social Reform III          P078951   150
          Uruguay            2005   Uruguay Social Program Support Loan DPL    P095028   75.38
 MNA      Djibouti           2008   Djibouti - Food Crisis Response Dev.       P112017   5
          Egypt, Arab Rep.   2010   Financial Sector DPL III                   P120470   500
          Lebanon            2008   LB - Reform Implementation DPL             P094288   100
          West Bank and      2011   WBG:PRDP Support III                       P118593   40
          Gaza
                             2009   WBG PRDP Support II                        P113621   40
                             2008   WBG PRDP Support                           P111078   40
          Yemen, Rep.        2008   RY-INSTITUTIONAL REFORM DPG                P101453   50.93
 SAR      Bangladesh         2007   BD DSC IV/DPL                              P074801   200
                                    BD Railway Reform Programmatic             P100330   40
                                    DevPolicy
                                    Education Sector Dev.Support Credit III    P102541   100
                             2006   Bangladesh Development Support Cr. III     P090832   200
                                    Education Sector Dev. Support Credit II    P084567   100
                             2005   Development Support Credit II              P083887   200
                                    Education Sector Dev. Support Credit       P077789   100
          Nepal              2004   Poverty Reduction Support Credit I         P074685   70
          Pakistan           2007   NWFP Second Development Policy Credit      P097471   130
                                    PEDPC-IV                                   P101243   100
                                    PK PRSC II                                 P090690   350
                                    Punjab Irrig DPL II                        P102333   100
                                    Sindh DPC                                  P100846   100
                             2006   NWFP DPC I                                 P090689   90
                                    PK Punjab Education DPC-III                P097636   100
                                    PK -Punjab Second Education Sector DPC     P090346   100
                                    PK Punjab-Irrigation Sector DPL            P096962   100
                             2005   Pakistan PRSC I                            P078806   300
                                    PK Banking Sector Dev. Policy Credit       P083079   300
                             2004   NWFP SAC II                                P079635   90
                                    Punjab Education Sector Adjustment Credi   P083228   100




36
                                                                                                      APPENDIX B
                                                    LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS

Appendix B. List of public expenditure knowledge
products
Note, if reports consists of various volumes, only volume one is presented.

 Region   Country       Year      Document Name                                                          Report
                                                                                                         Number
 SAR      Afghanistan   2010      Afghanistan - Country overview and role of public expenditure          72359
                                  Afghanistan - Education sector                                         72364
                                  Afghanistan - Expenditure framework and public financial               72361
                                  management
                                  Afghanistan - Public expenditure review 2010 : second generation       53892
                                  of public expenditure reforms
                                  Afghanistan - Public expenditure trends and fiscal sustainability      72360
                                  Afghanistan - Security Sector                                          72362
          Bangladesh    2010      Main Report                                                            47767
                        2003      Bangladesh - Public expenditure review                                 24370
          Bhutan        2013      Bhutan - Human development public expenditure review                   ACS2873
          Maldives      2002      Maldives - Public expenditure review                                   24238
          Nepal         2011      Nepal : Public expenditure review - Roads                              66303
                        2000      Main Report                                                            20211
          Pakistan      2013      Pakistan - Punjab social sector public expenditure review              78748
                        2013      Pakistan - Khyber Pakhtunkhwa : public expenditure review              77337
                        2004      Strategic issues and reform agenda                                     25665
                        2001      Pakistan - Reforming Punjab's public finances and institutions         20981
          Sri Lanka     2014      Investing in the Future : Education expenditures and financing in      AUS3408
                                  Sri Lanka
                        2014      Sri Lanka - Health PER : investing in Sri Lanka’s health system        AUS2874
                        2006      Sri Lanka - Selected public expenditure issues 2003/2004               36630
 AFR      Africa        2013      Guinea - Basic agricultural public expenditure diagnostic review       89509
                                  (2003-2012) : main report
                                  Malawi - Basic agricultural public expenditure diagnostic review       89511
                                  (2000-2013) : final report
                        2013      Senegal - Basic agricultural public expenditure diagnostic review :    89512
                                  final report
                        2013      Strengthening national comprehensive agricultural public               83163
                                  expenditure in Sub-Saharan Africa : basic agricultural public
                                  expenditure diagnostic review - Ghana
                        2013      Burkina Faso - Basic agricultural public expenditure diagnostic        90813
                                  review (2004-2012) : main report
                        2012      Togo - Basic agricultural public expenditure diagnostic review         73138
                        2011      More, better, or different spending? Trends in public expenditure      67321
                                  on water and sanitation in Sub-Saharan Africa
                        2011      Sierra Leone - Public expenditure review for water and sanitation      64895
                                  2002 to 2009
          Angola        2007      Policy briefing                                                        39710



                                                                                                             37
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
           Angola;Chad       2005    Angola - Public Expenditure Management and Financial                  29036
                                     Accountability
           Benin             2004    Benin - Enhancing the effectiveness of public spending - a review     29656
                                     of three sectors
           Botswana          2010    Botswana - Public expenditure review                                  53959
           Burkina Faso      2008    Burkina Faso - Rural water and sanitation sector : public             43912
                                     expenditures review
                             2005    Burkina Faso - The budget as centerpiece of PRSP                      29154
                                     implementation - Public Expenditure Review
           Burundi           2013    Burundi - Public expenditure review : strengthening fiscal            ACS5393
                                     resilience to promote government effectiveness
                             2012    Burundi - Public expenditure review : fiscal challenges, security     ACS3988
                                     and growth issues in Burundi
                             2010    Burundi - Improving the efficiency of public investment : public      56716
                                     expenditure review
                             2008    Republic of Burundi - Public Expenditure Management and               42160
                                     Financial Accountability Review (PEMFAR) : improving allocative
                                     efficiency and governance of public expenditure and investing in
                                     public capital to accelerate growth and reduce poverty
           Cabo Verde        2009    Synthesis                                                             44350
                             2006    Cape Verde - The challenge of increasing fiscal space to meet         34523
                                     future pressures : public expenditure review
           Cameroon          2010    Cameroon - Fiscal policy for growth and development                   48433
           Central African   2012    Central African Republic - Public expenditure review (PER) :          63517
           Republic                  creating fiscal space to transition out of fragility through growth
                                     and poverty reduction
           Central African   2008    Zambia - Making basic education services more effective in            54500
           Republic;Zambia           Zambia : improving delivery, tracking school level expenditures
           Chad              2011    Republic of Chad public expenditure review update : using public      57654
                                     resources for economic growth and poverty reduction
           Congo, Dem.       2008    Congo, Democratic Republic of - Public expenditure review (PER)       42167
           Rep.
                             2006    Executive summary                                                     34937
           Congo, Rep.       2014    Republic of Congo - Enhancing efficiency in education and health      AUS5649
                                     public spending for improved quality service delivery for all : a
                                     public expenditure review of the education and health sectors
           Cote d'Ivoire     2008    Main Report                                                           44429
                             2003    Cote d' Ivoire - Strengthening public expenditure management and      27141
                                     controls : public expenditure review
           Eastern Africa    2010    Enabling reforms : a stakeholder-based analysis of the political      74548
                                     economy of Tanzania's charcoal sector and the poverty and social
                                     impacts of proposed reforms
           Equatorial        2010    Equatorial Guinea : public expenditure review                         51656
           Guinea
           Eritrea           2008    Eritrea - Health and education sectors : public expenditure review    38698
           Ethiopia          2010    Ethiopia - Public finance review 2010                                 54952
                             2010    Addis Ababa city : public expenditure review                          67926
                             2010    Benishangul-Gumuz Regional State : Public finance review              67928
                             2010    Oromia region study case : public finance review                      67929
                                     The Amhara regional report : public finance review                    67927
                             2009    Ethiopia - Public finance review                                      50278




38
                                                                                           APPENDIX B
                                         LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                2008   Ethiopia - Agriculture and rural development : public expenditure      41902
                       review for 1997-98 and 2005-06
                2004   Public spending in the social sectors                                  29338
                2001   Main Report                                                            23351
                2000   Main Report                                                            20810
Gabon           2012   Gabon - Public expenditure review : better management of public        62548
                       finance to achieve millennium development goals
Gambia, The     2011   The Gambia - 2010 public expenditure review update                     59309
                2006   Gambia - Fiscal developments and the agriculture sector : public       67703
                       expenditure review update
                2005   The Gambia - Recovering Fiscal Discipline - Public Expenditure         31454
                       Review
Ghana           2011   Ghana - Joint review of public expenditure and financial               67466
                       management
                2009   Main Report                                                            47639
                2008   Main Report                                                            40676
                2008   Ghana - Rural water and sanitation sector : public expenditures        43909
                       review
                2006   Main Report                                                            36384
                2005   Main Report                                                            32595
                2000   Ghana - Public expenditure review 1999 : improving education           59491
                       through increased, efficient, and effective utilization of resources
Guinea          2004   Guinea - Strengthening public expenditure management for               27347
                       poverty reduction and growth : public expenditure review
Guinea-Bissau   2007   Guinea-Bissau - Public expenditure review (PER) update :               35871
                       enhancing growth and fiscal adjustment through civil service
                       reform
                2004   Guinea Bissau - The challenge of restoring budgetary discipline - a    27175
                       public expenditure review
Kenya           2013   Kenya - Comprehensive public expenditure review 2013 : eye on          82678
                       budget - spending for results
                2005   Kenya - Public Expenditure Review 2004 - Report on the structure       29421
                       and management of public spending
                2001   Kenya - Review of the water supply and sanitation sector               22182
Lesotho         2014   Lesotho - Public expenditure review                                    71973
Liberia         2013   Liberia - Public expenditure review : options for fiscal space         75049
                       enlargement
                2013   Liberia - Public expenditure review note : meeting the challenges      71009
                       of the UNMIL security transition
                       Strengthening national comprehensive agricultural public               83165
                       expenditure in Sub-Saharan Africa : agriculture sector public
                       expenditure review - Liberia
                2012   Liberia - Public expenditure review : human development                70980
                2009   Liberia - 2008 public expenditure management and financial             43282
                       accountability review
Madagascar      2007   Executive summary                                                      38687
                2005   Madagascar - Public Expenditure Review (PER) 2004 - The                30331
                       challenge of poverty reduction
Malawi          2013   Malawi - Public expenditure review                                     79865
                                                                                              89185
                2007   Malawi - Public expenditure review 2006                                40145



                                                                                                  39
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                          2001       Malawi - Public expenditures - issues and options                       22440
           Mali           2008       Mali - Rural water and sanitation sector : public expenditures          43911
                                     review
           Mauritania     2011       Mauritania - Public expenditure review : update                         62082
                          2007       Mauritania - Improving budget management to promote                     36385
                                     sustainable development and reduce poverty : public expenditure
                                     review
           Mauritius      2013       Mauritius policy notes : building analytical capacity to raise public   77778
                                     sector efficiency
                          2004       Mauritius - The New Economic Agenda and Fiscal Sustainability           26152
           Mozambique     2011       Mozambique - Analysis of public expenditure in agriculture              59918
                          2010       Mozambique - Public expenditure review for the water sector             54692
                          2003       Mozambique - Public expenditure review : Phase 2 - sectoral             25969
                                     expenditures
                          2001       Mozambique - Public expenditure management review                       22985
           Namibia        2008       Namibia - Implementing the agenda of the Namibian ministry of           42472
                                     environment and tourism : a rapid country environmental analysis
                                     with a public expenditure review for aligning policy, institutional
                                     and financing priorities
                          2005       Namibia human capital and knowledge development for economic            59166
                                     growth with equity
           Niger          2014       Niger - Security sector public expenditure review                       83526
                          2013       Niger - Public Expenditure Review (PER) 2012                            76851
                          2009       Main Report                                                             48234
                          2004       Niger - Public Expenditure Management and Financial                     29752
                                     Accountability Review
           Nigeria        2011       Nigeria - State level public expenditure management and financial       67934
                                     accountability review : a synthesis report (Anambra, Bayelsa, Ekiti,
                                     Kogi, Niger, Ondo, and Plateau)
                          2010       Nigeria - Lagos rolling first public expenditure review                 67936
                          2008       Nigeria - Agriculture public expenditure review                         44000
                          2008       Executive summary                                                       42418
                          2006       Nigeria - Strengthening the Nigerian forestry sector to enable          32406
                                     sustainable forestry and revenue generation in productive forests
           Rwanda         2010       Rwanda - Technical assistance for public expenditure                    54811
                                     management : a policy note
                          2003       Rwanda - Public expenditure reform for sustaining poverty               25914
                                     reduction : a public expenditure management review
           Senegal        2005       Senegal - Enhancing the efficiency of public investmnet - Public        32479
                                     Expenditure Review (PER)
                          2004       Senegal - Public expenditure review                                     29357
           Seychelles     2014       Seychelles - Programmatic public expenditure review policy notes        85290
                                     - health education and investment management
                          2011       Seychelles selected issues : social protection, labor market, and       57113
                                     public enterprise reforms - second public expenditure review
                          2009       Seychelles - Public expenditure review                                  49273
           Sierra Leone   2010       Sierra Leone - Public expenditure review                                52817
                          2004       Sierra Leone - Public expenditure review : from post-conflict           29075
                                     recovery to sustained growth
           South Africa   2012       Health expenditure and finance in South Africa                          69890



40
                                                                                      APPENDIX B
                                     LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
Sudan       2014   Sudan - State-level public expenditure review : meeting the           ACS8803
                   challenges of poverty reduction and basic service delivery
            2011   Sudan - Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) : case study        67712
                   of the health sector
            2011   Public Expenditure Tracking Survey (PETS) for Northern Sudan :        67937
                   case study of the health sector
            2009   Sudan - GoNU budget note series : World Bank review of 2008           67933
                   budget performance and 2009 budget preliminary analysis
            2007   Sudan - Public expenditure review : synthesis report                  41840
Swaziland   2006   Main Report                                                           35318
            2000   Swaziland - Reducing poverty through shared growth                    19658
Tanzania    2014   Tanzania - Strengthening national comprehensive agricultural          87819
                   public expenditure in Sub-Saharan Africa : national agricultural
                   input voucher scheme (NAIVS)
            2012   Rapid budget analysis 2012 : synoptic note                            89141
            2012   United Republic of Tanzania - Public expenditure review 2011          72119
            2011   United Republic of Tanzania - Public expenditure review 2010          64585
            2010   United Republic of Tanzania - Public expenditure and financial        56313
                   accountability review 2009
            2009   Tanzania - Public expenditure review of the water sector              50905
            2009   Tanzania - Public expenditure and financial accountability review     48042
                   2008
            2007   United Republic of Tanzania - Public expenditure and financial        67931
                   accountability review for FY07
            2006   Tanzania - Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Review     36642
                   : FY05
            2004   Public expenditure review for FY04                                    67930
            2003   Tanzania - Public Expenditure Review FY03 - Managing public           26807
                   expenditures for poverty reduction report on fiscal developments
                   and public expenditure management issues
                   Tanzania - Zanzibar Public Expenditure Review 2003 - Laying the       27504
                   foundations for improved public expenditure management
            2002   Tanzania - Public expenditure review FY02 - report on fiscal          24475
                   developments and public expenditure management issues : an
                   external evaluation
            2001   Tanzania - Public expenditure review                                  23812
            2001   Main Report                                                           22078
Uganda      2013   Service delivery with more districts in Uganda : fiscal challenges    ACS4421
                   and opportunities for reforms - public expenditure review
            2010   Uganda - Strengthening the effectiveness of the Public Investment     58565
                   Program : public expenditure review
            2010   Uganda - Agriculture public expenditure review                        53702
                                                                                         53704
            2010   Uganda - Public expenditure review : strengthening the impact of      55672
                   the roads budget
            2009   Uganda - A public expenditure review 2008 : with a focus on           49361
                   affordability of pay reform and health sector
            2008   Uganda - Sustainable Land Management Public Expenditure               45781
                   Review (SLM PER)
            2007   Executive summary                                                     40161
            2004   Main Report                                                           29377



                                                                                             41
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                          2003       Uganda - Public expenditure review 2003                                   27135
                          2001       The budget and medium-term expenditure framework in Uganda                23439
           Zambia         2012       Zambia - Public expenditure review : resource allocations and             67935
                                     financial flows in the water sector in Zambia
                          2010       Zambia - Impact assessment of the fertilizer support program :            54864
                                     analysis of effectiveness and efficiency
                          2009       Zambia health sector public expenditure review : accounting for           47110
                                     resources to improve effective service coverage
                          2006       Executive summary and main report                                         36552
                          2002       The impact of cash budgets on poverty reduction in Zambia : a             68547
                                     case study of the conflict between well-intentioned macroeconomic
                                     policy and service delivery to the poor
                          2001       Zambia - Public expenditure review : public expenditure, growth           22543
                                     and poverty - a synthesis
 ECA       Albania        2014       Toward a sustainable fiscal policy for growth                             82013
                          2008       Albania - Local finance policy note : programmatic public                 44109
                                     expenditure and institutional review
                          2006       Overview and policy options                                               36453
                          2001       Executive summary                                                         21857
           Armenia        2014       Armenia - Public expenditure review : expanding the fiscal                88586
                                     envelope
                          2012       Fiscal consolidation and recovery in Armenia : impact of the global       72880
                                     crisis on a small open economy
                          2011       Synthesis report                                                          62587
                          2010       Armenia - The 2008-09 global economic crisis, policy responses,           55011
                                     and household coping strategies
                          2003       Armenia - Public expenditure review                                       24434
           Azerbaijan     2013       Azerbaijan - Food security and livelihoods : public expenditure           78836
                                     review
                                     Azerbaijan - Healthy development improving outcomes in the                78834
                                     health sector : public expenditure review
                                     Azerbaijan - The oil nexus : public expenditure review                    78835
                          2003       Azerbaijan - Public expenditure review                                    25233
           Belarus        2013       Belarus - Public expenditure review : enhancing public services in        74148
                                     times of austerity
                          2011       Belarus public expenditure review : fiscal reforms for a sustainable      63566
                                     economic recovery
                          2003       Belarus - Strengthening public resource management                        26041
           Bosnia and     2012       Bosnia and Herzegovina - Challenges and directions for reform : a         66253
           Herzegovina               public expenditure and institutional review
                          2006       Bosnia and Herzegovina - Addressing fiscal challenges and                 36156
                                     enhancing growth prospects : a public expenditure and institutional
                                     review
                          2002       Bosnia and Herzegovina - From aid dependency to fiscal self-              24297
                                     reliance : a public expenditure and institutional review
           Bulgaria       2012       Bulgaria - Public expenditures for growth and competitiveness             62774
                          2010       Bulgaria - Public expenditure review for agriculture and rural            54903
                                     development
                          2008       Bulgaria - Resourcing the judiciary for performance and                   42159
                                     accountability : a judicial public expenditure and institutional review
                          2007       Overview                                                                  38570



42
                                                                                             APPENDIX B
                                            LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                  2006   Bulgaria - Public Finance Policy Review                                  33992
                  2002   Bulgaria - Public expenditure issues and directions for reform - a       23979
                         Public Expenditure and Institutional Review
Croatia           2014   Croatia - Justice sector public expenditure and institutional review :   ACS7424
                         resourcing the justice sector for efficiency and performance
                         Croatia - Public finance review : restructuring spending for stability   78320
                         and growth
                  2008   Croatia - Restructuring public finance to sustain growth and             37321
                         improve public services : a public finance review
                  2001   Croatia - Regaining fiscal sustainability and enhancing                  22155
                         effectiveness - a public expenditure and institutional review
Czech Republic    2001   Czech Republic - Enhancing the prospects for growth with fiscal          22114
                         stability - a public expenditure review
Georgia           2014   Strategic issues and reform agenda                                       78143
                  2012   Georgia - Managing expenditure pressures for sustainability and          73701
                         growth : public expenditure review
                         Georgia - Public expenditure review : managing expenditure               74474
                         pressures for sustainability and growth
                  2002   Georgia - Public expenditure review                                      22913
Kazakhstan        2006   Kazakhstan - Reforming intergovernmental fiscal relations                33709
                  2000   Summary report                                                           20489
Kosovo            2010   Kosovo - Public expenditure review                                       53709
                  2007   Kosovo - Policy note on public investment management                     68419
                  2006   Overall fiscal situation                                                 32624
Kyrgyz Republic   2014   Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes :               88978
                         education
                         Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes : health        88979
                         Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes :               88975
                         intergovernmental fiscal relations
                         Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes :               89007
                         pensions
                         Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes : public        89008
                         investment management
                         Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes : public        88976
                         wage bill
                         Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes : social        89022
                         assistance
                         Kyrgyz Republic - Public expenditure review policy notes :               88977
                         strategic setting
                  2004   Main Report                                                              28123
Latvia            2010   Overview and summary                                                     56747
                  2002   Latvia - Public expenditure review                                       22392
                  2001   Latvia - Public expenditures review : education sector                   73011
Macedonia, FYR    2008   Macedonia - FYR Macedonia public expenditure review                      42155
Moldova           2014   Moldova - Public expenditure review : reforming local public             87268
                         finance for more efficient, equitable, and fiscally sustainable
                         subnational spending
                  2013   Moldova - Public expenditure review : capital expenditures -             76310
                         making public investment work for competitiveness and inclusive
                         growth in Moldova
                                                                                                  82138



                                                                                                      43
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                           2007      Moldova - Improving public expenditure efficiency for growth and       37933
                                     poverty reduction
                           2003      Moldova - Public Economic Management Review                            25423
           Montenegro      2012      Montenegro - After the crisis : towards a smaller and more efficient   65909
                                     government - public expenditure and institutional review
                           2008      Public expenditure and institutional review                            46660
                           2006      Main Report                                                            36533
           Poland          2010      Poland - Mazowieckie public expenditure review : Local responses       52037
                                     to the global economic crisis
                           2010      Analysis of social sectors and public wages                            52536
                           2009      Better financing : stronger outcomes - a public sector expenditure     57305
                                     review for the education sector in Poland
                           2003      Poland - Toward a fiscal framework for growth - a public               25033
                                     expenditure and institutional review
           Romania         2010      Main Report                                                            51191
                           2009      Romania - Public sector pay practices Romania : overall public         47755
                                     sector trends and detailed analysis of local government contract
                                     employees
                           2006      Main Report                                                            36363
                           2002      Romania - Building institutions for public expenditure management      24756
                                     : reforms, efficiency and equity - a Public Expenditure and
                                     Institutions Review
           Russian         2011      Russia - Public expenditure review                                     58836
           Federation
                           2011      Russian federation : social expenditure and fiscal federalism in       54392
                                     Russia
                           2009      Russia environmental management system : directions for                51068
                                     modernization
                           2008      Public spending in Russia for health care : issues and options         45127
                           2006      Russian Federation - Enhancing the impact of public support to         39213
                                     agriculture and rural sectors
                           2005      Russia - Fiscal costs of structural reforms                            30741
                           2001      Russia - towards improving the efficiency of public investment         22693
                                     expenditures
                           2000      Russia : issues in public expenditure policy                           67932
           Serbia          2014      Serbia - Municipal public finance review : options for efficiency      87944
                                     gains
                           2013      Serbia - Municipal finance and expenditure review                      76855
                           2010      Serbia - Right-sizing the government wage bill                         54056
                           2009      Serbia - Doing more with less : addressing the fiscal crisis by        48620
                                     increasing public sector productivity
                           2008      Serbia : decentralization and local service delivery                   42154
                           2003      Executive summary                                                      23689
           South Eastern   2010      Western Balkans - Public investment management study : main            53768
           Europe and                report
           Balkans
                           2007      Public expenditure policies in Southeast Europe                        33400
           Tajikistan      2014      Capital expenditures and public investment management                  89184
                                     Fiscal risks from state-owned enterprises                              89183
                                     Key issues in public finance management                                88050



44
                                                                                                  APPENDIX B
                                                LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                             Tajikistan - Programmatic public expenditure review : capital           88052
                             expenditures and public investment management
                             Tajikistan - Programmatic public expenditure review : fiscal risks      88051
                             from state-owned enterprises
                      2013   Government expenditures : size, composition and trends                  77607
                             Review of public expenditures on education                              89182
                             Review of public expenditures on health                                 89181
                      2012   Main Report                                                             68418
                      2008   Synthesis note                                                          43261
                      2008   Main Report                                                             43280
                      2007   Tajikistan - Programmatic public expenditure review                     39771
                      2005   Tajikistan : Public expenditure and institutional review                34891
      Turkey          2014   Turkey - Public finance review : Turkey in transition - time for a      85104
                             fiscal policy pivot?
                      2012   Turkey - Transport sector expenditure review : synthesis report         62581
                      2006   Turkey - Public expenditure review                                      36764
                      2001   Turkey - Public expenditure and institutional review - reforming        22530
                             budgetary institutions for effective government
                      2001   Turkey - Forestry Sector Review                                         22458
      Ukraine         2008   Ukraine - Improving intergovernmental fiscal relations and public       42450
                             health and education expenditure policy : selected issues
                      2006   Ukraine - Creating fiscal space for growth                              36671
                      2003   Ukraine - Financing the environment : Ukraine's road to effective       68417
                             environmental management
                      2002   Ukraine - Review of the budget process : a public expenditure and       23356
                             institutional review
                      2001   Main Report                                                             22677
      Uzbekistan      2005   Uzbekistan - Public Expenditure Review                                  31014
      Yemen, Rep.     2002   Macedonia - Public expenditure and institutional review                 23349
MNA   Algeria         2007   Main Report                                                             36270
                      2002   Main Report                                                             22591
      Djibouti        2006   Djibouti - Public Expenditure Review (PER) - making public              34624
                             finances work for growth and poverty reduction
      Egypt, Arab     2014   Egypt - Medium-term macro-fiscal framework and debt                     89840
      Rep.                   sustainability
                      2012   Main Report                                                             71249
                      2010   Infrastructure and economic growth in Egypt                             WPS5177
                      2009   Egypt - Linking funding to outputs : expenditures of the Ministry of    47547
                             Agriculture and Land Reclamation
      Iran, Islamic   2005   Iran - Report on public financial management, procurement, and          34777
      Republic of            expenditure systems in Iran
                      2005   Islamic Republic of Iran - Transport sector review and strategy         34600
                             note
      Jordan          2012   Hashemite kingdom of Jordan options for immediate fiscal                71979
                             adjustment and longer term consolidation
      Lebanon         2013   Lebanon - Economic and labor force impact of the change in the          79324
                             wage structure of the public sector
                      2010   Republic of Lebanon - Water sector : public expenditure review          52024
                      2008   Lebanon - Electricity sector public expenditure review                  41421



                                                                                                         45
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                             2005    Lebanon - Public expenditure review : reform priorities for fiscal    32857
                                     adjustment, growth and poverty alleviation
           Libya             2009    Synthesis                                                             45019
           Middle East and   2014    A comprehensive review of the health financing systems in Jordan      ACS9635
           North Africa
           West Bank and     2007    Summary                                                               38207
           Gaza
           Yemen, Rep.       2006    Tracking basic education expenditure in Yemen : analyses of           38304
                                     public resource management and teacher absenteeism
 LAC       Argentina         2003    Argentina - Reforming policies and institutions for efficiency and    25991
                                     equity of public expenditures
           Belize            2013    Belize - PPIAF SNTA municipal finance : report of RESP activity       ACS3663
           Bolivia           2011    Bolivia - Agriculture public expenditure review                       59696
                             2004    Bolivia - Public expenditure management for fiscal sustainability     28519
                                     and equitable and efficient public services
           Brazil            2008    Different paths to student learning : good practices and student      43590
                                     performance - identifying success from municipal school systems
                                     in Brazil
                             2008    Main Report                                                           40144
                             2007    Stylized facts and recommendations                                    36595
                             2007    Brazil - Governance in Brazil's unified health system : raising the   36601
                                     quality of public spending and resource management
                             2002    Policy report                                                         24413
                             2002    Main Report                                                           22870
           Colombia          2005    Colombia - Public expenditure review                                  25163
           Costa Rica        2008    Costa Rica - Public expenditure review : enhancing the efficiency     40774
                                     of expenditures
                             2002    Summary of issues and recommendations with executive                  24300
                                     summary
           Dominica          2005    Dominica - OECS fiscal issues : policies to achieve fiscal            27467
                                     sustainability and improve efficiency and equity of public
                                     expenditures
           Dominican         2004    Dominican Republic - Public Expenditure Review : reforming            23852
           Republic                  institutions for a more efficient public expenditure management
           Ecuador           2004    Main Report                                                           28911
                             2000    Main document                                                         19920
           El Salvador       2010    Main Report                                                           53500
                             2004    El Salvador - Public expenditure review                               32856
           Grenada           2004    Grenada - OECS fiscal issues : policies to achieve fiscal             28334
                                     sustainability and improve efficiency and equity of public
                                     expenditure
           Guatemala         2013    Towards better expenditure quality : Guatemala public expenditure     78000
                                     review
                             2012    Guatemala - Public expenditure review                                 67363
                             2000    Guatemala - Expenditure reform in a post-conflict country             19617
           Guyana            2002    Guyana - Public expenditure review                                    20151
           Haiti             2008    Haiti - Public Expenditure Management and Financial                   40066
                                     Accountability Review (PEMFAR) : improving efficiency of the
                                     fiscal system and investing in public capital to accelerate growth
                                     and reduce poverty



46
                                                                                                  APPENDIX B
                                                 LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
      Honduras          2013   Public expenditures for decentralized governance in Honduras :          82662
                               towards restoring fiscal consolidation
                        2010   Main Report                                                             64692
                        2007   Executive summary and main report                                       39251
                        2001   Honduras - Public expenditure management for poverty reduction          22070
                               and fiscal sustainability
      Jamaica           2005   Jamaica - Fiscal consolidation for growth and poverty reduction - a     29546
                               Public Expenditure Review
      Mexico            2012   Mexico - Social protection system in health and the transformation      76735
                               of state health systems
                               Mexico's social protection system in health and the financial           76734
                               protection of citizens without social security
                        2009   Mexico - Agriculture and rural development public expenditure           51902
                               review
                        2006   Mexico - Water public expenditure review                                36942
                        2005   Mexico - Infrastructure public expenditure review (IPER)                33483
                        2004   Core report                                                             27894
                        2003   Mexico - State-level public expenditure review : the case of            25162
                               Veracruz-Llave
      Nicaragua         2010   Nicaragua - Selected issues in social sectors management :              71684
                               programmatic social NLTA implementation report
                        2008   Nicaragua - Public expenditure review 2001-2006                         39807
                        2008   Nicaragua - Social protection public expenditure review                 71687
                        2001   Nicaragua - Public expenditure review - improving the poverty           23095
                               focus of public spending
      Paraguay          2013   the quest for optimal tax and expenditure policies for shared           78194
                               prosperity
                        2006   Paraguay - Public expenditure review : main report                      32797
      Peru              2012   Peru - Public Expenditure Review for Peru : spending for results        62586
                        2010   Peru - The decentralization process and its links with public           52885
                               expenditure efficiency
                        2002   Peru - Restoring fiscal discipline for poverty reduction : a public     24286
                               expenditure review
      St. Kitts and     2003   Saint Kitts and Nevis - OECS fiscal issues : policies to achieve        25185
      Nevis                    fiscal sustainability and improve efficiency and equity of public
                               expenditures
      St. Vincent and   2005   Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - OECS fiscal issues : Policies        30885
      the Grenadines           to achieve fiscal sustainability and improve efficiency and equity of
                               public expenditures
      Uruguay           2013   Uruguay - Public expenditure review : mitigating fiscal risks           68770
                        2001   Uruguay : maintaining social equity in a changing economy               21262
EAP   Cambodia          2011   Cambodia - More efficient government spending for strong and            61694
                               inclusive growth : integrated fiduciary assessment and public
                               expenditure review
                        2008   Cambodia - Reaching the people : Public Expenditure Tracking            52807
                               Survey (PETS) in health - budget year 2003-2004
                        2005   Cambodia - Public expenditure tracking survey (PETS) in primary         34911
                               education
                        2003   Cambodia - Enhancing service delivery through improved resource         25611
                               allocation and institutional reform : integrated fiduciary assessment
                               and public expenditure review




                                                                                                           47
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
           China          2002       China - National development and sub-national finance : a review         22951
                                     of provincial expenditures
                          2000       China - Managing public expenditures for better results : country        20342
                                     economic memorandum
           Indonesia      2013       Indonesia - Spending more or spending better : improving                 73050
                                     education financing in Indonesia
                          2012       Indonesia - South Sulawesi Public Expenditure Analysis 2012 :            73504
                                     Improving public service delivery and financial management in the
                                     gateway to Eastern Indonesia
                          2012       Southeast Sulawesi public expenditure analysis 2012 : public             73273
                                     service delivery performance and development challenges in Bumi
                                     Haluoleo
                          2012       Investing in Indonesia's roads : improving efficiency and closing        73303
                                     the financing gap
                          2012       Bantuan Langsung Tunai (BLT) temporary unconditional cash                67324
                                     transfer
                                     Bantuan Siswa Miskin cash transfers for poor students                    67319
                                     History and evolution of social assistance in Indonesia                  67479
                                     Jamkesmas health service fee waiver                                      67312
                                     JSLU, JSPACA, PKSA cash and in-kind transfers for at-risk youth,         67320
                                     the disabled, and vulnerable elderly
                                     Main Report                                                              67217
                                     Program Keluarga Harapan (PKH) conditional cash transfer                 67309
                                     Public expenditure review summary                                        67299
                                     Raskin subsidized rice delivery                                          67308
                          2012       Targeting poor and vulnerable households in Indonesia                    67218
                          2011       Indonesia - Agriculture public expenditure review 2010                   69346
                          2011       2011 North Sulawesi public expenditure analysis : sub-national           67534
                                     public financial management and development in Bumi Nyiur
                                     Melambai
                          2009       Aceh growth diagnostic : identifying the binding constraints to          49568
                                     growth in a post-conflict and post-disaster environment
                          2009       Indonesia - Investing in Indonesia's education at the district level :   47514
                                     an analysis of regional public expenditure and financial
                                     management
                          2008       Investing in Indonesia's health : challenges and opportunities for       46314
                                     future public spending - health public expenditure review 2008
                          2008       Service delivery and financial management in a new province :            46313
                                     Gorontalo public expenditure analysis 2008
                          2007       Managing resources to build back and create a better future for          40822
                                     Nias : Nias public expenditure analysis
                          2007       Indonesia public expenditure review 2007 - Spending for                  38772
                                     development : making the most of Indonesia's new opportunities
                          2007       Public financial managment in Aceh : measuring financial                 40711
                                     management performance in Aceh's local governments
                          2007       Main Report                                                              38778
                          2006       Aceh public expenditure analysis : spending for reconstruction and       38417
                                     poverty reduction
                          2005       Papua public expenditure analysis - overview report : regional           34046
                                     finance and service delivery in Indonesia's most remote region
                          2003       Decentralizing Indonesia : A regional public expenditure review          26191
                                     overview report



48
                                                                                                   APPENDIX B
                                                   LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
                          2003   Indonesia - Selected fiscal issues in a new era                       25437
                          2000   Indonesia - Public spending in a time of change                       19845
        Kiribati          2013   Summary of findings : Kiribati public expenditure analysis            78308
        Lao PDR           2012   Government spending on health in Lao PDR : evidence and issues        76229
                          2011   Lao PDR - Public Expenditure Review (PER)                             63200
                          2008   Lao PDR - Public expenditure tracking survey in primary education     39043
                                 and primary health : making services reach poor people
                          2007   Lao PDR - Public expenditure review integrated fiduciary              39791
                                 assessment
        Malaysia          2000   Malaysia - Malaysia public expenditures : managing the crisis ;       20371
                                 challenging the future
        Mongolia          2009   Core report                                                           43353
                          2006   Mongolia - Public financing of education : equity and efficiency      36979
                                 implications
                          2002   Mongolia - Public expenditure and financial management review :       24439
                                 bridging the public expenditure management gap
        Papua New         2004   Papua New Guinea - Public expenditure review and rationalization      31209
        Guinea                   : overview of discussion paper
        Philippines       2013   Philippines - Second phase of the basic education public              ACS2212
                                 expenditure review : school based management - an empirical
                                 investigation
                          2013   Getting a grip on climate change in the Philippines : executive       78809
                                 report
                                 Getting a grip on climate change in the Philippines : extended        78798
                                 technical report
                          2012   Philippines - Basic education : public expenditure review             71272
                          2011   Philippines - Public expenditure review : strengthening public        55695
                                 finance for more inclusive growth
                          2009   Philippines - Transport for growth : an institutional assessment of   47281
                                 transport infrastructure
                          2007   Philippines : Agriculture public expenditure review                   40493
                          2003   Philippines - Improving government performance : discipline,          24256
                                 efficiency and equity in managing public resources (a public
                                 expenditure, procurement and financial management review)
        Samoa             2014   Samoa - Public expenditure review notes : taking stock of             ACS7927
                                 expenditure trends from FY2006-FY12
        Solomon Islands   2011   Solomon Islands - Public expenditure review for the Solomon           68826
                                 Islands Government
        Thailand          2012   Overview                                                              67486
        Timor-Leste       2013   Timor-Leste - Social assistance public expenditure and program        73484
                                 performance report
                          2004   Timor-Leste - Public expenditure review                               27886
                          2002   East Timor public administration : public expenditure management      27509
                                 and accountability note
        Vietnam           2014   Vietnam fiscal transparency review : analysis and stakeholder         88273
                                 feedback on state budget information in the public domain
                          2013   Vietnam - Agriculture public expenditure review                       ACS4599
                          2005   Cross sectoral issues                                                 30035
                          2001   Viet Nam - Growing healthy : a review of Viet Nam's health sector     22210
                          2000   Main Report                                                           21021
World   Lithuania;World   2009   Lithuania - Social sectors public expenditure review                  48604



                                                                                                           49
APPENDIX B
LIST OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTS
           World          2011       Forest sector public expenditure reviews : review and guidance   64491
                                     note
                          2011       How do we improve public expenditure in agriculture?             66817
                          2009       Tanzania - Public expenditure review of the water sector         68621




50
                                                                                              APPENDIX C
                                      THE ROLE AND INFLUENCE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS ON DPO DESIGN

Appendix C. The role and influence of Public
Expenditure Reviews on DPO design (Table 2 of 2)
Country, DPL, FY        Was there a PER?                If PER present and findings     Were there           Implementation
                        If yes, PER findings used in    used in DPO design, in          associated Prior     effective or not
                        DPO? (Yes/No)?                  which Policy Areas of DPO       Actions (PAs)        (strong,
                        If no PER, were findings on     were PER findings used                               moderate,
                        resource allocation from                                                             weak, none)
                        other analytical work used in
                        DPO?
Albania Social Sector   No recent PER.                  No links between 2006 PER       No
Reform, FY11            Extensive PER in 2006.          and DPO (although the                                Not applicable
                                                        DPL’s two Policy Areas
                        PER 2006 covered public         were: Social safety Net
                        debt, the social insurance      (SSN) Effectiveness; and
                        system, health financing and    Health Spending Efficiency
                        health insurance institute      and Equity.
                        (HII).
                        Although 2006 PER dated,        The Program Document
                        its findings remain relevant.   (PD) does not discuss the
                                                        adequacy of total
                        However, the findings did       expenditure allocations
                        not factor into DPO design      toward social transfer
                                                        programs and health.

                                                        The Project’s review
                                                        documents do not discuss
                                                        the composition of public
                                                        expenditure.
Benin PRSC 4-6,         PER in 2004 focused on          PER in 2004 recognized          The PAs are
series, FY07-10         social expenditure trends in    that “the share of              vague, given the     weak to none
                        the same sectors of focus in    expenditures in five major      seriousness of the
                        the PRSC series.                health programs is driven by    issues discussed.
                                                        the availability of foreign     The Program
                        However, the PRSC does          funds rather than by national   Document has no
                        not contain any reference to    priorities; some important      discussion of
                        PER.                            causes of child mortality and   necessary
                                                        morbidity are not               budgetary
                                                        addressed”.                     allocations.
                                                                                        No analysis of
                                                        A PRSC series focus: “to        public
                                                        support government efforts      expenditures in
                                                        toward achieving the MDGs       critical MDG
                                                        by improving access to          related areas
                                                        basic services, particularly    where Benin is
                                                        better efficiency of            particularly
                                                        expenditures in human           lagging (maternal
                                                        capital formation”. The         mortality, child
                                                        operation was explicitly        mortality and
                                                        aimed at improving MDG          morbidity).
                                                        outcomes.                       The 2010 IMF Ex-
                                                                                        Post Assessment
                                                                                        concludes that the



                                                                                                                            51
APPENDIX C
THE ROLE AND INFLUENCE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS ON DPO DESIGN
                                                           However, the PRSCs do not     program could not
                                                           follow up on the PER          monitor poverty
                                                           findings.                     reducing
                                                                                         expenditures
                                                                                         given the
                                                                                         weakness of
                                                                                         expenditure
                                                                                         classification.
 Brazil State - Fiscal    There was no PER or state        Not Applicable
 Sustainability, FY09     specific social sector reports                                 Not Applicable        weak
                          that could have guided the
                          DPO.
 Cote d’Ivoire Post       PER in 2008 Complex PER          Policy Areas covered in the   5 of 7 PAs based      Weak
 Reconstruction and       relevant to the program.         PER and included in the       on PER                Implementation
 Recovery, FY12           PER findings used in DPO         DPO:                          recommendations.      varied. I.e.
                          design (see next two             Health and Education          These were:           although PA
                          columns).                        expenditures                  Adopt MTEF for        (a) suggested
                                                           Tax policy on cocoa/coffee    health and            increased pro-
                                                           Budget execution              education sectors     poor
                                                           Accountability of public      Convert export        expenditures,
                                                           procurement                   taxes to ad           the DPO
                                                           Audit (of the cocoa sector)   valorem rate for      supported an
                                                                                         cocoa;                action to adopt
                                                                                         Submit budget         a MTEF in the
                                                                                         execution laws;       sector that was
                                                                                         open code of          not effective as
                                                                                         ethics for public     it was not
                                                                                         procurement;          binding.
                                                                                         conduct audits of     The result of
                                                                                         four cocoa entities   increasing
                                                                                                               expenditure on
                                                                                         PER called for        health and
                                                                                         increasing pro-       education was
                                                                                         poor                  not achieved
                                                                                         expenditures. In      due to lack of
                                                                                         particular, health    institutional
                                                                                         expenditures were     depth in the
                                                                                         very low by Sub-      prior action
                                                                                         Saharan African       underpinning
                                                                                         standards (below      this result.
                                                                                         1 percent of
                                                                                         GDP). Increasing
                                                                                         the share of
                                                                                         health and
                                                                                         education
                                                                                         expenditures was
                                                                                         an expected result
                                                                                         of the program.
 Indonesia                Per in 2007.                     Policy Areas were based on    Key associated        Implementation
 Infrastructure DPL 4                                      both studies:                 Prior Actions (too    moderate
 (series of 4), FY08-11   Also Infrastructure              a) Infrastructure spending    numerous to           Electricity
                          Framework for Policy and         and investment at national    mention all):         pricing delayed
                          Action (2004).                   and sub-national;             a) Increase           due to
                                                           b) Allocation of fuel         allocation to         parliament
                                                           subsidies (reducing           national              approval, but
                                                           inefficient and pro-rich;     infrastructure by     moved forward


52
                                                                                              APPENDIX C
                                      THE ROLE AND INFLUENCE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS ON DPO DESIGN
                        DPL design based on both        allocate from consumption       30% over 2007             in 2010 during
                        2007 PER and the 2004           to connection) to expand        level;                    last DPL,
                        study.                          network;                        b) Publicize
                                                        c) PFM in roads                 breakdown of              rural
                                                        d) Fiduciary (e-procurement     subsidy by region         electrification
                                                        and audit)                      and customer              target dropped
                                                        e) Impediments to sub-          category;
                                                        national borrowing and          c) Allocation to
                                                        arrears                         infrastructure fund
                                                        f) Incentives for PPPs          (for PPP);
                                                                                        d) Implement e-
                                                                                        procurement;
                                                                                        e) Assist water
                                                                                        utilities (PDAMs)
                                                                                        to clear arrears so
                                                                                        they can resume
                                                                                        borrowing.
Latvia Safety Net and   PER in 2007 before crisis,      DPL used the 2007 PER proposal to shift from              The Bank
Social Sector Reform    PER in 2010, (esp. for DPL)     hospital financing to primary healthcare. Overall         commissioned
Program, FY10           with a focus on social sector   relevance of PER limited as crisis downsized              a PSIA
                        reforms on a reduced            budget envelope in 2009.                                  (Employment
                        budget due to crisis.                                                                     and Welfare
                                                        2010 PER: Specifically commissioned to provide            Impact of the
                        Some findings from 2007         analytical underpinning for second DPL. The PER           Financial Crisis
                        used in DPL.                    supported social sector reforms undertaken since          in Latvia). A
                                                        2009, but, as policy actions for second DPL were          second study
                        2010 PER provided               already designed during first DPL (as indicative          by same
                        thorough analysis of            triggers) – there was little flexibility to incorporate   authors in
                        challenges in social            new actions.                                              2012 that did
                        protection, health and                                                                    ex-post poverty
                        education. Provided menu        This could be the reason why some potentially             simulations
                        of policy options for medium    important reform areas not included in the first          found that
                        term                            operation did not become reforms actions under            ESSNS
                                                        the second program. For example, the 2010 PER             worked
                                                        suggested reforms in Family State Benefits that           reasonably
                                                        were less targeted but constituted 37 percent of          well.
                                                        social protection budget as of 2010. The PER
                                                        suggested a number of reforms in the program to
                                                        direct resources from non-poor to the poor.
                                                        However, this did not become part of the reform
                                                        program.
Mexico Green            Sectoral PER in 2009, on        This DPL does not have          This DPL does not         Not relevant to
Growth, FY09            agriculture and rural           Policy Areas related to PE.     have Prior Actions        this DPL.
                        development;                                                    related to PE
                        General PER in 2004.            However, the EP DPL             As in previous
                                                        included 2004 PER               column, the EP
                        PER contents do not pertain     findings/Policy areas on:       DPL had several
                        to DPL.                         Government Accounting;          prior actions
                                                        Tax Reform;                     related to 2004
                        Although no PE findings         Conditional cash transfers      PER findings.
                        used in this DPL, the                                           These were:
                        Economic Policies (EP) DPL                                      Implement
                        approved 1 month after this                                     accounting law to
                        DPL includes a detailed                                         establish accrual
                        discussion on PE                                                accounting;
                        Management, and was


                                                                                                                                53
APPENDIX C
THE ROLE AND INFLUENCE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS ON DPO DESIGN
                           informed by several studies                                    Tax reform for
                           including the 2004 PER.                                        basic foods and
                                                                                          reducing subsidy
                                                                                          for residential
                                                                                          electricity;
                                                                                          Taxes to enhance
                                                                                          non-oil revenues
 Peru Programmatic         PER (2002)                     Policy Areas were:              Prior Actions         Strong
 Fiscal Management         PER (2007)                     a) Fiscal Management            include:              The PERs and
 and Competitiveness,      Public Expenditure and         (strengthening budget           a) Enforcement of     PEFA appear
 FY07-11                   Fiscal Assessment (PEFA,       reporting and planning)—        fiscal rules;         to have
                           2009).                         where most PAs were             b) Eliminating        informed the
                           The first operation used the   focused;                        sectoral and          country and
                           PER as a basis for its         b) Results-based budgeting      regional tax          the Bank on
                           design. The third operation    (to enhance efficiency and      exemptions;           the most
                           uses the PEFA to inform its    promote higher impact of        c) Linking budget     important
                           design (to inform the reform   public spending—(higher         presentation cycle    aspects of
                           process, and indicative        efficiency evident in health    with performance      reform, and
                           triggers)                      and nutrition programs);        indicators and        also provided
                                                          c) Tax reforms (but little      submission of         with data and
                           Overall, PERs and PEFA         advance).                       sector                analysis to
                           used to inform design of the                                   performance           have proper
                           series.                                                        indicators;           baselines for
                                                                                          d) Other PAs          some of the
                                                                                          related to fiscal     indicators
                                                                                          reforms
 Poland Energy             PER in 2010 focusing on                                                              Not Applicable
 Efficiency and            social sectors and public                                                            to this DPL.
 Renewable Energy          wages. PER mostly
 Development, FY11         discusses forms of targeted
                           social assistance.

                           Not relevant for an energy
                           sector DPL and did not
                           factor into DPO design
 Romania Financial         PER (2006)                     Consistency between 2010        Several               Moderate
 Management and            PER (2010)                     PER and DPL Policy areas        associated Prior
 Social Protection DPL                                    and Prior Actions. Policy       Actions:
 2 (series of 1-3, 2009-   Both relevant. 2010 was in     areas include:                  a) MTEF
 11), FY11                 middle of series and           a) Improving FM by explicitly   approved by
                           emphasizes urgency due to      introducing a MTEF;             Parliament with
                           global crisis. 2010 findings   b) Public sector wage policy;   binding
                           used in DPL.                   c) Education reform             expenditure limits;
                                                          (allocation of teachers);       b) Pay
                                                          d) Health – allocation of       adjustments made
                                                          resources;                      in public sector
                                                          e) Pension reform;              according to laws;
                                                                                          c) Schools to
                                                                                          receive budgets
                                                                                          by per-capita
                                                                                          formula;
                                                                                          d) Revised health
                                                                                          provider payment
                                                                                          mechanisms
                                                                                          adopted;




54
                                                                                             APPENDIX C
                                     THE ROLE AND INFLUENCE OF PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS ON DPO DESIGN
                                                                                      e) Link/de-link
                                                                                      pensions.
St Lucia Economic      No PER;                         A Policy Area relates to       Prior Actions do      weak
and Social DPL, FY10   No PSIA                         improving the effectiveness    not related to PE
                       The Program Document            and efficiency of social       allocation, except    Due partly to
                       states that, “the Bank has      safety nets (SSNs) by          for a reference to    long-term
                       supported the program           supporting transparent         a Value Added         reforms in a
                       through analytic work in        targeting mechanisms and       Tax Bill.             one-tranche
                       public expenditure,             prioritizing social spending                         operation.
                       economic management,            to vulnerable groups,                                Implementation
                       poverty and social              however, no expenditure                              is believed to
                       protection”. However, there     analysis.                                            have improved
                       is not enough evidence of                                                            after DPL
                       analytical work being used                                                           closure.
                       to support the operation.
Tunisia Governance     No PER                          No relevant Policy Areas in    No Prior Actions      Not relevant
and Opportunity,                                       DPO.                           related to
FY11                   Comprehensive Health                                           expenditure
                       Sector Study in May 2006,                                      allocation.
                       with important institutional
                       reforms suggested.                                             The only related
                                                                                      PA is “institute a
                       The DPL was prepared very                                      national outreach
                       rapidly. No obvious inclusion                                  service policy to
                       of findings.                                                   expand free
                                                                                      access to care.

                                                                                      No discussion on
                                                                                      allocation
Vietnam,               PER in 2005                      Policy Areas with             There were 7          Very Weak.
Programmatic PRSC      2013 PEFA                       recommendations in the         Prior Actions for     With
10 (series of PRSCs    The PER was a major             PER were:                      PRSC 6 and 10         progression of
6-10), FY10            exercise and very relevant      Implementing the MTEF as       indicative triggers   series, the
                       to the series. It suggested     part of budget cycle;          for PRSCs 7 to        policy matrix
                       10 key reforms in the           Balancing capital and          10.                   underwent
                       medium term                     recurrent expenditure          7 of the 10           significant
                                                       Eliminating off-budget         indicative triggers   changes. Most
                                                       transactions                   were dropped.         critical
                                                       Implementing Treasury and                            indicative
                                                       Budget Management                                    triggers were
                                                       Information System                                   never
                                                       State Audit of Vietnam                               incorporated
                                                       (SAV)                                                into the final
                                                       Audits of SOEs                                       policy matrix.
                                                       Strengthen public
                                                       investment management
                                                       Strengthen public debt
                                                       management
                                                       Follow up PERs in 2008 and
                                                       2011.




                                                                                                                           55
                                                                                        APPENDIX D
                                    DPOS AND PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS AT THE SUBNATIONAL LEVEL

Appendix D. DPOs and Public Expenditure
Reviews at the subnational level
1.     As documented in this descriptive annex, subnational DPOs and PERs have
taken place in a small number of large, federated countries durign the period under
review (2000-13 for PERs and 2004-13 for DPOs). By far the largest number of
subnational DPOs in this period took place in only one country: Brazil. 17PERs and
DPOs generally tend to overlap in a very small number of countries. Given the
important of subnational fiscal and development agenda, this may suggest a potential
knowledge gap and an opportunity for the Bank to intensify knowledge engagement at
the subnational levels, both as part of the knowledge and policy dialogue per se and as
a contribution to the future DPO development. This very brief annex provides some
very preliminary portfolio trends and figures that may raise questions and stimulate
further discussion.

2.     In the period under review (2004-14) there were a relatively limited number of
subnational DPOs. In this period, the first set of subnational DPOs18 were provided to
Pakistan in 2006, including an education and an irrigation policy credit to the Punjab
region. There was a total of 35 DPOs at the subnational level between 2006 and 2013,
equivalent to about 6 percent of all approved DPO operations in this period. On an
annual basis, DPOs at the subnational level, are relatively rare, showing a a modest
increase from one operation (2 percent of the total) in 2009 to six (10 percent) in 2014.

3.      All 35 subnational operations were provided to the following five countries:
Brazil, Pakistan, India, Nigeria, and Ghana. All are regionally large economies with
significant Bank engagements. The large majority of these (17) were provided to Brazil.
The trends and breakdown by country is provided in figure 1.




17In the previous period especially, there were subnational PERs in other countries (e.g., India,
Pakistan, Russian Federation, Nigeria).
18 DPOs at the subnational level were identified by all policy lending that include a “subnational
flag” as per business intelligence database. This includes only operations that lent directly to
subnational governments, but not operations that were targeting decentralization reform via
lending to central governments. The data here rely on BI report 2c.2.1, which was accessed on
March 26, 2015.


                                                                                                57
APPENDIX D
DPOS AND PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS AT THE SUBNATIONAL LEVEL

Figure D-1 . Trend of DPOs at subnational level in numbers and as share of total

                                        10                                                                   100%                                                                                 18




                                                                                                                    Subnational operations as share of total
     Number of subnational operations


                                                                                                                                                                                                  16




                                                                                                                                                               Number of subnational operations
                                        8                                                                    80%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  14

                                        6                                                                    60%                                                                                  12

                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                        4                                                                    40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  8

                                        2                                                                    20%                                                                                  6

                                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                        0                                                                    0%
                                             2006
                                                    2007
                                                           2008
                                                                  2009
                                                                         2010
                                                                                2011
                                                                                       2012
                                                                                               2013
                                                                                                      2014

                                                                                                                                                                                                  2

                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                  Number                      Share                                                                                                    Brazil Pakistan   India   Nigeria   Ghana


4.   As too few of those DPOs were reviewed by the IEG, no clear conclusion can be
drawn about the differences in outcome indicators at this time.

5.      Similarly, relatively few PERs were produced at the subnational level. Between
2000 and 2014, IEG identified 38 subnational PERs out of a pool of 404, amounting to 9
percent of total.19 Though the number of reports produced varies, many more
subnational PERs were produced in the latter half of the evaluation period, a trend
reflecting the lending pattern of DPOs. The distribution of countries with subnational
PERs is, however, much more balanced than with DPOs across the five regions.

6.     Subnational PERs were found in 16 countries. Most prominent is Indonesia (12),
followed by Ethiopia (4), and Pakistan (3). Of the five countries with subnational DPOs,
only Brazil (2 PERs), Pakistan (3 PERs), and Nigeria (2 PERs) had a subnational public
expenditure type knowledge product. This suggests that outside Brazil, where there has
been a strong DPO and PER engagement, the integration of subnational PERs and
DPOs is taking place in a very small number of countries. For example, while there
were national PERs in Ghana, no national nor subnational PERs were conducted in
India. Notable is also that no subnational DPOs were provided to Indonesia, China, or
Mexico, despite their regional importance and the World Bank’s interest in their
subnational expenditure composition. The trends and regional distribution of
subnatiojnal PERs are shown in figure 2.


 As subnational coding was not available for this database, IEG instead judged content of the
19

PER by the document title.


58
                                                                                                                                                                 APPENDIX D
                                                    DPOS AND PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEWS AT THE SUBNATIONAL LEVEL

Figure D-2. Trend of PERs at subnational level in numbers and as share of total

                               8                       80%                                                                          14




                                                             Subnational PERs as share of total PERs
  Number of subnational PERs



                                                                                                                                    12
                               6                       60%




                                                                                                       Number of subnational PERs
                                                                                                                                    10

                               4                       40%                                                                          8

                                                                                                                                    6
                               2                       20%
                                                                                                                                    4

                               0                       0%
                                                                                                                                    2

                                                                                                                                    0
                                   Number   Share                                                                                        SAR   AFR   ECA   LAC    EAP




                                                                                                                                                                        59
