                                 97490




INDEPENDENT EVALUATION GROUP




Work Program and Budget (FY16)
              and
   Indicative Plan (FY17–18)




           May 14, 2015
                     ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AAA      Analytic and Advisory Activities
CAS      Country Assistance Strategy
CASCR    CAS Completion Report
CASCRR   CAS Completion Report Review
CCSA     Cross-Cutting Solution Areas
CIF      Climate Investment Funds
CLEAR    Centers for Learning Evaluation and Results
CLR      Completion and Learning Review
CODE     Committee on Development Effectiveness
CPE      Country Program Evaluation
CPF      Country Partnership Framework
CSC      WBG Corporate Scorecard
DEC      Development Economics Vice Presidency
ECD      Evaluation Capacity Development
ECG      Evaluation Cooperation Group
FCS      Fragile and conflict-affected situation
FY       Fiscal year
GP       Global Practice
IBRD     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICR      Implementation Completion and Results Report
ICRR     ICR Review
IDA      International Development Association
IEG      Independent Evaluation Group
IFC      International Finance Corporation
IPDET    International Program for Development Evaluation Training
IT       Information technology
MAR      Management Action Record
M&E      Monitoring and evaluation
MDG      Millennium Development Goal
MIC      Middle income countries
MIGA     Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
PCR      Project Completion Report
PER      Project Evaluation Report
P4R      Program for Results
PLR      Performance and Learning Review
PPAR     Project Performance Assessment Report
RAP      Results and Performance (IEG annual report)
SCD      Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDGs     Sustainable Development Goals
WB       World Bank
WBI      World Bank Institute
WBG      World Bank Group
XPSR     Expanded Project Supervision Report
Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................................ I
1. IEG STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS .............................................................................................................................. 1
2. DEEPENING IEG IMPACT .................................................................................................................................... 5
    1.   CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES ......................................................................................................................5
    2.   MAKING STRATEGIC CHOICES AND ADJUSTING BUSINESS LINES ..........................................................................6
    3.   ENHANCING QUALITY AND CREDIBILITY OF IEG WORK ....................................................................................10
    4.   ENHANCING KNOWLEDGE AND IT INFRASTRUCTURE, AND LEARNING AND COMMUNICATIONS .......................12
3. PROPOSED WORK PROGRAM FOR FY16-18 ..................................................................................................... 14
    1.   SELECTIVITY FRAMEWORK ..................................................................................................................................14
    2.   MAJOR EVALUATIONS .........................................................................................................................................15
    3.   PROJECT EVALUATIONS.......................................................................................................................................20
    4.   VALIDATION PRODUCTS ......................................................................................................................................21
    5.   LEARNING PRODUCTS .........................................................................................................................................21
    6.   EVALUATION CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT .............................................................................................................22
    7.   GLOBAL LEADERSHIP AND COLLABORATION WITH EVALUATION PARTNERS ......................................................23
4. STAFFING AND BUDGET .................................................................................................................................. 24
    1. HUMAN RESOURCES ............................................................................................................................................24
    2. BUDGET PROPOSAL .............................................................................................................................................25
    3. ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK ..........................................................................................................................31
ANNEX 1: IEG RESULTS FRAMEWORK .................................................................................................................. 32
ANNEX 2: DESCRIPTION OF IEG STRATEGIC ENGAGEMENT AREAS ....................................................................... 37
ANNEX 3: GAP ANALYSIS OF RECENT IEG EVALUATIONS ...................................................................................... 42
    RECENT IEG EVALUATIONS BY SECTOR (FY10-15) .................................................................................................42
    RECENT IEG EVALUATIONS BY THEME (FY10-15) ..................................................................................................43
ANNEX 4: PROPOSED WORK PROGRAM FOR FY16-18.......................................................................................... 44
    WORK PROGRAM BY BUSINESS LINE ........................................................................................................................44
    MAJOR EVALUATIONS AND LEARNING PRODUCTS BY OBJECTIVES ..........................................................................46
                       IEG WORK PROGRAM AND BUDGET (FY16)
                                      AND
                             INDICATIVE PLAN (FY17-18)


                                       Executive Summary

Strategic Directions for FY16-18

1.     IEG’s strategic directions in FY16-18 respond to significant changes that are underway in
the WBG and in the broader development community. Internally, the launch of the twin goals in
2013, and the WBG Strategy and the internal reform process in 2014, are profound changes
designed to transform the institution. Externally, the global community is reaching consensus on
ambitious post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Against this backdrop, IEG faces a
unique opportunity to deepen its impact, and make a significant contribution to the successful
implementation of the new WBG Strategy and launch of the SDGs.

2.       To achieve the twin goals, the WBG need to better understand what works and the reasons
why, and draw lessons and good practices from experience. Independent evaluation is essential to
help the WBG tackle these challenges and build a stronger internal culture to deliver results to
clients based on evidence. Last year, IEG introduced a new Results Framework to better align our
objectives and work with the new WBG strategic directions. Over a six-year period, we committed
to focus on two objectives:

       What Works: Deepening evidence about the results of WBG program and activities – and
        their effectiveness for accelerating growth, inclusiveness, and sustainability – to contribute
        to the achievement of the WBG’s interim target of 9 percent poverty and progress on
        shared prosperity by 2020; and

       Real-Time Learning: Generating evidence on the early implementation experience of the
        WBG Strategy to enable mid-course corrections and promote a stronger internal culture for
        results, accountability, and learning.

3.      During the first year of implementation of the new Results Framework, IEG found that our
work related to the first objective was dispersed across a wide range of sectors and thematic areas.
As a result, it has been difficult to build a robust knowledge base about the overall WBG
contribution to the twin goals. In response, IEG intends to develop a more selective and
coordinated program of work, focusing on three cross-cutting Strategic Engagement Areas: (1)
Inclusive Growth, (2) Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor, and (3) Environmental Sustainability.
These Strategic Engagement Areas will leverage IEG resources on “game changers” where we can
have maximum impact on the overall challenge of meeting the twin goals in a sustainable manner.

Deepening IEG Impact

4.     IEG has launched an internal renewal effort to strengthen our influence and impact – and
we look forward to the recommendations of the independent External Review commissioned by the
                                                - ii -


Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE) to further enhance our impact. Our ongoing
renewal program has focused on:

      Making strategic choices on evaluation coverage and adjustments to business lines –
       including stronger alignment of major evaluations with the objectives of the new IEG results
       framework; working “faster, smarter, and cheaper” in the delivery of major evaluations;
       aligning country evaluation work with the new country engagement model; improving the
       efficiency and effectiveness of the project-level validation system; and developing a more
       comprehensive business line related to evaluation of knowledge products.

      Enhancing the quality and credibility of IEG work – including deepening our quality
       assurance framework and introducing new tools to assess quality after evaluation
       completion; refining and improving our methods, particularly with regard to the assessment
       of inclusive growth and gender equality; and tapping into large internal and external data sets
       and beneficiary feedback mechanisms to deepen the evidence we use in evaluations.

      Enhancing knowledge, learning, and communications – including developing new
       learning products that distill lessons and key findings from IEG evaluation evidence to
       support GP/CCSAs, and other WBG corporate units; selectively developing concepts for
       “user-centric” formats to engage with those being evaluated, with the objective of improving
       critical “touch points” between IEG and its counterparts; and supporting the launch of the
       new Results Measurement and Evidence Stream.

      Managing human and financial resources more effectively – with a strong focus on
       deepening a performance culture of integrity, technical excellence, and high quality through
       strategic staffing review, talent review, organizational change, and performance management.

Proposed Work Program

5.     In line with CODE’s recommendation for increased selectivity and fewer large evaluations,
IEG proposes to deliver about eight major new evaluations and one annual synthesis of results and
performance each year in FY16-18.

      About three-quarters of the major evaluations in the work program will contribute to the
       first objective of the IEG results framework of deepening evidence about the results of
       WBG programs and activities. FY16 evaluations will focus heavily on the Strategic
       Engagement Area related to Inclusive Growth, including (i) tertiary education; (ii) capital
       market development; and (iii) jobs and competitiveness. Other FY16 evaluations include:
       fragility in non-FCS countries; a clustered country program evaluation on small states; and
       the annual Results and Performance Report, with a thematic focus on gender equality.

      About one-quarter of the work program will focus on the second objective of generating
       evidence about the early implementation experience of the new WBG Strategy. FY16
       evaluations include: a process evaluation of the Systematic Country Diagnosis and Country
       Partnership Framework; assessment of the WBG’s self-evaluation system; and review of the
       Program for Results.
                                                - iii -


6.      IEG proposes to scale up the number of Project Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs)
of World Bank projects in FY16-18, in line with the earlier objective to cover about 20-25 percent of
closed projects to ensure robust learning and accountability for actual project performance (the
coverage rate fell to about 15 percent in FY14-15, when the volume of lending expanded and IEG
redeployed staff resources to clear the backlog of reviews of Bank Implementation Completion and
Results Reports). In addition, IEG will continue with the pilot launched in FY15 to conduct a small
number of PPARs on IFC and MIGA investments.

7.      IEG will continue to validate WBG project completion reports, and review options to
improve and streamline the validation of Bank Implementation Completion and Results Reports
with CODE and WBG Management in FY16. IEG will also continue to review and validate the
completion reports of country strategies, and discuss with CODE on how to provide useful
evaluative input for the implementation of the new country engagement model.

8.       In addition to the evaluation and validation work, IEG is proposing to maintain a strong
focus on learning and knowledge sharing. After the past year of piloting (where IEG delivered
fifteen learning products), IEG intends to be more selective and deliver fewer learning products
(about 10-12 per year in FY16-18), based on feedback from Bank Group Management for more
targeted and prioritized learning support from IEG. We propose to conduct a stocktaking on the
use and influence of IEG learning products in FY16 to help guide future work program decisions
about the appropriate scope and budget for this new product line.

Budget Request

9.      IEG’s FY16 work program is based on a total budget request of $35.9 million, comprising a
$34.0 million regular budget to be approved by the Board, and $1.9 million in trust funds and
externally funded outputs. This resource envelope is consistent with the flat budget framework
agreed with the Board in FY12, and adjusted to reflect the planned savings from IEG’s Expenditure
Review that was approved by CODE in FY14.

10.     In FY16-18, about 80 percent of resources will support the first objective of deepening
evidence about the results of WBG programs and activities; and about 20 percent will focus on the
second objective of generating evidence on the early implementation experience of the WBG
Strategy. The proposed spending trends are fully aligned with IEG’s new strategic directions: the
proportion of spending on major evaluations declines from 25 percent in FY13 to 23 percent in
FY16-18, while the proportion of spending on other evaluation products increases from 12 to 14
percent, reflecting the increased selectivity on major evaluations and corresponding scale up of
learning products and services, and PPARs.
                                      1. IEG Strategic Directions


1.      IEG’s strategic directions in FY16-18 reflect and respond to significant changes that are
underway internally in the WBG and externally in the broader development community. They will
be further reviewed, and adjusted as necessary, in light of the upcoming External Review
commissioned by CODE.

2.       Internally, the launch of the twin goals in 2013, and the WBG Strategy and the internal
reform process in 2014, are profound changes designed to renew and transform the WBG. Over
the past year, WBG has taken many significant steps in implementation. These include the new
country engagement model and new IFC client engagement model, the establishment of the Global
Practices and Cross Cutting Solutions Areas, the cascading Corporate Scorecard, the Results
Measurement and Evidence Stream, and new operational frameworks related to risk assessment and
citizen engagement.1

3.     Looking forward, the WBG has highlighted six priorities in its strategic planning, budget,
and performance review process for FY16-18:2

       Delivery. Ensure strong delivery across WBG, with a focus especially on IDA lending
        delivery, quality across the whole portfolio, and commitments on climate change, gender and
        fragile and violence-affected areas.

       Focus. Maintain focus on poverty and shared prosperity, according to country contexts.

       Operating Model. Strengthen the operating model with special focus on reinforcing
        selectivity in the Country Partnership Frameworks, reviewing the Cross-Cutting Solutions
        Areas business model, and improving the Bank budget systems within operations; and
        review lessons learned from the Strategic Country Diagnostics in FY15 and CPFs in FY16.

       Public-Private Sector Balance. Strengthen internal incentives to support public-private
        interventions by all WBG institutions; build and share knowledge on public-private models,
        differentiated by sector and country circumstances; support development of domestic
        business; and explore opportunities for sub-sovereign operations.

       Resource Mobilization and Partnerships. Align trust funds more closely with WBG strategy;
        strengthen partnerships with middle income countries, NGOs, UN and others to achieve the
        twin goals; strategically engage new development banks/funds; leverage more private sector
        resources for development; and continue to boost Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS).

       Knowledge. Make knowledge more accessible internally—including knowledge on political
        economy, industry best practice, innovation, technology and what works in development



1World Bank Implementation Update, SECM2015-0029 (January 2015)
2FY16-18 Strategic Planning, Budget, and Performance Review: Overview of the W process and W1 Outcome,
SecM2014-0547/2 (December 2014)
                                                          -2-


         based on evidence; and ensure that our knowledge and advice is cutting edge and consistent
         across the Bank Group.

4.     Externally, the global community is reaching consensus on the new post-2015 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), expected to be adopted at the UN Special Summit for Sustainable
Development in September 2015. The SDGs aim to meet the dual challenge of overcoming poverty
and protecting the planet, with a focus on five transformative shifts:

        Leave no one behind
        Put sustainable development at the core
        Transform economies for jobs and inclusive growth
        Build peace, and effective, open and accountable public institutions
        Forge a new global partnership

5.      The financing resources needed to achieve the SDGs will be of a much greater magnitude
than those mobilized for the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), surpassing current
development financial flows. International financial institutions are collaborating on Post-2015
Financing for Development to help increase available financial resources, and promote and catalyze
private flows and domestic resources.

6.      However, global risks and volatility will continue to affect the financing and implementation
of the SDGs. Global growth forecasts have been revised downward, post crisis growth slowdowns
are widespread, and cyclical and structural challenges abound. New projections reveal that the WBG
extreme poverty goal will not be achieved unless there are extraordinary efforts to improve inclusive
growth.3

7.       Against this backdrop, IEG faces a unique opportunity to deepen its impact, and make a
significant contribution to the successful implementation of the new WBG Strategy. To achieve the
twin goals in a sustainable manner, the WBG need to better understand what works and the reasons
why, and draw lessons and good practices from experience to inform decision making and future
action. Independent evaluation is essential to help the WBG address these challenges and build a
stronger internal culture for results, accountability, and learning.

8.      IEG’s long-term goal is to accelerate WBG development effectiveness through independent
evaluation. The twin goals now define WBG development effectiveness in a measurable way – the
degree to which WBG programs and activities contribute to sustainably achieving reductions in
extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity by the interim targets of 2020 and the final targets
of 2030. In response, IEG introduced last year a new Results Framework to better align our
objectives and work with the new WBG strategic directions (see Annex 1).

9.       Over a six-year period, we committed to focus on two objectives:4



3World Bank Group, 2015 Global Economic Prospects
4We will review these objectives at the mid-term to see if any adjustments are needed in response to the first three years
of implementation experience – particularly with regard to the priorities for real-time learning in the second objective.
                                                           -3-


         What Works: Deepening evidence about the results of WBG program and activities – and
          their effectiveness for accelerating growth, inclusiveness, and sustainability – to contribute
          to the achievement of the WBG’s interim target of 9 percent poverty and progress on
          shared prosperity by 2020; and
         Real-Time Learning: Generating evidence on the early implementation experience of the
          WBG Strategy to enable mid-course corrections and promote a stronger internal culture for
          results, accountability, and learning, with a focus on three areas: (1) Helping Clients Tackle
          the Most Important Development Challenges, (2) Becoming the Solutions Bank, and (3)
          Working in Partnership.

10.     The Results Framework maps out how we intend to achieve these objectives, including the
“chain of logic” on how the deliverables proposed in the FY16-18 work program feed into
intermediate (1-3 years) and medium-term (4-6 years) outcomes. It also includes indicators to assess
both intermediate progress (have inputs and outputs been delivered effectively, and are they
generating the expected short-term outcomes?) and medium-term impact (are the intermediate
outcomes leading to the expected results required to achieve the objective?).5

11.     The achievement of medium-term outcomes will depend on a number of factors, some of
which are beyond IEG’s control, such as the acceptance of evaluation recommendations and their
effective implementation by Management. IEG will manage the risk to its effectiveness through its
strong commitment to quality and timeliness of evaluations, while also piloting user-centric learning
approaches and outreach, and engagement with key players in the learning and knowledge field
across the Bank Group.

12.     During the first year of implementation of the new Results Framework, IEG found that our
evaluation and learning work related to the first objective of the twin goals was dispersed across a
wide range of sectors and thematic areas – just as the WBG portfolio encompasses a wide range of
services in diverse sectors. We also realized that we were not effectively leveraging work on the
same theme across the different product lines, such as major evaluations, country and project level
evaluations, and learning products.

13.     In response, IEG intends to develop a more selective and coordinated program of work in
FY16-18 that will leverage IEG resources on “game changers” where we can have maximum impact
on the overall challenge of meeting the twin goals in a sustainable manner. With this new focus, we
are asking: What are the issues that will determine success in eradicating poverty and boosting
shared prosperity for generations to come? Where are the bottlenecks that have to be addressed?
What are the knowledge gaps that can be filled by evidence from independent evaluation to ensure
the Bank Group, its clients, and the development community know what successes to replicate?



5Several indicators will require further analysis and piloting, in coordination with the ongoing fine-tuning of the
Corporate Scorecard and the finalization of the WBG M&E Framework. These include new metrics to assess: (i) the
quality of IEG work, to based on the assessment matrix under development in the on-going meta-evaluation work (see
para. 29); (ii) the value-for-money for IEG business lines; (iii) how to link the influence of IEG evaluation work in the
medium-term in our three new Strategic Engagement Areas; (iv) IEG knowledge flows, to be based on the measure
under development by Bank Group Management for the Corporate Scorecard; and (v) the internalization of IEG
evaluation work in WBG operations and SCD/CPF.
                                                 -4-


14.     Following consultations with internal and external stakeholders, we have selected three
cross-cutting Strategic Engagement Areas for the FY16-18 work program. These three topics,
which lie at the heart of the new WBG Strategy, are designed to:
     Maximize the collection of evaluation evidence and unpack the overall challenge of meeting
        the twin goals in a sustainable manner;
     Ensure better coordination and synergy on thematic issues across IEG product lines and
        departments; and
     Create a stronger platform for medium-term strategic engagement with Management on
        critical development challenges.

15.    The three Strategic Engagement Areas are summarized below and described in more detail
in Annex 2:

      Inclusive Growth. A key development challenge is generating growth that is inclusive,
       resilient and sustainable, and that creates jobs. Factors central to addressing this challenge
       include: macroeconomic stability, an enabling business environment, and the rule of law;
       capable public and private institutions; access to productive assets (land, knowledge, capital,
       infrastructure) and to markets; harnessing the powers of economic integration and
       technological change; and policies for creating jobs that are good for development and
       transformational for people’s lives. This Strategic Engagement Area squarely addresses the
       public-private interface necessary for inclusive growth that creates jobs.

      Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor: The 2004 World Development Report
       emphasized that services are failing poor people – in terms of access, quantity, and quality.
       Public spending typically benefits the rich more than the poor, money often fails to reach
       frontline service providers, and service quality is consistently low for poor people. But
       services can work, as illustrated by project-level evaluation work by IEG over the past
       decade. This Strategic Engagement Area will assess the models most commonly used for
       service delivery in different sectors, and compare their effectiveness in reaching the poor, in
       terms of quantity, quality, access, behavior change and impact, and the sustainability of
       services over time.

      Environmental Sustainability: Growth and poverty reduction requires sustainable
       management of natural resources, and mitigation of environmental externalities. In many
       cases, natural capital is over-exploited, with non-sustainable growth patterns. It is difficult
       for those affected – poor, diffuse, and without effective voice – to organize for more
       efficient and equitable resource management. This Strategic Engagement Area will assess
       how the WBG promotes sustainable patterns of consumption and production, and supports
       protecting and managing the natural resource base, including sustainable approaches to
       landscape management, water resources, energy efficiency, and climate change, in line with
       the twin goals and SDGs.

16.     Work in some of the Strategic Engagement Areas may continue beyond the next three years,
in view of the complexity of the issues and large scope of WBG assistance in these areas. Other
ones may be largely covered in this cycle and then be replaced by new ones in future work programs.
                                                -5-


                                    2. Deepening IEG Impact


1. Challenges and Opportunities

17.     IEG has laid out an ambitious agenda – to influence the WBG to take better informed
decisions about its programs and activities to accelerate achievement of the twin goals. Yet how
influential is IEG’s work?

18.    The 2014 Client Survey also provides helpful data to review the relevance, quality, and impact
of IEG’s work. The findings, summarized below, show significant improvement with respect to the
use and influence of IEG products since the last survey in 2012.

      How relevant is IEG to the WBG’s overall mission? Board members increased their
       assessment of our relevance in the top response category from 26 to 40 percent; taking all
       ratings “above the line”, 100 percent of Board respondents view IEG’s work as relevant to
       WBG’s overall mission. WBG staff rating is lower, but stable since the 2012 survey at
       around 88 percent, in the range of highly to somewhat relevant. External clients again give a
       high overall rating of 95 percent (respondents based in Africa, who showed a strong level of
       participation in this year’s survey, were the external grouping who thought our work was
       most relevant).

      Are we getting the balance right between accountability and learning? Board
       members and external clients are more satisfied than WBG staff with the balance between
       accountability and learning in our work. Staff, particularly senior staff and those most
       familiar with IEG’s work, believe we are overly focused on accountability – they believe that
       IEG’s emphasis should be equally split between accountability and learning.

      How do clients assess the quality of our evaluations? Client feedback on the quality of
       IEG’s work shows that on a scale of 1-6, with 6 being the highest, we have come out with an
       average of 4.2 – above the mid-point of 3.5 but not as high as our targets in the Results
       Framework. This rating has not improved since the 2012 survey, despite our investments in
       improving quality. In particular, timeliness is the lowest rated process indicator, with only
       about one-half of respondents being satisfied/very satisfied -- a drop since the last survey.

      To what extent are our products being used? Among WBG staff, 65 percent said they
       are using our evaluations for various purposes. While the usage has gone up across all
       categories – whether in the form of advising clients, designing results frameworks, projects
       or policies –we want that percentage to be much higher. Among respondents from the
       Board, the percentage reaches 95 percent for the use of our work in assessing country
       strategies, and 75 percent and above for reviewing projects, policies and procedures, sector
       strategies, giving inputs to the work of others or proposing a course of action.

      Are we making a difference? All categories of respondent have rated our impact and
       influence on the WBG and the broader development community much higher than in the
       2012 survey: 94 percent of Board members find that IEG’s work impacts WBG
       development effectiveness to some extent (up 14 percent since 2012); and 90 percent of
                                                -6-


       external clients (up by 11 percent) and 75 percent of WBG staff (up by 20 percent) also
       think so. There is a similar pattern, though at a slightly lower level, for IEG’s influence on
       the broader development community: 88 percent of Board members, 83 percent of external
       clients, and 63 percent of WBG staff see IEG having some influence.

19.     As with previous client surveys, WBG staff ratings are consistently less favorable than the
Board and external clients -- though there is significant variation, with lower grades and country-
based staff generally responding more favorably than higher grades and DC-based staff. IEG’s
FY14 evaluation of Learning and Results in World Bank Operations – Phase 1 also highlighted that very
few Bank staff regularly use IEG products. In the survey commissioned for the evaluation, less than
one-quarter of respondents rated IEG evaluations as a very large or substantial source of learning;
and for project implementation, the corresponding proportion dropped to 17 percent.

20.     Scaling up WBG staff use of IEG’s work – and addressing their concerns about the quality
and relevance of our evaluations – remains a top priority. At the same time, IEG wants to ensure
that we remain a global intellectual leader in evaluation, and stay on top of new developments in a
rapidly evolving field. In response to these challenges, IEG has launched an internal renewal effort
to strengthen our influence and impact. As reviewed in last year’s Work Program, IEG has been
investing significantly in a long-term agenda to build our capacity for:

      Making strategic choices on evaluation coverage and business lines adjustments;
      Enhancing the quality and credibility of IEG work;
      Enhancing knowledge, learning, and communications; and
      Managing human and financial resources more effectively.

Recent developments in the different areas of the long term agenda, and plans for FY16-18, are
summarized below (resource management is covered in Chapter 4).

2. Making Strategic Choices and Adjusting Business Lines

21.      With the introduction of the new Results Framework last year, and the Strategic
Engagement Areas this year, IEG continues to refine its strategic objectives and ensure greater
selectivity and alignment of evaluation work with key priorities. As reviewed and agreed in last
year’s Work Program, IEG is already implementing several steps to strengthen alignment, efficiency,
and outcomes of the current product mix, as reviewed below.

22.    Major Evaluations. IEG is continuing to review how to work “faster, smarter, and
cheaper” in the delivery of the major evaluations.

      We are introducing more innovative evaluation topics and approaches to be able to respond
       more rapidly to the evolving business needs of the WBG – such as the proposed new
       process evaluations to facilitate real-time learning of the early implementation experience of
       the WBG country engagement model, GP/CCSAs, and IFC client engagement model, and
       support mid-course corrections, if needed. Likewise, the FY15 Poverty Focus in Country
       Programs is designed to draw lessons from the poverty focus of recent country programs to
       show how SCDs can inform CPFs to achieve poverty reduction and shared prosperity.
                                                -7-


       In line with the WBG shift to a development solutions culture, the major evaluations now
        focus much more on multi-sectoral themes, full integration of lending, knowledge, and
        convening services, and WBG collaboration and synergy – the FY15 World Bank Group
        Support to Early Childhood Development and the FY15 World Bank Group Support for Financial
        Inclusion illustrate this stronger “solutions” approach.

       We are more carefully linking and sequencing our learning products to create synergies – for
        example, the FY15 systematic review of evaluation evidence related to the impact of
        electricity access on health, education, and welfare outcomes not only feeds high quality
        evidence into the FY15 Electricity Access evaluation but also serves as a useful knowledge
        product for the Energy and Extractives Global Practice.

       In response to feedback about the timeliness and length of the reports, we are putting in
        place new processes and incentives to accelerate the delivery of shorter and more concise
        reports, with relevant additional analytical material included in annexes and some topics
        divided into a series of more “bite sized” reports. For example, the main text of the 2014
        Results and Performance of the WBG was less than 50 pages, compared to 100 pages in 2013.
        Likewise, we sequenced the complex topic of how the Bank learns in operational work into
        two separate phases in FY14-15; and the DPO Learning Product Series unpacked a major issue
        into seven smaller thematic reports sequenced over FY15-16.

       More broadly, we completed an analysis in FY15 of the IEG “user experience,” and
        identified specific “touch points” with our constituencies that we are aiming to improve.
        Key changes include: introduction of “Outreach and Tracking” strategies that systematically
        identify core audiences and the actions they are to take as a consequence of the outreach;
        moving our intranet fully into SPARK so as to create the option for an interactive
        experience for those interested in exploring; and new branding for IEG reports, with colors
        and formats more attractive to users.

23.     Country-Level Evaluation. IEG is continuing to update the toolkit for country
evaluations to enhance their relevance and usefulness for operational teams, and ensure alignment
with the new country engagement model.

       IEG has recently completed the first pilot using the new “clustered approach” to Country
        Program Evaluations, namely, the Resource Rich Developing Countries, covering Bolivia,
        Kazakhstan, Mongolia and Zambia. This approach builds on the strategic direction of the
        Solutions Bank Group, where client countries are encouraged to learn from each other
        about the solutions the Bank Group has supported in different countries. The new
        Clustered Country Program Evaluation is designed to improve cost effectiveness, deepen
        learning impact, and broaden country coverage – and offers the potential for significant
        cross-country and South-South learning on certain common themes.

       To make country evaluation knowledge more accessible and useful for country teams
        preparing SCD and CPF, IEG piloted new country synthesis notes that combine country
        focused background data with the latest evaluative evidence, surveys, and assessments from
        IEG and external sources. The first two notes on Albania and Costa Rica were completed in
        FY15, and well received by the country teams. They deliver key data and evidence in one
                                                -8-


       easy-to-use, focused, but comprehensive package – and are supported by a new web-based
       interface that provides much easier access to curated IEG country data and evidence. The
       web interface now provides data on several countries and will be fully populated in FY16.

      A series of “Good Practice Notes” were developed on key operational issues to share
       lessons learned for staff preparing SCD and CPF. Key topics were CAS self-evaluation and
       results, selectivity, and treatment of WBG collaboration. These have been presented at a
       number of workshops and are being utilized by WBG staff in preparing the first round of
       Completion and Learning Reviews.

24.      Project Level Evaluation and Validation. IEG continued to focus on enhancing the
quality, timeliness, and cost-effectiveness of our project evaluation and validation products.

      IEG has largely eliminated its backlog of reviews of the World Bank Implementation
       Completion and Results Report (ICRRs), after implementing the agreed actions spelled out
       in last year’s work program. The total number of outstanding reviews that exceed the IEG
       service standard of 180 days processing time has dropped from 201 reviews as of end-April
       2013 to 68 as of end-April 2015. For ICRs received in FY15, IEG has processed 76 percent
       of them within the agreed service standard, which contributed to a robust data base for the
       2014 RAP.

      IEG has reviewed the guidelines for ICRRs, in coordination with Bank Management, to
       further clarify the purpose of the exercise and streamline the processing. The ICRRs are
       intended to validate the quality of the Bank’s self-reporting on performance, with the goal of
       incentivizing objective, complete, and evidence-based reporting of project-level results and
       performance. Planned simplifications, coupled with forthcoming IT-system improvements,
       will lead to a less cumbersome process, and thus more timely delivery in line with service-
       standards.

      As part of the review of the ICCR process, IEG is also making preparations to introduce a
       system of markers in the ICRR review process to identify project relevance to, and
       measurement of, impact with respect to gender in development, poverty targeting, and
       distributional indicators related to the shared prosperity goal of the WBG. These will be
       formulated to provide quick guidance on the extent to which projects address these issues,
       and facilitate more in-depth analysis through screening the relevant portfolio.

      As reviewed in last year’s work program, IEG has been discussing with Bank Management,
       the option of moving to sampling of ICRRs, rather than the current 100 percentage
       coverage. It has been agreed to postpone further discussions until after WBG Management
       has more time to reflect on how a new validation system would fit with other dimensions of
       the internal reform agenda, including the data requirements of the new Corporate Scorecard
       and the desire to track unit-level performance, as well as the findings of the FY16 Evaluation
       of the WBG Self-Evaluation System.

      IEG has had continuous productive engagements with the new GPs and CCSAs in order to
       ensure they derive useful insights and lessons from IEG’s project-level evaluation and
       validation work (this is particularly important since the Corporate Scorecard will now be
       tracking the share of operations that draw lessons for design from evaluation).
                                                  -9-


       IEG completed discussions with IFC and MIGA in FY14 about streamlining the Expanded
        Project Supervision Reports (XPSRs) in IFC and Project Evaluation Reports (PERs) in
        MIGA. In the process, progress was made in aligning the two frameworks with those of the
        Bank, while reflecting the differences in their business models and approaches. IEG also
        agreed to reduce the sampling rate for XPSRs from 45 to 40 percent given the increase of
        the number of IFC projects, yet without compromising our ability to report on the
        performance of IFC's investment operations.

       Finally, IEG is exploring the possibility for closer harmonization of the project-level
        validation and evaluation methodologies across World Bank, IFC and MIGA. In particular,
        IEG has a unique opportunity to pilot methodologies across institutions and projects to
        analyze the pros and cons of various approaches. The insights from this will be used to
        engage the relevant institutional counterparts in a conversation about possible
        methodological updates more aligned with the notion of a One World Bank Group.

25.     Learning Products. In line with the earlier guidance from CODE, IEG has accelerated its
focus on learning and knowledge sharing. After a period of piloting in FY14-15, IEG developed in
FY15 clear guidelines for the definition, selection, and processing of learning products, which were
discussed and agreed with WBG Management and then presented to CODE at a technical briefing.
We also developed standardized templates to facilitate dissemination and “branding” of the
products, and more clearly differentiate them from our evaluation work

26.      In FY15, IEG delivered fifteen major learning products that synthesized IEG evaluation
findings, with significant outreach and dissemination to GP/CCSAs, IFC, and MIGA operational
staff (see Annex 4 for full list). Corporate topics included: lessons from WBG partnership work,
and environmental and social risk management in DPOs. Country topics included: Bank-IFC
cooperation at the country strategy level, selectivity in country strategies, and results frameworks in
country strategies. Sector and thematic topics included: housing finance, microfinance in Africa,
manufacturing, and renewable energy.

27.     In addition to these major products, IEG continued to deliver a wide range of brief, focused,
and “just-in-time” learning products, often at the request of GP/CCSAs or other WBG technical
units. Recent examples include: lessons learned from avian influenza for the World Bank Ebola
response; summary of findings from water, urban, energy, and transport PPARs; new IFC Sector
Highlights that synthesize lessons from recently evaluated IFC operations; and new IEG websites
for each GP/CCSA that provide “one stop” information on relevant evaluations, IEG contacts, and
upcoming work relevant for that group.

28.      Knowledge Product Evaluation. In line with the focus of the WBG Strategy on
enhancing knowledge, IEG is continuing to develop a more comprehensive and systematic business
line related to the evaluation and validation of knowledge products.

       While IEG has been validating IFC advisory services since 2006, the validation of analytical
        and advisory activities for the World Bank has not been addressed systematically. At
        Management’s request, IEG completed in FY14 an evaluability assessment of the Bank’s
        new self-evaluation system for knowledge products. The findings from the assessment
        suggest opportunities for improvement in the quality of the system as well as harmonization
                                               - 10 -


       in evaluation of knowledge products across the WBG. In addition, IEG is internally
       developing a harmonized approach to evaluating knowledge across the variety of its
       products. Based on the findings of the evaluability assessment and the approach developed
       by IEG , IEG and Bank Management will work together on developing a framework for
       evaluating knowledge products.

      With respect to knowledge product evaluations in IFC, IEG and CDI have revised the
       guidelines for Project Completion Reports (PCRs) to reflect: (i) improvements in the
       methodology and (ii) the IFC reform process that has brought together investment and
       advisory services under a combined product offering. The updated guidelines better align the
       validation frameworks for investment and advisory services in IFC, which will facilitate the
       assessment of joint investment and advisory operations in line with new IFC directions.

3. Enhancing Quality and Credibility of IEG Work

29.   Quality Assurance Framework. Over the past three years, IEG has put in place a more
comprehensive quality assurance framework (see Figure 1).

      Good quality starts with the selection of the right evaluation issues, so IEG has continued to
       refine its process for selectivity and prioritization of the work program, as described in
       Chapter 3.

      During evaluation preparation and implementation, key quality elements include the recently
       updated standards for approach papers, the introduction of quality enhancement reviews as
       requested by TTLs, internal IEG review meetings on the draft Approach Paper and
       Evaluation Report with external peer reviewers, and review and feedback by WBG
       Management on the draft Approach Paper and Evaluation Report.

30.   In FY15, IEG continued with two new quality assessment mechanisms after evaluation
completion:

      “After Action Reviews” where IEG staff have a structured debrief process to analyze what
       happened, why, and how the work could have been done better.

      “Meta-Evaluations” where an independent panel provides an assessment of the quality,
       strengths and weaknesses, and overall conduct of a sample of individual IEG evaluations.
       The panel is assessing utility, feasibility, propriety and validity, drawing on standards from
       the Joint Committee Standards and the ECG Big Book on Evaluation Good Practice
       Standard. The first round of assessments is underway on three recent evaluations and the
       findings are expected in end-FY15. Based on the pilot experience, IEG will review whether
       to scale this up in FY16-18, and how the meta-evaluation methodology could be internalized
       in the design and implementation of IEG evaluation work.
                                               - 11 -


                         Figure 1: IEG Quality Assurance Framework




31.    Methods and Data. IEG has continued to invest in testing, adapting, and developing new
methods to ensure that we maintain cutting-edge rigor and quality in the evaluation of WBG
development effectiveness. Key steps include:

      Ensuring a strong and integrated review of environmental and social risk management in
       evaluation and validation work, including: (i) updating of guidance related to safeguards in
       the ICRR Evaluator Manual; (ii) greater use of project-level findings from ICRRs in the
       CASCR Reviews; and (iii) development of guidance for IEG review meetings to ensure
       consistent consideration of safeguard-related issues in IEG’s evaluations;

      Publishing IEG’s methodologies on the web to ensure transparency and credibility;

      Refining and harmonizing project validation methodologies for the Bank IFC, and MIGA, in
       line with the consolidated data reporting requirements of the new WBG Monitoring and
       Evaluation Framework;

      Tapping into large internal and external data sets (“big data”) and beneficiary feedback
       mechanisms to deepen the evidence we use in evaluations, and establishing standards for
       data collection and sharing to make our evaluation data more accessible to stakeholders;

      Developing a new web-based handbook for IEG staff on data analysis and portfolio review,
       designed to ensure high and uniform standards of quality across IEG evaluation work, foster
       staff exchange across departments, and harmonize our internal processes;

      Harmonization of the methodology and ratings of Completion and Learning Review, with
       IEG and OPCS jointly issuing an updated guidance note “Assessing Country Partnership
       Strategies: A Shared Approach,” in January 2015; and

      Updating the methodology for Country Evaluations to ensure consistency with good
       practice standards, and harmonize with the methods for Completion and Learning Reviews.
                                                 - 12 -


32.  In FY16-18, IEG will continue to focus on improving methods related to the evaluation of
WBG contributions to the achievement of the twin goals in a sustainable manner.

       IEG is reviewing and deepening its current evaluation methodologies from the perspective
        of measuring the performance and results of WBG programs and activities on shared
        prosperity and inclusive growth. The methodological issues are multidimensional, reflecting
        the relevance of growth analytics and decomposition, household survey evidence of project
        incidence, and qualitative evidence on participation, voice and accountability among
        excluded communities at the local level.

        IEG has developed a specific work stream on gender equality to improve IEG assessment
         of distributional effects, which will identify approaches to facilitate the assessment of
         gender-relevant impacts in evaluation products, provide support to evaluators (through
         guidelines, training, BBLs, etc.) to better integrate gender in their work, and foster learning
         and knowledge sharing within and outside the WBG.

        To ensure that complex evaluation issues like inclusive growth draw on “state of the art”
         research methods, IEG has also advanced work to deepen use of mixed methods in
         evaluation work, sharpen our methodologies for qualitative and quantitative analysis, and
         develop a more rigorous framework for assessing the contribution of the WBG when it is
         difficult to attribute outcomes directly to interventions. In addition, IEG has strengthened
         approaches to using country case studies in thematic evaluations, and enhanced consistency
         in evaluating change in WBG operations.

4. Enhancing Knowledge and IT Infrastructure, and Learning and Communications

33.       Knowledge and IT Infrastructure. IEG attaches great importance to ramping up the
distillation and dissemination of knowledge from evaluation products, including through
development of new knowledge management products and processes that share lessons, good
practices, and key evaluation findings. IEG continues to implement the public disclosure policy
introduced in FY12 that makes evaluation work more accessible to external stakeholders.

34.     IEG continues to enhance the accessibility and usability of its knowledge, with the ultimate
goal of enhancing influence across its key target groups. Key actions completed in FY15 include:

       LessonFinder (earlier called ELearn) was revamped and expanded to incorporate lessons
        from PERs and PCRs; a new portal has been introduced to facilitate the analysis of XPSR
        results by sectors, regions or topic, which will be further enhanced with data for MIGA and
        IFC Advisory operations, and hence will cover the learning from all private sector project
        evaluations;

       Workflow automation for PPARs and ICR Reviews, funded by the capital budget, was
        completed, providing better work-program tracking and management;

       New, easier-to-use data management services, such as “Data Mart” and “Tableau,” are
        helping IEG teams to quickly and reliably gain access to portfolio data; advanced data
        visualization tools have substantially simplified data-intense reviews; and new country-
        focused analytical reports are facilitating faster analysis in country evaluation work;
                                                   - 13 -


         New text analysis methods continue to be piloted that make it easier to explore and search
          massive document collections, and provide faster insights into relevant portions of the
          operations portfolio; and

         Joined the WBG “AskSoFi” (Ask Solutions Finder) effort to have one-stop WBG advisory
          service for knowledge and data, with IEG staff assigned to field IEG-related questions.

35.       In FY16, the following actions are envisioned:

         Strategy: Develop and agree on a comprehensive Knowledge Management and
          Infrastructure Technology strategy for IEG, bringing specifically user-centric design
          concepts to bear in the development of a selected set of IT enabled tools and approaches,
          and building alliances with the KM and ITS constituencies across the Bank Group.

         IEG external website will be upgraded to ensure user-centric design, mobile friendliness,
          enhanced indexing of reports to improve search capabilities, and clearer messages; and

         Lessonfinder Portal usage and experience will be closely monitored, and the feasibility and
          cost/benefit to expand the database to include lessons from World Bank PPARs and ICR
          Reviews will be assessed, in partnership with some GPs/CCSAs.

36.     Learning and Communications. The following tools and approaches will be specifically
targeted in FY16:

         Strategy: IEG will develop a comprehensive Communications and Learning strategy, bringing
          specifically adult-learning and marketing concepts together and building alliances with the
          communications and learning constituencies across the Bank Group;

         Social Media will be scaled up and more tightly integrated into product communication
          strategies, with a focus on utilizing #WBLive platforms, and creating more visual "story-
          telling" content through infographics and memes;

         More active use of “Constituent Relationship Management” technologies to build a network
          of IEG users, and deliver more targeted and meaningful engagement experiences with staff,
          development practitioners, and external stakeholders;

         Continued championing of the new Results Measurements and Evidence Stream (RMES), in
          partnership with OPCS, CDI, and MIGA, so that it can become an effective network of
          professionals across the Bank Group; IEG will focus on scaling up use of the evaluation
          competencies approved in FY15, and development of a new “RMES Academy,” a
          clearinghouse on results measurement and evidence good practices, and an interactive
          dictionary on results and evidence terminologies; and

         Continue to explore further improvements in IEG’s engagement with evaluees throughout
          the evaluation process to stimulate learning, including joint IEG-World Bank Group
          workshops on recommendations, collaboration spaces to allow stakeholders to track an
          evaluation, and collaboration on IEG-GP learning programs.
                                                  - 14 -


                               3. Proposed Work Program for FY16-18


1. Selectivity Framework

37.       To identify the specific evaluation topics for the work program, IEG followed five steps.

38.      First, as reviewed in Chapter 1, we selected three cross-cutting Strategic Engagement Areas
to (i) enhance IEG’s focus on “game changers,”(ii) better leverage IEG resources across product
lines, and (iii) maximize influence and impact. These areas are designed to build a robust and
integrated knowledge base about WBG contribution to the twin goals – and generate strategic
findings to help the Board and Bank Group make informed decisions about WBG programs.

39.     Second, we reviewed and updated the “gap analysis” that was introduced two years ago to
assess the coverage of IEG evaluations over the past five years, and identify knowledge gaps within
the Strategic Engagement Areas where IEG evaluation work would add value. The analysis looked
at gaps in the evidence base related to the strategic directions set out in the WBG Strategy, as well as
the emerging priorities flagged by WBG Management in its strategic planning, budget, and
performance review process for FY16-18, as reviewed in para. 3. We also reviewed our evaluation
coverage related to the size and spend of WBG lending (summary tables are included in Annex 2).

40.    Third, we mapped existing and planned evaluation work against the two objectives of the
IEG Results Framework to identify pressing knowledge areas where additional evaluation evidence
was needed to achieve the intermediate and medium term outcomes that we have set out.

         For the first objective related to WBG contribution to the twin goals, we found good
          coverage of the poverty reduction target in recent evaluations (since inclusive growth has
          been a strategic priority in our work program for the past three years), but insufficient
          coverage of distributional issues that feed into the shared prosperity target.

         For the second objective related to the early implementation experience of the WBG
          Strategy, we found several gaps related to: (i) the new reforms being launched, such as the
          country engagement model, the new IFC client engagement model, and GP and CCSAs; (ii)
          partnership dimensions, including citizen engagement, and managing global public goods;
          and (iii) the relevance and efficiency of operational instruments and services (i.e. P4R,
          DPOs, data and knowledge services).

41.     Fourth, work program discussions were held with CODE, the senior leadership teams of the
three institutions, GPs and CCSAs, and other important internal partners, to solicit their
recommendations for evaluation priorities. External consultations were held with civil society
organizations, think tanks, and other global partners. Overall, there was strong endorsement for
alignment of the IEG work program with the WBG Strategy and reform agenda, and the
introduction of the three Strategic Engagement Areas to enhance selectivity and influence.

42.     Fifth, all proposed topics were subject to the IEG selectivity framework, which focused on
the following key questions:
                                                - 15 -


      1. What is the scope and purpose of the product?
          How does the product contribute to the IEG Results Framework and the three Strategic
           Engagement Areas?
          How does the product relate to the twin goals, the strategic priorities set out in new
           WBG Strategy, and corporate reform agenda?
          How does it connect to other external strategic directions such as Sustainable
           Development Goals, and country client priorities?
          How is the timing of the product aligned with key WBG corporate deliverables and
           decision points?

      2. How is this a game changer?
          How is this a transformational topic that will maximize impact?
          Who is the specific audience that we seek to influence?
          What is the level of Board, WBG Management, and GP/CCSA interest in this area?

      3. Why IEG?
          What makes IEG uniquely positioned to conduct this work?
          What is the value added that an independent evaluation perspective would bring,
           compared with WBG self-evaluation, DEC research, existing external evaluations, etc.
          Will the product address a knowledge gap in IEG, follow up an earlier evaluation, or
           follow up an important and unresolved MAR issue?

      4. What are the challenges and risks?
          What are the key implementation challenges or risks for IEG working on this product
           and achieving impact (internal skills and knowledge, methodology and data, political
           economy, level of client commitment and engagement, etc)?

43.     Based on this analysis, IEG developed the three-year work program, which is included in
Annex 4. The work program tables are presented with two different lens: (i) by IEG business lines,
which highlight the introduction of additional learning products in line with the greater strategic
focus on learning and knowledge sharing; and (ii) by the objectives and results areas of the new
Results Framework, which highlight the contribution of individual work products to achieving the
objectives and outcomes that IEG has set for the intermediate and medium-term.

44.    As earlier agreed with CODE, IEG has reduced the number of major evaluations to
promote enhanced selectivity and focus on the critical issues. As in last year’s work program, we are
proposing to deliver about eight major new evaluations and one annual synthesis of results and
performance each year in FY16-18.

2. Major Evaluations

45.    Evaluations Related to Twin Goals. About three-quarters of the major evaluations in the
FY6-18 work program will contribute to the first objective of the IEG Results Framework, related
to deepening evidence about the results of WBG programs and activities.

46.      Eight evaluations will focus on the Strategic Engagement Area related to Inclusive Growth:
                                                 - 16 -


      FY16 Capital Market Development for Long Term Growth will assess the extent to which WBG
       support to capital markets development has contributed to inclusive growth;
      FY16 Jobs and Competitiveness will assess the effectiveness of WBG support to competitive
       industries to promote meaningful contributions to growth, job creation, and shared
       prosperity;
      FY16 Accelerating Prosperity through Tertiary Education will assess the performance and results of
       World Bank support to tertiary education, particularly with regard to quality, financing
       mechanisms, equality of access, and contributions to improved productivity and labor
       market outcomes, economic growth, and poverty reduction;
      FY17 WBG Support for Shared Prosperity in Country Programs will serve as a companion piece to
       the FY15 poverty reduction evaluation and assess WBG contribution to understanding and
       addressing inequality in client countries, with a focus on WBG engagement supporting
       country data, analytics, formulating strategy, selecting a lending and knowledge portfolio, and
       learning from experience;
      FY17 Rural Non-Farm Economy will assess whether increased attention to connectivity,
       resilient rural enterprises, and rural financial markets has contributed to broad-based and
       sustainable rural growth and poverty reduction;
      FY18 Public Finance for Investment and Jobs will assess the range of public finance tools
       (primarily public revenue and expenditure measures) that WBG supports through
       operational and analytic work to foster investment and jobs, addressing the consistency of
       their use, the evidence of direct and indirect impacts, and the effectiveness of these tools;
      FY18 Informal Sector and Development will assess the coverage and effectiveness of WBG
       support for jobs and growth in the informal sector, and the transition from informal to
       formal sector employment; and
      FY18 Corporate Sustainability and Development will assess how WBG support for corporate
       governance and corporate social responsibility have influenced corporate behavior and
       contributed to stronger social and environmental impacts of private sector investment.

47.    Three evaluations will address the Strategic Engagement Area related to Sustained Service
Delivery to the Poor:

      FY17 Sustaining Water Supply and Sanitation Services will assess the extent to which WBG
       support has been effective in helping countries sustain water supply and sanitation services
       to the poor, with a focus on what has and has not worked, scalability and replicability of
       interventions;
      FY17 Sustainable Urban Transport Services will assess the extent to which WBG engagement has
       increased the availability, quality, and sustainability of urban transport services, especially for
       the poor; and
      FY18 Scaling Up Nutrition will review implementation of the WBG nutrition strategy, which is
       viewed as a critical input for accelerating progress on the lagging MDG/SDGs, with a focus
       on the effectiveness and results of different service models used to deliver a multi-sectoral
       approach to address under-nutrition.
                                                - 17 -


48.    Three evaluations will address the Strategic Engagement Area related to Environmental
Sustainability:

      FY17 Environmental Management of Air and Water Resources will assess WBG support for
       management of airsheds and air pollution, and water resources and water pollution,
       (including water basins, lakes, coastal waters, and fisheries), with a focus on the
       strengthening of regulatory frameworks and institutional capacity, results and performance
       of investments, and contribution to global partnerships;

      FY18 Sustainable Cities will assess implementation of the “green cities” focus of the WBG
       urban development strategy, with a focus on support for low carbon livable cities, climate
       resilient growth, improved solid waste management systems, and sustainable financing and
       planning that addresses pollution and livability challenges; and
      FY18 WBG Support to Carbon Finance will review the extent to which WBG carbon finance
       programs have been effective in reducing carbon emissions, leveraging private sector
       investments, and influencing global policy and standards setting, thereby providing valuable
       lessons for the next generation of climate finance starting in 2020 pending decisions at the
       Paris Conference of Parties in late 2015.

49.     Country Program Evaluations will remain a cornerstone of the work program, designed to
enhance accountability and learning for results in country programs. In FY15, IEG introduced a
new “clustered country program evaluation” instrument (see para. 23). IEG will conduct a stock-
taking in FY16 with CODE, Bank Group Management and country clients to assess the relevance,
effectiveness, and efficiency of this pilot. This review will feed into the selection of future topics
and approaches for country program evaluation work. Based on the initial implementation
experience, we are proposing to continue with the clustered approach, and the following evaluations
are planned in FY16-18:

      FY16 Fragile Situations in Non-FCS Countries will broaden the analysis of the FY14 FCS
       evaluation and include WBG operations in mainly IBRD and blend countries that are not
       classified as FCS, and help deepen the understanding of how WBG can be relevant and
       effective in tackling fragile and conflict situations;
      FY16 Clustered CPE on Small States will assess the effectiveness of WBG support for small
       states, notably the challenges related to vulnerability to economic shocks and income
       volatility, limited institutional capacity, difficulties in accessing external capital, and
       susceptibility to natural disasters and climate change;
      FY17 Clustered CPE on Dynamic MICs will assess the effectiveness of WBG support in the
       country programs of dynamic middle income countries for sustainable achievement of the
       twin goals; and
      FY18 Clustered CPE – topic to be determined, following stocktaking.

50.    The annual Results and Performance Report will continue to provide a summary of
aggregate WBG performance and a synthesis of IEG evaluations completed in the year. As earlier
agreed with CODE, the RAP will include a special thematic chapter and incorporate the Regional
Updates as annexes. The proposed thematic focus in FY16 is Gender Equality, FY17 is Managing for
                                                    - 18 -


Results (which would synthesize IEG’s work on monitoring and evaluation at the corporate, country,
and project levels), and FY18 is Working in Partnership, described below.

51.      Evaluations Related to Reform Agenda. About one-quarter of the major evaluations in
the FY16-18 work program will contribute to the second objective of the IEG Results Framework,
related to generating independent evaluation evidence to assess the early implementation experience
of the WBG Strategy. These evaluations are designed to enable real-time learning and mid-course
corrections, and promote a stronger internal culture for results, accountabilities, and learning.

52.   Two evaluations will focus on the WBG reform pillar related to Helping Clients Tackle
the Most Important Development Challenges.

         FY16 SCD/CPF Process Evaluation will not assess performance or results, but rather how the
          new tools have been prepared and used – including alignment with good practices and WBG
          guidance, level of inclusion (citizen voice, country perspective) and partnership engagement
          (other development partners, private sector), effectiveness of WBG collaboration, and
          treatment of key issues such as selectivity and comparative advantage. Client feedback on
          the early experience with the new country engagement model will be a central feature of this
          process evaluation; and
         FY17 IFC Client Engagement Model will assess the extent to which IFC’s recently launched
          enhanced client engagement model is contributing to the achievement of increased
          development impact and contributing to the WBG twin goals.

53.     A second set of evaluations will focus on WBG reform pillar related to Becoming a
Solution Bank. These will review the effectiveness of learning and knowledge in operations,
including the early implementation experience of the GPs and CCSAs, and assess the relevance,
efficiency, and effectiveness of operational instruments and systems.

         FY16 Assessment of WBG Self-Evaluation Systems will appraise the effectiveness of operations
          self-evaluation and development risk management systems, including the usefulness and
          relevance of project supervision and completion reporting;
         FY16 Program for Results Evaluation will assess early implementation experience and identify
          lessons learned and good practices for this new instrument;
         FY17 Data and Knowledge for Development will review WBG data and knowledge programs,
          designed to improve availability and quality of data and knowledge on poverty and shared
          prosperity to inform policy and track progress, both for country clients and for WBG
          corporate monitoring, including initiatives related to Knowledge for Change, Data for Goals,
          Statistical Capacity Building, Open Data, etc; and
         FY18 Process Evaluation of GPs will review the clarity of roles, efficiency of delivery, interface
          with country engagement model, level of “jointness,” process to deploy expertise and
          knowledge to meet client needs, and process to collect, curate, and share knowledge – the
          evaluation would contribute to the “third wave” of the GP operational plan.

54.       Several evaluations will focus on the WBG reform pillar related to Working in Partnership.
                                                      - 19 -


       FY17 Engaging Citizens will address WBG support for transparency, accountability and
        participation to enhance citizen voice, beneficiary feedback loops, and partnership with civil
        society organizations in order to strengthen the demand side of governance and complement
        service delivery through public and private institutions.
       IEG will continue to integrate the review of individual partnership programs into the major
        thematic evaluations. For example, the FY16 Clustered CPE on Small States will review: Small
        States Forum, Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility, Caribbean Growth Forum,
        Pacific Region Infrastructure Facility, and institutional partnership with the Secretariat of
        Organization of Eastern Caribbean States. Likewise, the FY16 Capital Market Development for
        Long Term Growth will review the Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative
        (FIRST).
       FY18 Results and Performance Report will include a thematic chapter on Working in Partnership,
        which will integrate findings and lessons on WBG partnerships since the last synthesis report
        in 2011.

55.    With the completion of the GEF and GAVI reviews in FY14, no other large, independent
Global Program Reviews are proposed in the work program. As flagged in last year’s work program,
IEG is continuing to participate on the oversight committee for the independent evaluation of the
Global Partnership for Education, on a full cost-recovery basis.6

56.     Monitoring Evaluation Recommendations. The Management Action Record (MAR)
reform process has been an important step to enhance the quality and impact of major evaluations
as well as strengthen monitoring and accountability related to implementation of agreed actions in
the Management Action Plan. Key outcomes include:

       Improved quality of IEG recommendations, including clearer links to findings,
        prioritization, better clarity and specificity, and considerations of feasibility and cost
        effectiveness;
       Stronger engagement with WBG management while drafting the recommendations;
       More specific actions to be taken to implement IEG recommendations in Management
        Response, and clearer timeline and monitoring arrangements; and
       Enhanced assessment of progress on implementation and reduced inconsistencies in ratings
        between IEG and Management.

57.      The on-line MAR system that was introduced in FY14 provides a central repository of
findings, recommendations, management responses, detailed action plans and implementation, for
use by all stakeholders. The MAR data set is now available on the external website – an important
step in the WBG’s commitment to transparency and Open Data. In FY16, IEG will focus on (i)
reemphasizing the engagement process with WBG management on IEG recommendations and
findings; (ii) conducting a stock-taking of the MAR process over the past two years in partnership
with Management, and identifying steps to enhance the impact and effectiveness of the MAR

6
 The special evaluation of the Climate Investment Funds that was jointly undertaken by the five participating
multilateral development banks (for which IEG chaired the Evaluation Oversight Committee and managed the trust
fund established for this purpose) was completed in FY15.
                                                - 20 -


process; and (iii) continued system enhancements based on the experiences over the past two years.
IEG will continue outreach efforts to familiarize Executive Directors’ staff, WBG Management, and
other stakeholders on the use of the on-line system.

3. Project Evaluations

58.   IEG will focus on deepening the relevance of and learning from Project Performance
Assessment Reports (PPARs) in FY16-18.

      In the past, IEG has aimed to conduct PPARs on about 20-25 percent of closed World
       Bank projects, in order to ensure (i) a robust assessment of actual project performance
       (particularly with regard to sustainability of project impacts over time and client feedback),
       and (ii) an independent review of the quality and accuracy of the self-evaluation system.
       However, in recent years, the PPAR coverage rate has dropped to about 15 percent, for two
       reasons: (i) we maintained production of 40-45 PPARs per year despite an increase in the
       overall volume of lending, and (ii) we redeployed staff time from PPARs to the priority task
       of eliminating the backlog of Bank ICR Reviews (see para 24). IEG proposes to increase the
       annual delivery of PPARs, from 42 in FY15 to about 60 in FY18, thereby covering about 20
       percent of closed projects.

      IEG launched a new pilot in FY15 to apply the World Bank PPAR methodology to a small
       number of IFC and MIGA operations, in line with our objective for harmonization of
       evaluation instruments across the three institutions. Seven PPARs were completed last year,
       designed to enhance accountability, learning, and transparency about the results of IFC and
       MIGA investments. In FY16, eight PPARs are planned. IEG will assess the use and value
       of this new product for IFC and MIGA in end-FY16, and make a recommendation in the
       next work program cycle on the scope of this product line.

      IEG will continue to review and update the PPAR methodology and procedures in FY16 to
       make this a more relevant, rigorous and self-standing analysis that can bring deeper insights
       and lessons to WBG management and operational staff. The revisions will draw upon a
       range of pilot PPARs carried out in FY15 in which innovative use of technology and local
       evaluators was made. IEG will also be investing in more effective ways of disseminating the
       lessons and findings from this product line. The selection criteria will continue to include: (i)
       themes related to future evaluations or learning products of IEG; (ii) projects that pose a
       high risk because of their size or other characteristics; (iii) projects that are particularly
       innovative, fill knowledge gaps, or transformational in nature; and (iv) projects where is a
       major divergence in the view on the ratings between IEG and the self-evaluation.

59.      IEG will continue to use impact evaluation methods to produce and synthesize evidence
on the effectiveness of specific development interventions in FY16-18. It is not in IEG’s
comparative advantage to produce prospective impact evaluations since they require early project
engagement, something which would compromise IEG’s ability to independently evaluate the
projects at closure. However, retrospective impact evaluations that generate treatment and
comparison groups ex-post and are lower cost will continue to be part of IEG’s toolkit. This work
will be fully aligned with and feed into the major evaluations and learning products in the work
program, to ensure strategic relevance. No free-standing impact evaluations are planned. IEG will
                                                - 21 -


continue to produce systematic reviews of the impact evaluation literature to accompany major
evaluations when there is an evidence-gap to fill by doing so. These systematic reviews will also
provide value-added for the WBG where there is considerable unmet demand for harvesting the
evidence-base on specific development questions.

4. Validation Products

60.    CASCR Validations. IEG will continue to review 100 percent of all CAS Completion
Reports in FY16 – 18. About 22 CASCRs are expected to be reviewed in FY16. In addition, as the
new country engagement is rolled out, IEG is continuing to review and discuss with CODE how to
provide useful evaluative input for the initial round of PLRs.

61.      Project Validations. IEG will continue to review WBG project completion reports, to
foster both accountability and learning in the self-evaluation system. In FY16, IEG will continue to
review 100 percent of completed IDA/IBRD lending operations with available self-evaluations, as
well as 100 percent of completed recipient-executed trust funded projects greater than or equal to $5
million with available self-evaluations. Looking forward, IEG will continue to review with WBG
Management and CODE the scope for streamlining the system and the options for moving towards
a strategic sampling basis, as reviewed in para. 24.

62.     IFC will prepare self-evaluations for 40 percent of randomly selected mature investments, all
validated by IEG. For closed projects, IEG will prepare independent project evaluation summaries
(PES) in lieu of XPSRs. In case of Advisory Services, IEG will validate 51 percent of project
completion reports, based on random representative sampling. For MIGA, the self-evaluation
accompanied by IEG's validation and independent evaluation by IEG will together cover 100
percent of MIGA's mature guarantees.

5. Learning Products

63.     IEG will continue to focus on accelerating learning and knowledge sharing from IEG
evaluation work in FY16-18. IEG categorizes learning products into three types, depending on the
level of complexity of the topic, the range of evaluation sources involved, and whether additional
evaluation work is needed:

      Short “just in time” notes or presentations involve simple synthesis or dissemination of
       existing evaluation findings. Recent examples include the summary of findings from water,
       urban, energy, and transport PPARs; presentation on IFC Microfinance Projects in Africa;
       and lessons learned from avian influenza for the World Bank Ebola response. These are not
       included in the work program planning process, as they are often produced “just in time” in
       response to emerging demands and opportunities.
      Category I Products involve synthesis of evaluation findings from multiple sources, and
       identification of cross-cutting lessons and good practices. Recent examples include lessons
       learned for road safety, opportunities and challenges for working in partnerships, and Bank-
       IFC collaboration in Country Assistance Strategies.
      Category II Products include some additional evaluation work (such as portfolio reviews,
       country visits, or interviews), or may focus on high profile or complex corporate issues.
                                                   - 22 -


          Recent examples include social safety nets and gender, and environment and social risk
          dimensions of DPOs.

64.       To identify the strategic priorities for this work, IEG follows three steps.

         First, we assess “demand.” As part of the annual work planning process, we consult with a
          wide range of WBG operational stakeholders to identify learning topics where there is strong
          operational demand and interest for IEG evaluation findings, particularly working with
          GP/CCSAs. In addition, we review whether there are any pressing learning or knowledge
          gaps emerging from the implementation of the new WBG Strategy, or CODE and Board
          feedback on WBG strategic directions, where we think IEG evaluation evidence would add
          value.
         Second, we assess “supply.” We review our recent evaluation work, as well as other sources
          of independent evaluation, to see whether we have relevant evidence to address the learning
          priorities that have been flagged. If we have insufficient evidence from existing work, we
          may decide to either drop the topic, or incorporate additional evaluation work and analysis
          into the design of the learning product.
         Third, all major learning products are subject to the IEG selectivity framework, to ensure
          strong linkage with the IEG results framework and with the strategic focus of the three
          Strategic Engagement Areas.

65.     After the past year of piloting (where IEG delivered fifteen learning products), IEG intends
to be more selective and focus on fewer learning products with deeper client engagement in FY16-
18, based on feedback from Bank Group Management for more targeted and effective learning
support from IEG. We aim to produce about 10-12 Category I/II Learning Products per year in
FY16-18. The proposed topics for FY16 -- which are still under discussion with the relevant GPs,
CCSAs, and other corporate stakeholders -- are included in Annex 4. We intend to conduct a
stocktaking in FY16 on the use and influence of IEG learning products to help guide future work
program decisions about the appropriate scope and budget for this work.

6. Evaluation Capacity Development

66.      Evaluation Capacity Development (ECD) remains high on IEG’s agenda, and during FY15
IEG took time to re-asses its support to and effectiveness in two major initiatives: (i) Centers for
Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR), and the (ii) the International Program for
Development Evaluation Training (IPDET). IEG also considered options for more broadly
engaging appropriate World Bank entities in the ECD agenda and began, throughout FY15, building
a joint set of activities with the Governance GP to leverage and draw on IEG’s work on ECD
knowledge products and technical assistance.

67.     CLEAR. The governing board of CLEAR commissioned an independent evaluation of the
program, which concluded in early FY15. The evaluation found that CLEAR’s work is highly
relevant to development effectiveness and M&E needs of government, the initiative has delivered its
work program, and the CLEAR Centers’ work is relevant and promising. The evaluation concluded
that IEG remains the best platform for the program, given its independence and affiliation with the
World Bank Group. Importantly, the evaluation also pointed out areas for improvement, notably:
making knowledge and learning about ECD explicit in the program; developing a realistic results
                                               - 23 -


framework and theory of change; and making the governance of the initiative more inclusive. In
response, CLEAR has developed a new theory of change and a new charter that emphasizes
learning, has introduced new business processes suitable to manage performance more tightly in
support of the strategic shift, and has instituted a more inclusive and partnership-oriented
governance and decision making structure.

68.      In FY16, CLEAR’s “phase II” will be implemented for the first of three years, and IEG’s
role in this partnership will be well defined and focused. Being the “Global Hub” for knowledge
exchange and community building, IEG’s main tasks will be to drive systematically and purposefully
the codification and sharing of learnings from evaluation capacity efforts across the CLEAR
community. This will involve a number of initiatives, such as suite of web resources more suitable
for learning and knowledge exchange, and a series of business processes linking performance to
learning and innovation. At the same time, CLEAR’s reach will consolidate in FY16. The
Lusophone Center in Brazil will be brought fully into the program, able to reach out not only across
Brazil but also to Lusophone countries around the world, with a particular focus on Mozambique
and Angola. Also, CLEAR will look to solidify its support to central government agencies leading
the charge on government-wide evaluation. To this end, CLEAR will aim to build a dedicated and
ongoing community of practice for practitioner-to-practitioner exchange

69.     IPDET. Now in its 15th year, IPDET has attracted 2,621 professionals working on
evaluating policies and programs in developing countries, of which 60 percent have come from
developing countries. The summer courses, having grown in annual attendance from about 100 to
over 200 every year, maintain an ongoing influence through a very active social media platform that
has created a well-connected network of around 3,500 professionals from across the world. In
FY15, IEG revised its memorandum of understanding with Carleton University and agreed to
undertake a substantive strategic review of the program in FY16. Topics to be assessed include
IPDET’s relevance, the quality of the learning experience, the program’s competitiveness, and
financial viability.

7. Global Leadership and Collaboration with Evaluation Partners

70.      One of the core functions in IEG’s mandate is to cooperate with other IFIs and
development agencies. In FY16-18, IEG will maintain close engagement with the Evaluation
Cooperation Group (ECG), the OECD DAC Network on Development Evaluation, and other
evaluation partnerships. In 2015, IEG will serve as the Chair of ECG, and has committed to focus
on (i) a stocktaking of the past twenty years of experience and achievements, and (ii) developing a
renewed strategic vision for the future for ECG. As part of this work, IEG is proposing to bring
together the chairs of CODE (and equivalents) and senior managements of the member IFIs and
ECG members to help shape the vision.

71.     2015 has been designated by international development agencies as the “Year of
Evaluation,” mindful that the dialogue about the post 2015 agenda will need to be informed and
supported by efforts to measure and track progress made towards the new goals. The “Year of
Evaluation” provides an excellent opportunity for IEG to raise awareness of the role of independent
evaluation in particular, and to build collaboration with other agencies and in developing countries.
In close collaboration with the UN agencies and private foundations that are playing a lead role in
organizing the “Year of Evaluation,” we plan to take this opportunity to make a substantive
contribution both internally within the WBG and externally.
                                                 - 24 -


                                       4. Staffing and Budget


1. Human Resources

72.      IEG will continue to manage its staff levels and skills mix to support the strategic directions
set out in the IEG results framework and work program. In line with WBG HR reforms, IEG is
focusing on the following four steps.

73.    Building a Culture of Performance and Accountability. IEG has implemented the new
performance management framework, which is designed to build a clear line of sight between staff’s
work and IEG priorities through cascading objectives from the Director General to the Directors
down to all staff, captured in transparent results agreements.

74.      Driving a More Effective Organization. IEG has completed a strategic staffing exercise,
in parallel to the process that is underway in the WBG, with the objectives of: (i) ensuring alignment
of staffing resources with IEG business needs and strategic directions; (ii) identifying skills gaps, and
related learning priorities for professional, technical, and leadership development; and (iii)
strengthening a collaborative leadership team approach to assess staffing needs and staffing actions
across IEG. We are focusing on three core issues: (i) What skills does IEG have and need? (ii)
What are current workforce levels and plans? and (iii) How can we best align staffing levels and skills
mix with our strategic business needs in FY16-18? In addition, IEG is currently reviewing the
alignment of the organizational structure with evolving business needs and strategic directions. IEG
is separately briefing CODE on the findings of the strategic staffing exercise and organizational
review.

75.      Creating Career Opportunities. The annual review of talent has been conducted and its
recommendations are being implemented. This exercise will ensure there is a right mix of formal
training, mentoring, and on-the-job development opportunities to equip staff at all levels with the
evaluation knowledge and skills they need to grow professionally. In addition, IEG is regularly using
the evaluation competencies developed last year, to help enrich professional development by giving
staff a clearer view of what is needed in a job at different levels. IEG continues to run special
mentoring, onboarding, and technical training program for its staff.

76.      Fostering a More Diverse and Inclusive Workplace. IEG is renewing its emphasis on
diversity and inclusion (D&I) to reinforce WBG’s goal of fostering a diverse and inclusive work
place as core to both our business strategy and employment value proposition. While IEG scores
higher than the overall WBG on diversity indicators related to women representation in GF+
technical staff and in management, it scores below on Part II representation in management and
significantly below on Sub-Saharan African and Caribbean representation in GF+ technical staff.
Generally, IEG scores the same as or higher than the overall WBG on inclusion indicators from the
2014 Employee Engagement Survey. IEG has finalized a new D&I Compact, with a focus on: (i)
ensuring D&I issues are mainstreamed throughout IEG, (ii) improving managerial accountability
and promoting transparency, and (iii) strengthening mechanisms for openness, voice, dignity and
respect.

77.     As of end-April 2015, staffing levels in IEG stood at 105, with staffing levels during the year
fluctuating in the range of 105-110 due to natural turnover and planned recruitment. IEG compares
                                                                          - 25 -


favorably relative to the Bank Group in terms of internal mobility of staff, which allows for active
management of the staff skills base. IEG management is conscious of the need to draw both on
Bank Group experience and on external experience from other organizations. The proportion of
professional staff (GE+) at end-March 2015 that were recruited from outside the WBG stood at 48
percent, higher than 43 percent a year before. IEG will continue to maintain staff and other fixed
costs at a level consistent with a fixed cost ratio of around 70 percent to allow for adequate
flexibility.

2. Budget Proposal

78.    Sources. IEG’s projected resources to deliver its FY16 work program total $35.9 million,
comprising a $34.0 million regular budget to be approved by the Board, $1.9 million in trust funds,
and $0.02 million in other revenues. This resource envelope is consistent with the flat budget
framework agreed with the Board in FY12 and adjusted to reflect planned savings from IEG’s
Expenditure Review.

79.      The regular budget is set out in Table 1, which shows recent trends as well as projections. In
line with the new practice of the Bank Group, the figures are presented in nominal terms. There is
no change in the proposed contributions from individual institutions: the World Bank will maintain
its 1.4 percent contribution, IFC 1.1 percent, and MIGA 1.0 percent, as in previous years. These
percentages are monitored as an indicator of magnitude, the total envelope of IEG’s regular budget
remaining flat in real terms since FY05.

                                       Table 1: IEG Institution Contributions, FY13–18
                                                          FY13/4              FY14               FY15              FY16               FY17                 FY18
    (in nominal dollars)                                  Budget             Budget             Budget           Proposed           Indicative           Indicative
                                                            $m                 $m                 $m                $m                  $m                   $m
    WB Contribution                                           26.0               26.6               26.5              26.4               26.3                27.1
    IFC Contribution                                          6.5                7.0                7.0               7.0                6.9                 7.1
    MIGA Contribution 1/                                      1.0                0.6                0.6               0.6                0.6                 0.6
    Total IEG                                                 33.4               34.2               34.1              34.0               33.8                34.8

    IEG as % of parent institution budget 2/, 3/
         WB                                                   1.4%               1.4%               1.4%              1.4%               1.4%                1.4%
         IFC                                                  1.0%               1.1%               1.1%              1.1%               1.1%                1.1%
         MIGA                                                 2.0%               1.0%               1.0%              1.0%               1.1%                1.1%
         Total                                                1.3%               1.3%               1.3%              1.3%               1.3%                1.3%
    1/ The approved contribution from MIGA assumes that it will continue to absorb $0.12m in IEG related non-discretionary fees and charges. In the event that MIGA
    choses to depart from this practice which it initiated in FY11, or these fees and charges rise, MIGA's contribution to IEG will be increased by a commensurate
    amount.
    2/ In the case of the World Bank and IFC, the Net Administrative Budget and Regular Administrative Expenses budgets have been used as the denominator. In the
    case of MIGA, for comparison purposes, the denominator comprises the Regular Administrative Budget plus FIAS contributions and Contingencies. For consistency
    purposes, the numerators have also been adjusted, with an adjustment being added to the IFC contribution for space and IT, and with the MIGA contribution being
    reduced in the amount of overheads and pension contributions.
    3/ Percentage calculations assume that budgets for the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA will remain at FY15 levels and continue to incorporate ER savings
    4/ Additional to Institution contributions as noted above, the FY13 Final Budget included a one time spending authority of $0.7m based on unspent FY12 Budget



80.     Trust funds. IEG expects to receive $1.9 million in trust funds and Externally Funded
Outputs (EFOs)7 in FY16, including: (i) $0.8 million from the multi-donor trust fund that was
established in FY10 to support IEG’s evaluation capacity development program, including the
CLEAR secretariat; (ii) $0.3 million from a Japan Policy and Human Resource grant that was

7 The EFO is a streamlined instrument for receiving external contributions to support the Bank Group’s work program.
It is primarily designed to replace Bank-Executed Trust Funds below $1 million.
                                                           - 26 -


approved in FY12 for impact evaluation work; (iii) $0.5 million from an EFO from the Swedish
Government that was approved in FY15, related to deepening evaluation methodologies for gender
and cost-effectiveness; and (iv) a possible allocation of $0.3 million from a new EFO to be
developed in FY16 with the Government of Norway, to follow up a trust fund that closed in FY14.
In addition, IEG expects to receive about $0.02 million from trust fund fee income, which is shown
as other income in Table 2.

81.      Recognizing the imperative of protecting independence from misperceptions that could be
caused by reliance on trust funds, IEG put in place several years ago clear procedures on the use of
trust funds.8 IEG recently reviewed the procedures, in light of the evolving WBG guidance set out
in the revised Trust Fund Handbook, and particularly the development of the new EFO instrument.
We propose to follow a simpler and stricter definition of eligible uses for trust funds and EFOs.
Going forward, IEG will not distinguish between “core” and “non-core” evaluation activities, and
will not use trust fund or EFO resources for any work related to the conduct of a major evaluation,
based on the principle that the budget allocation from the Board fully covers the conduct of a major
evaluation. We will instead focus trust fund and EFO resources on innovative activities directly
linked to the IEG results framework that do not affect IEG independence and are “additional” to
activities funded by our budget from the Board.

82.   Under this new definition, the following areas would be eligible for future trust fund and
EFO funding:

        Accelerated learning and knowledge sharing from evaluations (particularly targeted to
         country clients and other external/global stakeholders);
        Strengthening of methodology and data systems (particularly with spillover benefits to the
         broader global evaluation community);
        Professionalization and development of evaluation networks (like a possible IEG fellows
         program); and
        Evaluation capacity development (such as the existing CLEAR and IPDET initiatives, and
         possible new work to mainstream ECD into the new country engagement model and the
         development of related new tools).

83.      Capital budget. No new capital budget is requested for FY16. The capital budget
allocation of $800,000 that was approved in FY14 is under implementation. Work is underway to (i)
establish a high-quality search function covering all document collections relevant to IEG’s
evaluation research; (ii) introduce new electronic process automation for streamlining complex and
labor-intensive document production, and (iii) expand the use of text analytics for greater insight
and productivity. These improvements are expected to be functional by June 2015, with project
completion expected by December 2015.

84.    A prior FY12 capital funding request of $450,000 was used for upgrading several aging
information management systems. As a result there is now in place a new system that supports

8 IEG’s existing procedures include a requirement that aggregate use of trust funds should not exceed 15 percent of total
spending on products and should also not exceed 25 percent of the cost of any individual product. In addition, IEG has
required that trust funds be used for non-core evaluation activities, such as literature reviews, case studies, focus groups,
and in-country workshops, but not for any core evaluation activities, such as strategy development, portfolio reviews,
and approach paper preparation.
                                                  - 27 -


IEG's Access to Information Policy, modern data analytics software used by IEG teams, and the
Management Action Record (MAR) system used to track follow-up of IEG evaluation
recommendations. This project also funded an upgrade to IEG's intranet system, in order to better
serve IEG and WBG staff. The capital project has been completed and closed in December 2013,
and IEG is now paying depreciation costs.

85.      Expenditure Review. As reviewed in last year’s work program, IEG completed an internal
Expenditure Review in FY14 to identify opportunities to enhance efficiency and reduce costs, in
parallel to the WBG initiative. Four key findings emerged from the Review:

       Benchmarking data confirmed that IEG’s budget share (0.9 percent of total WBG budget)
        falls in the lower range of comparable multilateral institutions.9
       IEG continues to experience some weaknesses in budget management and bunching of
        deliverables, in particular effective tracking of expenditures against task plans.
       IEG performs better than the Bank on some variable cost efficiency measures, but compares
        unfavorably on specific measures in the travel and consultant areas.
       IEG’s share of sustaining and indirect costs stands above comparable units in the WBG,
        reflecting a relatively large share of GI/GH staff as well as high office-space-to-staff ratio.

86.     Based on the analysis, IEG made several recommendations that would generate net cost
savings of 8 percent of IEG’s budget in FY15-17, which were reviewed and endorsed by CODE and
the Board. These include reduction in GI/GH staffing levels, improvements in variable cost
management (particularly related to consultant fees and travel costs), efficiency gains from ongoing
IT investments, reductions in office space, and other measures. In addition, IEG is continuing to
focus on redeploying resources from “backline” functions to “frontline” evaluation work. In FY16,
the total savings from the implementation of the Expenditure Review are projected to stand at $1.7
million and have been reflected in the spending trends, described below.

87.     Spending trends. Table 2 sets out trends in resource use over the FY13–18 period,
including regular budget resources, trust funds, and other income. IEG’s strategic directions are
reflected in the spending proposals, as follows:

       The proportion of spending on Major Evaluations declines from 25 percent in FY13 to 23
        percent in FY16-18, in line with the earlier decision agreed with CODE to reduce the number
        of major evaluations and redeploy the savings to other product lines like learning and
        knowledge sharing work.

       The proportion of spending on Other Evaluation Products increases from 12 percent in FY13
        to 14 percent in FY16-18. This reflects:

            o The earlier agreement with CODE to scale up the delivery of learning and knowledge
              products (the budget allocation for large synthesis reports is proposed to increase from
              $0.5 million in FY13 to $1.6 million per year in FY16);


9 Comparator institutions include: Asian Development Bank (evaluation budget share of 1.8 percent), African
Development Bank (1.7 percent), Inter-American Development Bank and Islamic Development Bank (1.3
percent), and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (1.2 percent).
                                                  - 28 -


            o The current proposal to increase the share of funding for PPARs, as reviewed in para.
              58 (the budget allocation for PPARs is proposed to increase from an estimated $1.5
              million in FY15 to $2.9 million by FY18);

            o Note that the total spending on Other Evaluation Products shows a “hump” for
              partnership reviews in FY14-15, which reflects the exceptional trust fund resources
              provided for the evaluation of climate investment funds (see para. 55).

       Spending on validation products has been projected at roughly the same level in FY16-18.
        The spending plans for outer-years will be revised pending further analysis and discussions
        about the scope for (i) streamlining of the ICRRs and CASCR validation process (which would
        reduce costs), and (ii) possible piloting the validation of World Bank AAA products (which
        would increase costs).

       The proportion of spending on Learning and Knowledge Services has been projected at
        roughly the same level in FY16-18 (this budget item includes evaluation capacity development
        partnerships, publications and dissemination, internal methods work, internal knowledge
        management and quality assurance, and internal staff learning costs). Within this category, we
        are assuming (i) cost-efficiencies arising from the shift from printed reports to e-reports, and
        from face-to-face learning delivery to e-learning, and the introduction of new text analytic tools
        that will reduce staff time in research, made possible by the capital budget program; and (ii)
        increased expenditures for the delivery of outreach, training and other knowledge sharing
        activities to IEG and WBG staff.

       Indirect costs are expected to decline in FY16 due to consolidation of space. Sustaining costs
        remain broadly even in nominal terms, with savings corresponding to the phased reduction of
        GI/GH positions and backline functions offset by annual staff salary increases.

88.      Table 3 sets out spending trends by expense categories for regular budget resources. In line
with the IEG Expenditure Review recommendations, from FY13 to FY18, staff costs are projected
to slightly increase in nominal terms (as the phased reduction of positions is offset by SRI increases),
consultant and travel costs decline from $9.7 to $8.8 million, and equipment and buildings costs
slightly increase from $1.3 to $1.6 million due to increased depreciation when IT improvement
projects become functional.

89.     Table 4 sets out expenditures by objectives, and related deliverables, from the IEG Results
Framework, for all direct resources. In FY16-18, about 80 percent of resources will support the first
objective of deepening evidence about the results of WBG programs and activities; and about 20
percent will focus on the second objective of generating evidence on the early implementation
experience of the WBG Strategy.
                    - 29 -


Table 2. Summary of Sources and Uses, FY13–18
                                                          - 30 -


               Table 3: Expenditure Trends by Expense Category, FY13-18 (BB only)

                                              FY13         FY14          FY15         FY16            FY17            FY18
(in nominal dollars)                         Actual       Actual       Estimate       Plan         Indicative      Indicative
                                              $'m          $'m           $'m          $'m             $'m             $'m
Fixed Costs
            Staff Costs                         19.9         20.3              20.9         21.1            21.4            21.8
            Communications and IT                   1.3          1.1            1.3          1.3             1.3             1.4
            Equipment and Buildings                 1.3          1.4            1.4          1.5             1.5             1.6
            Total Fixed Costs                   22.6         22.7              23.6         23.9            24.2            24.8


Variable Costs
            Consultants and Temps                   6.4          7.0            6.2          6.0             6.0             6.2
            ETC & ETT                               1.4          1.3            1.1          1.0             0.9             1.0
            Travel Costs                            1.9          1.7            1.7          1.6             1.4             1.6
            Representation and Hospitality          0.0          0.0            0.0          0.0             0.0             0.0
            Contractual Services                    1.1          0.8            1.0          1.0             0.8             0.8
            Other Expenses                          0.5          0.7            0.5          0.5             0.5             0.5
            Total Variable Costs                11.3         11.5              10.5         10.1             9.6            10.1


Total Expenses                                  33.9         34.2              34.1         34.0            33.8            34.9



                       Table 4: Percentage of Expenditures by Objective, FY14-18
                                                    - 31 -


3. Accountability Framework

91.     IEG adheres to WBG budget rules and procedures. IEG is subject to Controller’s Quality
Assurance reviews of selected expenses and has consistently received favorable ratings on adherence
to budget rules, procedures, and policies. IEG’s control environment continues to be ranked as one
of the strongest in its peer group.

92.      In regard to external audit, the contributions by World Bank, IFC, and MIGA are audited as
part of regular external audits of those institutions.

93.     In November 2006 the Board approved a procedure formalizing CODE’s role in overseeing
IEG’s budget and safeguarding its independence in the governance structure of the WBG. This
procedure includes the periodic review of IEG’s budget proposal every 2-3 years by an independent
external budget analyst, validating the adequacy of IEG’s annual budget proposal as well as its
consistency with the overall WBG budgetary principles.

94.      The last independent review was conducted in April 2012, which concluded: “IEG’s budget
formulation and management is broadly satisfactory as there have been no major changes from budget practice,
expenditures, and outputs achieved in the recent past.” Specific recommendations were made to reduce
bunching, improve costing and monitoring of deliverables, and introduce stronger tracking of
expenditures against plans, all of which IEG has been implementing.

95.     Slippages and bunching of major evaluation have reduced from prior years, but still remain a
problem. IEG is addressing these issues through better upfront planning of tasks, more effective
tracking and reporting as well as periodic management reviews and coordination of deliveries across
all IEG products. In addition to real time technical tracking of milestones, IEG management
conducts a Quarterly Business Review Meetings with Department Management Teams, focusing on
individual products and tasks and troubleshooting delivery bottlenecks. In response to the findings
of the Expenditure Review, IEG Management has implemented decisive measures to strengthen
budget management:

       Greater realism in developing robust budgets in Approach Papers;
       Instilling stronger budget discipline among TTLs, adhering to task budgets and prioritizing
        individual components;
       Systematic monitoring by TTLs and Managers of actual costs against Approach Paper
        budgets and a resolution mechanism should new developments arise;
       Closer focus by TTLs and Managers on managing elapsed time, and staff and consultant
        costs, between the Approach Paper and Final Report Review Meetings; and
       Regular IEG Leadership Team oversight of elapsed time and costs, and more proactive
        decisions on corrective actions, where needed.

96.    As earlier agreed with CODE, the next external budget assessment is scheduled for the next
work program and budget cycle. It will draw on the findings of the completed External Review
commissioned by CODE, and the subsequent CODE and Board discussions.
                                                                                - 32 -
                                                                   Annex 1: IEG Results Framework

Objective 1: What Works – Deepening evidence about the results of WBG program and activities – and their effectiveness for accelerating growth,
inclusiveness, and sustainability – to contribute to the WBG’s interim target of 9% poverty and progress on shared prosperity by 2020
                                                             Intermediate (1-3 years)                                                      Medium Term (4-6 years)
         Deliverables
                                                 Outcomes                                  Indicators                           Outcomes                          Indicators
                                                                             -   Overall feedback on quality of                                      - IEG influence on client results
Major sector, thematic, and
                                   - Greater understanding of:                   IEG work from Client Survey         - Better informed policy and       supported by WBG operations
country evaluations and
                                      - When and how WBG activities          -   External assessment of quality         operational choices by the   - Client feedback on IEG
learning products focused on
                                        lead to growth, inclusiveness,           of major evaluations                   Board, Management, and          influence and impact
WBG contributions to twin
                                        and sustainability (learning)        -   Self-assessment of strategic           Clients                      - External assessment of actual use
goals –with particular reference
                                      - Whether WBG activities are               alignment of major evaluations                                         and impact of evaluations
to:                                                                                                                  - Enhanced WBG
                                        aligned with the twin goals and      -   Efficiency measure of elapsed                                       - Level of adoption of evaluation
- WBG Scorecard categories                                                                                              development effectiveness in
                                        effective in contributing to their       time in evaluation processing                                          recommendations and
- IDA Special Themes                                                                                                    terms of contributing to the
                                        achievement (accountability)         -   Value for money measure                                                Management actions in MAR
- IFC Areas of Strategic                                                                                                attainment of twin goals.
                                      - IDA Performance                      -   Measures of usage of IEG work                                       - Measure of IEG knowledge
   Emphasis
                                                                                 by Board and WBG staff                                                 flows
Corporate performance data for      Timely delivery of high quality          -   Compliance with service             Stronger portfolio performance - IEG portfolio performance
WBG Scorecard and IDA RMS           performance data                             standards for validation delivery   from improved M&E               ratings
Stronger methods for evaluating
                                    New methods mainstreamed in IEG          - Completion of Methods Action          Increased relevance and quality   - External assessment of accuracy
WBG contributions to inclusive
                                    evaluation work                            Plan                                  of evaluation evidence            and validity of evaluations
growth, gender, sustainability
Objective 2: Real-Time Learning – Generating evidence on the early implementation experience of the WBG Strategy to enable mid-course corrections,
and promote a stronger internal culture for results, accountability, and learning
   Helping Clients Tackle the Most Important Development Challenges
                                                                   Intermediate                                                                    Medium Term
         Deliverables
                                                Outcomes                                Indicators                               Outcomes                           Indicators
Process evaluation of early        Adjustments to the country                - Feedback on quality of IEG            - Enhanced country-level           - Client feedback on WB
implementation of new country      engagement model to increase                work from country clients in            performance (ownership,            effectiveness and impact on
engagement model                   effectiveness, if needed                    Client Survey                           selectivity, results focus)        results
Country-level learning products    Use of IEG evaluation evidence in         - Coverage of IEG evaluation            - Stronger country-level results - IEG ratings on outcomes of
                                   SCD, CPF, PLR, and CLR                      evidence in SCD, CPF, PLR,              (outcomes, growth,                 country strategies
                                                                               CLR                                     inclusiveness, and               - IEG ratings of WB performance
                                                                                                                       sustainability)                    on country strategies
                                                                                                                     - Enhanced quality of SCD,         - Coverage of evaluation capacity
                                                                                                                       CPF, PLR, and CLR                  development in country strategy
System for validation of self-     Self-evaluation system is incentivized    - Compliance with service                 Learning cycles lead to
evaluation in PLR/CLR              to serve learning and accountability        standards for validation delivery       continuous improvement
Support evaluation capacity        Mainstreaming of ECD in country           - Stakeholder feedback on ECD             Client-driven demand for
development in client countries    engagement model and enhanced               product quality and use                 high quality WBG support for
                                   coordination with WBG SCB work                                                      ECD
                                                                                 - 33 -


   Becoming a Solutions Bank Group
                                                           Intermediate (1-3 years)                                                      Medium Term (4-6 years)
         Deliverables
                                               Outcomes                              Indicators                             Outcomes                           Indicators
Evaluations of lending and        Adjustments to lending and            - Feedback from GP/CCSA,                -   GP/CCSA, IFC, MIGA             - Stakeholder feedback on WBG
knowledge services and            knowledge services and instruments         IFC, MIGA on quality of IEG            marshal best knowledge to        knowledge
instruments, including early      to increase efficiency and                 work in Client Survey                  provide world class,           - IEG ratings on outcomes of
implementation experience of      effectiveness, and alignment if       - Coverage of IEG evaluation                integrated, evidenced-based      WBG operations
GP/CCSA and IFC reforms           needed                                     evidence in major GP/CCSA,             solutions                      - Level of adoption of relevant
Sector and thematic learning      Use of knowledge from IEG                  IFC, MIGA knowledge                -   Teams work on cross-             evaluation recommendations and
products supporting global        evaluations in the work of                 products                               practice and public-private      Management actions in MAR
knowledge flows in GP/CCSA,       GP/CCSA, IFC, MIGA                    - Coverage of IEG evaluation                solutions                      - IEG ratings of quality at entry
IFC, MIGA                                                                    evidence in WBG operations         -   Improved quality and impact      and quality of supervision of WB
Appraisals of operational self-   Adjustments as needed to enhance      - Level of adoption of relevant             of investment, knowledge,        and IFC projects
evaluation and development        efficiency and effectiveness of            evaluation recommendations             and convening services
risk management systems           systems                                    and Management actions in          -   Stronger internal culture and
Operational learning products     Use of IEG lessons learned and             MAR                                    competencies around results
to strengthen results and         good practices in operations                                                      delivery for clients
evidenced-based operations
System for validation of self-    Self-evaluation system is             -   Compliance with service             Learning cycles lead to
evaluation of lending and         incentivized to serve learning and        standards for validation delivery   continuous improvement
knowledge                         accountability                        -   Completion of action plan to
                                                                            restructure ICR validation
                                                                            system
   Working in Partnership
                                                           Intermediate (1-3 years)                                                     Medium Term (4-6 years)
         Deliverables
                                               Outcomes                              Indicators                              Outcomes                         Indicators
Evaluations of WBG                Adjustments to partnership and TF     - Coverage of partnerships in           -   Alignment of TFs and          - Alignment of WBG partnerships
partnership and trust fund        arrangements to increase efficiency,      IEG evaluation work                     Partnerships with twin goals    with Strategy
programs                          effectiveness and alignment, if       - Feedback from partners on             -   Leverage external knowledge, - Level of adoption of relevant
                                  needed                                    quality of IEG work in Client           resources, and collaboration    evaluation recommendations and
Evaluations of collaboration      Learning and accountability on            Survey                                  for greater development         Management action in MAR
with development partners,        effectiveness on collaboration and    - Level of adoption of relevant             effectiveness                 - Use of beneficiary feedback
particularly private sector and   leveraging stakeholders’                  evaluation recommendations          -   Increased efficiency and        during project implementation
citizens                          contributions for inclusive growth        and Management action in                effectiveness of partnerships
Learning products                 Use of knowledge from IEG                 MAR                                 -   Citizens engaged in design
                                  evaluations to improve partnership                                                and monitoring of operations
                                  arrangements
                                                                                                                                                                               - 34 -
                                                                                                                                                       Annex 1: Draft Indicators for IEG Results Framework

O bje c t iv e 1: Wha t Wo rk s : D e e pe ning e v ide nc e a bo ut t he re s ult s o f WB G pro gra m s a nd a c t iv it ie s - - a nd t he ir e f f e c t iv e ne s s f o r a c c e le ra t ing po v e rt y re duc t io n, pro s pe rit y, a nd
s us t a ina bilit y - - a nd t he ir c o nt ribut io n t o WB G int e rim t a rge t o f 9 % po v e rt y a nd pro gre s s o n s ha re d pro s pe rit y by 2 0 2 0
                                                                                                                                       Int e rm e dia t e ( 1- 3 ye a rs )                                                                                         M e dium T e rm ( 4 - 6 ye a rs )
D e liv e r-
                                                                                                                                                                               B a s e line      C urre nt      T a rge t                                                                                B a s e line        A c t ua l
 a ble s                                                                                   O ut c o m e s                           Indic a t o r                                                                                 O ut c o m e s                      Indic a t o r
                                                                                                                                                                             V a lue      Year   ( F Y 15 )     ( F Y 17 )                                                                             V a lue      Year     ( F Y 15 )




                                                                                                                  Quality: % o f respo ndents who were satisfied B o ard: 82%                    B o ard: 98% B o ard: 100%
   Major sector, thematic and country evaluations and learning products focused on




                                                                                                                  (o r better) with quality o f IEG evaluatio ns in WB G: 46% FY13               WB G: 44% WB G: 75%
                                                                                                                  Client Survey                                                                                                                         IEG Influence o n Client Results
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Suppo rted by WB G
                                                                                     Greater understanding
                                                                                     o f:                                                                                                                                                               -- Inclusive Gro wth SEA :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [under develo pment]
                                                                                                             Quality: A ggregate measure being develo ped
                                                                                     (1 ) When and ho w WB G based o n ratings matrix develo ped fo r M eta-                           [under develo pment]                                             -- Service Delivery SEA :
                                                                                     activities lead to      Evaluatio n A ssessment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B etter info rmed
                              WBG contributions to twin goals




                                                                                     gro wth, inclusio n and                                                                                                                                            -- Enivo rnmental Sustaianbilitiy SEA :
                                                                                                             Strategic A lignment: % o f evaluatio ns with                                                                    po licy and o peratio nal
                                                                                     sustainability
                                                                                                             o verall rating o f satisfacto ry (o r better) in                                                                cho ices by the B o ard,
                                                                                     ( le a rning) ;
                                                                                                             analysis o f Selectivity Sheets and A ppro ach                   100%      FY14        100%          100%        M anagement, and
                                                                                                             P apers o n alignment with IEG Results                                                                           Clients
                                                                                     (2) Whether WB G
                                                                                     activities are aligned  Framewo rk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Enhanced WB G
                                                                                     with the twin go als and                                                                                                                                           Client Feedback o n IEG: % o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              develo pment
                                                                                     effective in                 Efficiency: Elapsed time fro m IEG A P                                                                                                respo ndents who rate the aggregate   B o ard: 87%                  B o ard: 96%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              effectiveness in
                                                                                     co ntributing to their       M eeting to e-Submissio n delivery o f majo r                11.2     FY13        14.3           11.0                                 influence o f IEG pro ducts as "to    WB G: 65%            FY13     WB G: 72%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              terms o f co ntributing
                                                                                     achievement                  evaluatio ns delivered in FY (mo nths)                                                                                                so me extent" (o r better) in Client External: 92%                 External: 98%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              to the attainment o f
                                                                                     ( a c c o unt a bilit y) ;                                                                                                                                         Survey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              twin go als.
                                                                                     and                                                                                                                                                                Client Feedback o n IEG: % o f
                                                                                                                  Value fo r M o ney: A ggregate measure being                                                                                          respo ndents who rate IEG's impact    B o ard: 80%                  B o ard: 94%
                                                                                     (3) IDA perfo rmance.        develo ped to assess value fo r mo ney o f all                       [under develo pment]                                             o n WB G develo pment effectiveness   WB G: 55%            FY13     WB G: 75%
                                                                                                                  IEG business lines                                                                                                                    as mo derate (o r better) in Client  External: 79%                 External: 90%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Survey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M A R Implementatio n: % o f IEG
                                                                                                                  Useage: % o f respo ndents rating the
                                                                                                                                                                        B o ard: 91%             B o ard: 95% B o ard: 90%                              reco mmendatio ns fo r which
                                                                                                                  aggregate use o f IEG pro ducts as "to so me                       FY13                                                                                                               73%        FY12        84%
                                                                                                                                                                        WB G: 61  %              WB G: 65 % WB G: 75%                                   ado ptio n was rated as substantial (o r
                                                                                                                  extent" (o r better) in Client Survey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        better) by 4th year in M A R
                                                                                                                  Useage: % o f o peratio n designs drawing                                                                                             Kno wledge Flo ws: M easure o f IEG
                                                                                                                  lesso ns fro m evaluative appro aches fro m                 50%       FY13        68%           100%                                  kno wledge flo ws, aligned with                    [under develo pment]
                                                                                                                  Co rpo rate Sco recard                                                                                                                indicato r being develo ped fo r CSC
                                                                                                                                                                         ICR: 18%                 ICR: 22%   ICR: 100%
                                                                                                                  % current year pro ject validatio n delivered                                                                                         % o f M S+ co mpletio n o f WB G/WB
 performance




                                                                                     Timely delivery o f high                                                           XP SR: 78% FY13          XP SR: 81% XP SR: 100%                                                                                 51%        FY13        65%
  Corporate




                                                                                                                  within IEG service standards                                                                          Stro nger po rtfo lio           co untry strategies
                                                                                     quality perfo rmance                                                               P CR: 47%                P CR: 63% P CR: 1  00%
     data




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        perfo rmance fro m
                                                                                     data fo r WB G               Size o f ICRR backlo g ( > 180 days )                 201 ICRRs FY1 3          68 ICRRs        0                                                                                   WB : 70%               WB : 70%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        impro ved M &E                  % o f M S+ o utco mes o f WB G
                                                                                     co rpo rate mo nito ring     % CA SCR validatio n delivered within IEG                                                                                                                                          IFC: 65%      FY13     IFC: 60%
                                                                                                                                                                              100%      FY13        100%          100%                                  o peratio ns
                                                                                                                  service standards                                                                                                                                                                 M IGA : 76%            M IGA : 70%
   Stronger
   methods




                                                                                     New metho ds                                                                                                                             Increased relevance       % o f evaluatio ns rated very go o d fo r
                                                                                     mainstreamed in IEG          % co mpletio n o f FY14 M etho ds A ctio n P lan            NA        FY14        25%           100%        and quality o f           "validity" in M eta-Evaluatio n                    [under develo pment]
                                                                                     evaluatio n wo rk                                                                                                                        evaluatio n evidence      A ssessment
                                                                                                                                               - 35 -
O bje c t iv e 2 : R e a l- T im e Le a rning – G e ne ra t ing e v ide nc e o n t he e a rly im ple m e nt a t io n e xpe rie nc e o f t he WB G S t ra t e gy t o e na ble m id- c o urs e c o rre c t io ns , a nd pro m o t e a s t ro nge r int e rna l
c ult ure f o r re s ult s , a c c o unt a bilit y, a nd le a rning
                                                                              Int e rm e dia t e ( 1- 3 ye a rs )                                                                                      M e dium T e rm ( 4 - 6 ye a rs )
D e liv e r-
                                                                                                                      B a s e line      C urre nt      T a rge t                                                                             B a s e line        A c t ua l
 a ble s                            O ut c o m e s                         Indic a t o r                                                                                O ut c o m e s                    Indic a t o r
                                                                                                                    V a lue      Year   ( F Y 15 )     ( F Y 17 )                                                                          V a lue      Year     ( F Y 15 )
         H e lping C lie nt s T a c k le t he M o s t Im po rt a nt D e v e lo pm e nt C ha lle nge s

                                                                                                                                                                    Enhanced co untry-       Client feedback o n WB
          Evaluations




                               A jdustments to
                                                        % o f client respo ndents who were satisfied           ratings no t             ratings no t                level perfo rmance       effectiveness and impact o n results            6.9       FY13         7.0
                               co untry engagement
                                                        (o r better) with quality o f IEG wo rk in Client           yet         NA           yet         75%                                 (scale 1-10)
                               mo del to increase
                                                        Survey                                                  available                available                  Stro nger co untry-      % o f M S+ co mpletio n o f WB G/WB
                               effectiveness                                                                                                                                                                                                51%        FY13        65%
                                                                                                                                                                    level results            co untry strategies
                                                                                                                                                                                             % o f IEG reco mmendatio ns fro m
          Learning




                               Use o f IEG evaluatio n                                                                                                              Enhanced quality o f
                                                       % o f SCD, CP F, P LR, and CLR that                                                                                                   pro cess evaluatio n fo r which           ratings no t             ratings no t
                               evidence in SCD, CP F,                                                                         [under develo pment]                  SCD, CP F, P LR, and                                                                NA
                                                       internalize lesso ns fro m IEG evaluatio n wo rk                                                                                      ado ptio n was rated as substantial (o r yet available            yet available
                               P LR, and CLR                                                                                                                        CLR                      better) by 4th year in M A R
 Validation

 evaluation




                               Self-evaluatio n system                                                                                                              Learning cycles lead
   of self-




                                                       % CA SCR validatio n delivered within IEG                                                                                             % o f M S+ WB G perfo rmance fo r
                               serves learning and                                                                   100%      FY13        100%          100%       to co ntinuo us                                                         67%        FY13        73%
                                                       service standards                                                                                                                     co untry strategies
                               acco untability needs                                                                                                                impro vement
 support to




                               M ainstreaming o f ECD
                                                                                                                                                                    Client-driven demand
   clients




                               in co untry engagement
    ECD




                                                        % o f SCD with diagno stic o f ECD                            0%       FY13         0%           20%        fo r high quality WB G % o f CP F that suppo rt ECD                      0%        FY13         0%
                               mo del and enhanced
                                                                                                                                                                    suppo rt fo r ECD
                               co o rdinatio n with SCB

        B e c o m ing a S o lut io ns B a nk G ro up

                               A djustments to lending
          Evaluations




                               and kno wledge
                                                       % o f GP /CCSA respo ndents who were                 ratings no t         ratings no t                       GP s pro vide wo rld
                               services and                                                                                                                                                  Stakeho lder feedback o n WB G
                                                       satisfied (o r better) with quality o f IEG wo rk in      yet       NA         yet                75%        class, integrated,                                                       6.8       FY13         7.0
                               instruments to                                                                                                                                                kno wledge
                                                       Client Survey                                         available            available                         evidenced so lutio ns
                               increase efficiency,
                               alignment
                                                                                                                                                                    Teams wo rk o n cro ss-
                                                       % o f majo r GP E and CCSA kno wledge                                                                                                                                           WB : 70%                 WB : 70%
                               IEG kno wledge used by                                                                                                               practice and P P P      % o f M S+ o utco mes o f WB G
                                                       pro ducts that internalize lesso ns fro m IEG                     [under develo pment]                                                                                          IFC: 65%        FY13     IFC: 60%
                               GP s and CCSA s                                                                                                                      so lutio ns             o peratio ns
          Learning




                                                       evaluatio n wo rk                                                                                                                                                              M IGA : 76%              M IGA : 70%
                                                                                                                                                                                           % o f IEG reco mmendatio ns fro m
                                                                                                                                                                    Impro ved quality and
                               IEG kno wledge used in % o f WB G o peratio ns that draw o n IEG                                                                                            GP /CCSA fo cused evaluatio ns fo r         ratings no t             ratings no t
                                                                                                                              [under develo pment]                  impact o f LEN & A A A                                                              NA
                               o peratio ns           evaluatio n wo rk                                                                                                                    which ado ptio n was rated as              yet available            yet available
                                                                                                                                                                                           substantial (o r better)
                                                                                                                                                                                             % o f IEG reco mmendatio ns fro m
                               A djustments as
                                                        % o f IEG reco mmendatio ns fro m FY1    3                                                                                           FY1  6 assessment o f WB G self-
   Validation & Appraisal of




                               needed to enhance                                                                                                                                                                                       ratings no t             ratings no t
                                                        B ROE evaluatio n fo r which ado ptio n was                  NA        FY13        30%           100%                                evaluatio n system fo r which                              NA
    Self-Evaluation System




                               effectiveness o f                                                                                                                                                                                      yet available            yet available
                                                        rated as substantial (o r better) in M A R                                                                  Stro nger culture fo r   ado ptio n was rated as substantial (o r
                               system
                                                                                                                                                                    results delivery         better)
                                                                                                                                                                                             % o f M S+ quality at entry and quality
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60% & 77%       FY13    57% & 78%
                                                                                                                                                               Learning cycles lead          o f supervisio n o f WB pro jects
                               Self-evaluatio n system                                                          ICR: 18%                 ICR: 22%   ICR: 100% to co ntinuo us                % o f substantial+ M &E quality o f WB
                                                       % pro ject validatio n delivered within IEG                                                                                                                                         28%         FY13        29%
                               serves learning and                                                             XP SR: 78% FY13          XP SR: 81% XP SR: 100% impro vement                  pro jects
                                                       service standards
                               acco untability needs                                                           P CR: 47%                P CR: 63% P CR: 1  00%                               % o f satisfacto ry wo rk quality at
                                                                                                                                                                                             appraisal and supervisio n o f IFC        63% & 87%       FY13    56% & 84%
                                                                                                                                                                                             investment pro jects
                                                                                                                                   - 36 -




                                                                  Int e rm e dia t e ( 1- 3 ye a rs )                                                                                     M e dium T e rm ( 4 - 6 ye a rs )
D e liv e r-
 a ble s                                                                                                  B a s e line      C urre nt      T a rge t                                                                            B a s e line      A c t ua l
                        O ut c o m e s                         Indic a t o r                                                                                O ut c o m e s                  Indic a t o r
                                                                                                        V a lue      Year   ( F Y 15 )     ( F Y 17 )                                                                         V a lue      Year   ( F Y 15 )
    Wo rk ing in P a rt ne rs hip
                   A djustments to                                                                                                                      A lignment o f TFs and
                   partnership and TF                                                                                                                   P artnerships with twin
                                             % o f IEG majo r evaluatio ns that inco rpo rate                                                                                   % o f partnership pro grams assessed
                   arrangements to                                                                                                                      go als
                                             substantive assessments o f relevant                        27%       FY13        50%           50%                                fo r alignment to WB G strategic            [under develo pment by WB G]
                   increase efficiency,
                                             partnerships                                                                                                                       o bjectives
                   effectiveness and                                                                                                                    Leverage external
     Evaluations




                   alignment, if needed                                                                                                                 kno wledge,
                   Learning and                                                                                                                         reso urces, and
                   acco untability o n                                                                                                                  co llabo ratio n fo r
                   effectiveness o n                                                                                                                    greater develo pment % o f IEG reco mmendatio ns fro m
                                             % o f partner respo ndents who were satisfied         ratings no t             ratings no t
                   co llabo ratio n and                                                                                                                 effectiveness           partnership evaluatio ns fo r which       ratings no t          ratings no t
                                             (o r better) with quality o f IEG wo rk in Client          yet         NA           yet         75%                                                                                         NA
                   leveraging                                                                                                                                                   ado ptio n was rated as substantial (o r yet available         yet available
                                             Survey                                                 available                available
                   stakeho lders’                                                                                                                       Increased efficiency    better)
                   co ntributio ns fo r                                                                                                                 and effectiveness o f
                   inclusive gro wth                                                                                                                    partnerships

                   Use o f kno wledge fro m
   Learning
   products




                                            % o f IEG reco mmendatio ns fro m FY1   1                                                                   Citizens engaged in    % o f WB pro jects using beneficiary
                   IEG evaluatio ns to
                                            partnership evaluatio n fo r which ado ptio n                57%       FY12         71%          100%       design and             feedback during pro ject                        34%        FY13      35%
                   impro ve partnership
                                            was rated as substantial (o r better)                                                                       mo nito ring o f       implementatio n
                   arrangements
                                                                                                                                                        o peratio ns
                                                 - 37 -


                   Annex 2: Description of IEG Strategic Engagement Areas

                                         1.   Inclusive Growth

Overview

Economic opportunity and productive jobs are atop the development agenda in all countries. It is
the cornerstone of development, generating the resources for growth, providing pathways out of
poverty, and improving living standards for all. Realizing economic potential requires a vibrant
private sector and capable government. But models that have worked for development success
stories, such as China and Korea, are proving elusive. Many countries face jobless growth, growing
inequality, environmental degradation and persistent unemployment or under-employment that
impede prosperity and poverty reduction. A key development challenge is generating growth that is
inclusive, resilient and sustainable and that creates jobs.

Factors central to addressing this challenge include: macroeconomic stability, an enabling business
environment, and the rule of law; capable public and private institutions; access to productive assets
(land, knowledge, capital, infrastructure) and to markets; harnessing the powers of economic
integration and technological change; and policies for creating jobs that are good for development
and transformational for people’s lives. Sustainably addressing these challenges will be ephemeral
without reducing vulnerability to crises. While these issues are wide ranging, much else is needed to
eliminate extreme poverty and share prosperity, including access to basic services, security, investing
in human development, voice and empowerment, and good stewardship of natural capital—global,
regional and local. These issues will be covered in other strategic engagement areas.

Several recent IEG evaluations focus on issues that are central for inclusive growth: evaluations of
WBG activities in Investment Climate, SMEs, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, PPPs, Trade
Finance, and Youth Employment. Ongoing work covers the areas of Inclusive Finance, Jobs and
Competitiveness, Supporting Tertiary Education for Growth and Opportunity; Capital Market
Development, and Rural and Urban Development Strategies.

Both formal and informal sector job creation hinges on mobilizing public and private investment,
and developing effective public and private institutions. This Strategic Engagement Area squarely
addresses the public-private interface necessary for inclusive growth that creates jobs. Four priority
evaluations have been identified for the next three years: (1) The critical importance of the informal
sector for the poor in many countries, both lower and middle income, is often overlooked and
forms the core of this evaluation; (2) The effective role of the private sector in supporting
development priorities relies on good corporate governance and corporate social responsibility and
form the core of the second topic; (3) the third topic addresses the effectiveness and role of public
financial instruments (tax and expenditure policies) to mobilize and direct private investment flows,
both foreign and domestic, to priority areas; and finally (4) how has the WBG supported shared
prosperity and reduced inequality through country engagement, a topic squarely aligned with
economic opportunity, but touching also on issues central to the other Strategic Engagement Areas
with respect to equality in access to basic services and sharing in sustainable access to land, clean
water, forests, and other natural resources.

Potential Impact

Promoting inclusive and shared growth is one of the most daunting and pressing global challenges.
It is at the center of the World Bank Group Strategy and critical for the twin goals. Addressing this
challenge requires strong partnership between the public and the private sectors and, within the
                                                 - 38 -


World Bank Group, integration of the Group’s public and private sector capabilities. With its focus
on the public-private interface, this Strategic Engagement Area connects directly with the agenda of
“One World Bank Group”. Evaluation of the private-public interface--fostering investment
opportunity, improving the ‘quality of growth’, and promoting broad participation in the economy--
holds the promise of being transformational, lifting Bank effectiveness.



                             2.   Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor

Overview

Access to social services are essential for poverty eradication. The 2004 World Development
Report illustrated that illiteracy, ill health, gender inequality, and environmental degradation are all
aspects of being poor. Going back to Robert Chambers rapid rural appraisal and participation, the
development community has recognized that access to services to enhance human capital is essential
to escape poverty.

Looking back at more than ten years of delivering services to the poor. Progress has been made
against some of the relevant MDGs, such as equity and enrolment rates, but the WDR equally
emphasized access, quantity, and quality of health, education, water, sanitation, and electricity
services. While this definition has broadened in the Social Inclusion Strategy of the World Bank
Group to include other services than these (adding social protection, information, transport, and
credit markets), the model for service delivery suggested in the WDR 2004 remains an important
entry point to understand whether the poor have access to the quantity and quality of services that
helps them live decent lives and participate in economic opportunities.

Remaining challenges. Governments devote about a third of their budgets to health and
education, yet it is unclear how much reaches poor people. Even when public spending can be
reallocated toward poor people, the resources do not always reach the frontline service provider and,
if it does, quality is not assured: the incentives for effective service delivery are often weak, wages
may not be paid or service-delivery monitored. Other problems that can undermine services include
corruption, political patronage, lack of social accountability, and a lack of demand (due to real or
perceived poor quality of service, lack of time to seek the service, cultural barriers or lack of
knowledge). The WDR suggested a three-pronged model of accountability in the 'service delivery chain':

    i)      poor people who require voice in policy making, provide feedback on services received,
            and participate in monitoring and accountability, using modern technology or other
            means of participation;

    ii)     government who must contract and govern service provision, including promoting
            models that ensure services reach the poor, secure quantity and quality over time, weigh
            trade-offs between different sectors (local and national governments thinking about
            options in service provisions across sectors), develop models that allow various providers
            to participate in cost-effective ways (RBF, pay-on-demand, and other schemes), and
            institute systems that allow monitoring, feedback and learning over time; and

    iii)    providers who must be responsive to people and fulfill contracts, involving diverse
            service providers from public, private, and community sectors.
                                                  - 39 -


Questions of political economy and service delivery in difficult contexts – fragile, remote, low
population density, socially excluded minorities – play an overarching role across these dimensions of
accountability.

The focus of this Strategic Engagement Area over the next 3 years. This Strategic Engagement
Area will deliver a series of three evaluations, each focusing on a specific sector or sub-sector: urban
transport; water supply and sanitation; and nutrition. A common framework, to be developed and
published in a Working Paper, will be applied in the three service delivery evaluations. Using this
comprehensive framework, each evaluation will be able to describe the models most commonly
supported in that particular sector, and compare effectiveness of the models in terms of reaching the
poor, in terms of quality, behavior change and impact, and in terms of sustaining the services over
time. The findings are likely to differ across political, cultural and implementation capacity realities.

Using this common approach, IEG will then produce a “chapeau” or synthesis product that draws
upon and contrasts findings from the three sectors, as well as other relevant existing evaluative
material in IEG. This product will also be able to identify service delivery models that may have
been used (successfully or not) in certain sectors supported by the Bank Group but not in others,
thus potentially uncovering gaps where innovation can occur.

Potential Impact

Evaluations will tell us what works and what doesn’t in service delivery, so the first way we will have
an impact is in identifying more comprehensively what works under what circumstances and in which
sectors in relation to all four dimensions of service delivery - access, quantity, quality and sustainability
of services. A focus on evaluating whether systems have been built to continuously monitor, provide
feedback, take corrective action, and learn, will help understand whether and how service delivery has
been built to be sustained.

As the GPs and CCSAs are developing their strategies to tackle development challenges, IEG’s
findings on whether and how service delivery has been sustainable can have a transformational
impact on Bank operations. Most GPs which involve service delivery such as health, education, social
protection, transport, water, energy, Social, Urban, Rural, (and Resilience), agriculture, etc. are likely
to be involved in the proposed topic most directly.

Gap Analysis

Support to service delivery to the poor is, directly or indirectly, at the heart of most of the WBG’s
business. IEG has carried out a few evaluations that address specific services, e.g. transport,
electricity access, financial services. These have to varying degrees assessed targeting of the poor and
financial sustainability, but have not been able to assess sustained outcomes. A number of services
such as water and sanitation, nutrition, and urban services have not been assessed recently. IEG has
previously not considered ‘the science of sustained delivery’ with a cross-sectoral perspective, has not
addressed the role of citizen engagement and social accountability in ensuring successful service
delivery to the poor, and has not assessed service delivery with a social inclusion or environmental
sustainability lens.
                                                 - 40 -


                                   3. Environmental Sustainability

Overview

Growth and poverty reduction requires sustainable management of natural resources, and mitigation
of environmental externalities. Sustainable environmental management is both difficult, and critical
for poor people because of well-known problems of collective action. In many cases, natural capital
is over-exploited, with non-sustainable growth patterns. It is difficult for those affected – poor,
diffuse, and without effective voice – to organize for more efficient and equitable resource
management. So the poor are disproportionately affected.

Climate change is a prominent example. But others include:

       air pollution, which kills over 3 million people annually, mostly in the developing world
       unsustainable exploitation of groundwater, imperiling the livelihoods of hundreds of millions
       overexploitation and destruction of fisheries
       rural and urban flooding due to deforestation, loss of wetlands, urban paving and poor
        drainage
       land degradation from overgrazing

Promoting sustainable patterns of consumption and production and protecting and managing the
natural resource base, including sustainable approaches to landscape management, water resources,
energy efficiency, and climate change, are at the core of the twin goals. Natural resources and
ecosystem services are fundamental to meeting basic needs (e.g. providing livelihoods, shelter, food
and fresh water) and reducing income inequalities, both in rural and urban settings. They are also a
key component of the inclusion and shared prosperity agenda, particularly regarding traditionally
marginalized and disempowered communities, such as women, children and indigenous
communities. Natural resource degradation or contention also contributes to violent conflicts in
many IDA and IBRD countries.

Signaling the centrality of this issue, more than one third of the 16 SDGs make direct reference to
actions that would improve the sustainability of the environment and natural resource base.
Examples of these goals include:

       Ensure availability and sustainable management of water [and sanitation] for all (Goal 6)
       Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all (Goal 7)
       Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns (Goal 12)
       Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts (Goal 13)
       Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas, and marine resources for sustainable
        development (Goal 14)
       Protect, restore, and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage
        forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity
        loos (Goal 15).

While each country has primary responsibility for the management of its own natural resource
base, because of the global common nature of much of this base, global partnership and therefore
global mobilization of financing from a variety of sources are demanded in order to promote
environment and natural capital sustainability. In sum, delivering evaluation evidence in this area is
not only of high priority for domestic and global policy making but urgent and indispensable for
eradicating extreme poverty and improving the lives of the bottom 40 percent of the population.
                                                - 41 -


Potential Impact

While climate change has risen in attention over recent years, less attention has been paid to some of
the other urgent environmental issues. Making this issue a focal point for IEG will help galvanize
the profile of environmental sustainability issues, including their key role in addressing the twin
goals.

Gap Analysis

While IEG has extensively evaluated climate change, and has done an evaluation of forestry issues,
there has been no comprehensive evaluation of environmental issues since 2008, and environmental
issues have had limited treatment in sectoral evaluations. The issues mentioned above – air
pollution, water basin management, fisheries, urban environmental management – are ripe for
examination.
                                                        - 42 -


                     Annex 3: Gap Analysis of Recent IEG Evaluations

                        Recent IEG Evaluations by Sector (FY10-15)

                       % of WB
      Sector         Portfolio (at                                    Evaluations
                      end FY14)
                                     Global Food Crisis Response (FY13)
                                     Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development (FY13)
                                     Impact Evaluations in Agriculture (FY11)
Agriculture and
Rural                    7.5         Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness (FY11)
Development
                                     GPR: Forest Carbon Partnership (FY12)
                                     GPR: International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science, and
                                     Technology for Development (FY10)

Education                8.5         World Bank Support to Education Since 2001 (FY11)
                                     Electricity Access (FY15)
                                     Clustered CPE on Resource Rich Countries (FY15)
Energy and Mining        16.4
                                     Challenge of Low-Carbon Dev.: Climate Change and WBG - Phase II (FY10)
                                     Climate Change and WBG: Win-Win Energy Policy Reforms - Phase I (FY09)
                                     GPR: EITI (FY11)
                                     Inclusive Financing (FY15)
Finance                  4.9         WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase II (FY12)
                                     WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase I (FY10)
                                     Health Systems Financing (FY14)
                                     Social Safety Nets and Gender Equality (FY14)
                                     Maternal and Child Health Care Systematic Review (FY13)
                                     What Can We Learn from Nutrition Impact Evaluations? (FY10)
Health and Other
                         8.2         Social Safety Nets (FY11)
Social Services
                                     Improving Effectiveness and Outcomes for the Poor in Health, Nutrition and
                                     Population (FY09)

                                     GPR: GAVI (FY14)
                                     GPR: The Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria (FY12)
                                     Support to SMEs (FY14)
                                     Public-Private Partnerships (FY14)

Industry and                         Investment Climate Reform (FY14)
                         4.4
Trade                                Trade Finance (FY13)
                                     Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Competitiveness (FY13)
                                     Support to SMEs (FY13)

ICT                      0.9         Capturing Technology for Development (FY11)
                                     World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and Anticorruption
Public                               (FY11)
Administration,          21.6
                                     World Bank Engagement at the State Level (FY10)
Law, and Justice
                                     Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed (FY10)

Transportation           17.0        Improving Capability and Financial Viability to Sustain Transport (FY13)
Water, Sanitation,
and Flood                10.6        GPR: Global Water Partnership (FY10)
Protection
                                                           - 43 -


                           Recent IEG Evaluations by Theme (FY10-15)
                  % of WB
   Theme        Portfolio (at                                         Evaluations
                 end FY14)

                                Clustered CPE on Resource Rich Countries (FY15)
Economic
                    2.3         WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase II (FY12)
Management
                                WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase I (FY10)
                                Adapting to Climate Change: Assessing WBG Experience - Phase III (FY13)
                                Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development (FY13)
Environment
and Natural                     The Challenge of Low-Carbon Dev.: Climate Change and WBG - Phase II (FY10)
                    9.5
Resources                       GPR: GEF (FY14)
Management
                                GPR: Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FY13)
                                GPR: Global Water Partnership (FY10)
                                Inclusive Finance (FY15)
                                Support to SMEs (FY14)
                                Investment Climate Reform (FY14)
Financial and                   Public-Private Partnerships (FY14)
Private
                    19.7        Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Competitiveness (FY13)
Sector
Development                     Assessing IFC's Poverty Focus and Results (FY11)
                                GPR: EITI (FY11)
                                Earnings and Growth and Employment Creation in 3 MICs (FY11)
                                MIGA Financial Guarantees (FY11)
                                Early Childhood Development (FY15)
                                Health Systems Financing (FY14)
                                Maternal and Child Health Care IE Review (FY13)
Human                           World Bank Support to Education Since 2001 (FY11)
                    12.7
Development                     What Can We Learn from Nutrition Impact Evaluations? (FY10)
                                GPR: GAVI (FY14)
                                GPR: The Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and Malaria (FY12)
                                GPR: Stop TB Partnership (FY10)

Public Sector                   World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and Anticorruption (FY11)
                    12.9
Governance                      World Bank Engagement at the State Level (FY10)
Rule of Law         0.7
                                Global Food Crisis Response (FY13)
Rural
                    15.8        Impact Evaluations in Agriculture (FY11)
Development
                                Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness (FY11)
Social                          Social Safety Nets and Gender Equality (FY14)
Development,
                    2.6         Social Safety Nets (FY11)
Gender, and
Inclusion                       Analyzing the Effects of Policy Reforms on the Poor (FY10)
                                Poverty Focus of Country Programs (FY15)
Social Prot.
and Risk            8.8         Youth Employment Programs (FY12)
Management                      Social Safety Nets (FY11)

Trade and                       Trade Finance (FY13)
                    4.0
Integration                     WB Involvement in Global and Regional Partnership Programs (FY11)
Urban Dev.          11.0        Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed (FY10)
                                                          - 44 -


                            Annex 4: Proposed Work Program for FY16-18

                                      Work Program by Business Line



Business Line              FY15 Actual                      FY16                         FY17                       FY18
1. Major Evaluations
Thematic and Sector 1. Ending Poverty              1. Tertiary Education      1.     Shared Prosperity   1. Public Finance for
Evaluations          2. Financial Inclusion        2. Capital Market                 in Country             Investment and
                                                      Development                    Programs               Jobs
                      3. Electricity Access
                                                   3. Jobs and                2.     Rural Non-Farm      2. Corporate
                      4. Early Child                                                 Economy                Sustainability and
                         Development                  Competitiveness
                                                                              3.     Water Supply and       Development
                                                                                     Sanitation          3. Informal Sector and
                                                                              4.     Urban Transport        Development
                                                                                     Services            4. Sustainable Cities
                                                                              5.     Environmental       5. Scaling Up
                                                                                     Management of          Nutrition
                                                                                     Air and Water       6. Carbon Finance
                                                                                     Resources
Corporate and          5. Learning and             4. Process Evaluation      6. Data and                7. Process Evaluation
Process Evaluations       Results in WB               of SCD and CPF             Knowledge for              of GP/CCSAs
                          Operations – Phase       5. Review of P4R              Development             8. Engaging Citizens
                          2                                                   7. IFC Client
                                                   6. Assessment of
                                                      WBG’s Self-                Engagement
                                                      Evaluation Systems         Model

Country-Focused        6. Clustered CPE on         7. Fragile Situations in   8. Clustered CPE on        9.    Clustered CPE -
Evaluations               Resource-Rich               Non-FCS Countries          Dynamic MICs                  TBD
                          Countries (4 country     8. Clustered CPE on
                          reports plus synthesis      Small States (4
                          report)                     country reports plus
                                                      synthesis report)


Results and            7. RAP 2014:                9. RAP 2015: Gender        9. RAP 2016:               10. RAP 2017: Working
Performance Report        Achieving the               Equality                   Managing for                in Partnership
                          MDGs                                                   Results
2. Other Evaluation Products
 PPARs                     World Bank: 43             World Bank: 50               World Bank: 55             World Bank: 60
                                IFC: 7                      IFC: 8                       IFC: 8                     IFC: 8
Systematic Reviews     Electricity Access                                          [TBD in prior year]        [TBD in prior year]
and Impact
Evaluations
                                                      - 45 -

Business Line             FY15 Actual                   FY16                        FY17                          FY18
Learning Products      Opportunities and        Maximizing                 [TBD in prior year, in         [TBD in prior year, in
                       Challenges from          Development Impact        consultation with              consultation with
                       Working in               in IDA (LP II)            Management]                    Management]
                       Partnerships (LP I)      Lessons from Joint
                       Bank-IFC                 WBG Projects (LP I)
                       Cooperation at the       WBG
                       Country Strategy Level   Transformational
                       (LP I)                   Engagements (LP II)
                       Selectivity in Country   Domestic Resource
                       Strategies (LP I)        Mobilization in WBG
                       Results Frameworks in    Instruments (LP I)
                       Country Strategies (LP   Mobilizing Private
                       I)                       Capital for
                       Additional Financing     Development (LP I)
                       Instrument (LP I)        Financial Viability of
                       Housing Finance (LP      Infrastructure Delivery
                       I)                       (LP I)
                       Renewable Energy (LP     Gender Impacts of
                       I)                       CDD (LP I)
                       Microfinance in Africa   Land Administration
                       (LP I)                   (LP I)
                       Manufacturing (LP I)     Fisheries (LP I)
                       IFC Additionality (LP    DPO: Political
                       I)                       Economy Analysis (LP
                       DPO: Environment         II)
                       and Social Risk          DPO: Poverty and
                       Management (LP II)       Social Impact Analysis
                       DPO: Public              (LP II)
                       Expenditure (LP I)       DPO: Environment
                       DPO: Macro Fiscal        Sector (LP II)
                       Framework (LP I)
                       DPO: Results
                       Framework and
                       Conditionality (LP I)
3. Validation Products
 Country Strategy      13 (estimate)            22 expected               [TBD in prior year, based      [TBD in prior year, based
 Completion Report                                                        on expected CAS/CPF            on expected CAS/CPF
 Validations                                                              delivery]                      delivery]
 Project Completion    IFC XPSR: 88             IFC XPSR: 40%             [TBD in prior year, based      [TBD in prior year, based
 Report Validations    (estimate)               coverage (103 projects    on expected project closure]   on actual project closure]
                       MIGA PER: 19             expected)
                       (estimate)               MIGA PER: (25
                       WB ICRR: 350             expected)
                       (estimate)               WB ICRR: 100%
                                                coverage (340 projects
                                                expected)
AAA/AS Completion      IFC PCR: 83 (estimate)   IFC PCR: 51%              [TBD in prior year, based      [TBD in prior year, based
Report Validations                              coverage (102 projects    on expected project closure]   on actual project closure]
                                                expected)
                                                      - 46 -


                           Annex 4: Proposed Work Program for FY15-17

                       Major Evaluations and Learning Products by Objectives


 Objective 1: What Works – Deepening evidence about the results of WBG program and activities –
 and their effectiveness for accelerating growth, inclusiveness, and sustainability – to contribute to the
 achievement of WBG’s interim target of 9% poverty and progress on shared prosperity by 2020

     Results Area             FY15 Actual                 FY16                     FY17                    FY18
  Major sector and
  thematic evaluations
  and learning products
     Inclusive Growth    - Ending Poverty       - Capital Market             - Shared           - Public Finance for
                          - Housing Finance        Development                  Prosperity in      Investment and Jobs
                                                 - Jobs and                     Country          - Corporate
                          - Renewable Energy                                    Programs
                                                   Competitiveness                                 Sustainability and
                          - Manufacturing                                     - Rural Non          Development
                                                 - Tertiary Education
                                                                                Farm Economy     - Informal Sector and
                                                 - Domestic Resource
                                                   Mobilization                                    Development
                                                 - Mobilizing Private
                                                   Capital
                                                 - DPO: Poverty and
                                                   Social Impact Analysis
     Service Delivery    - Electricity Access   - Gender Impacts of         - Water Supply      - Scaling Up
      for the Poor                                 CDD                         and Sanitation      Nutrition
                          - Financial
                            Inclusion            - Financial Viability of    - Urban Transport   - Effectiveness of Service
                                                   Infrastructure Delivery     Services            Delivery Models
                          - Early Childhood
                            Development
                          - Electricity Access
                            Systematic Review
                           - Microfinance in
                             Africa
     Environmental                              - Land Administration       - Environmental     - Sustainable Cities
      Sustainability                             - Fisheries                   Management of     - Carbon Finance
                                                 - DPO: Environment            Air and Water
                                                   Sector                      Resource
 Country evaluations      - CCPE on              - Fragile Situations in - CCPE on               - CCPE – to be
                            Resource Rich          Non-FCS Countries       Dynamic MICs            determined
                            Countries            - CCPE on Small
                                                   States
 Corporate                - RAP 2014:            - RAP 2015: Gender          - RAP 2016:         - RAP 2017: Working
 performance data           Achieving the          Equality                    Managing for        in Partnership
                            MDGs                 - Maximizing Impact in        Results
                                                   IDA
[Note: Deliverables in italics are learning products]
                                                        - 47 -

 Objective 2: Real-Time Learning – Generating evidence to assess the early implementation
 experience of the WBG Strategy to enable mid-course corrections, and promote a stronger internal
 culture for results, accountability, and learning

   Results Area              FY15 Actual                   FY16                 FY17                      FY18
   Helping Clients Tackle the Most Important Development Challenges
 Evaluations of                                    - SCD/CPF            - IFC Client
 country and client                                  Process              Engagement Model
 engagement                                          Evaluation
 Country-level         - Bank-IFC Cooperation at                        [TBD in prior year, in   [TBD in prior year, in
 learning products       Country Strategies                               consultation with      consultation with
                                                                          Management]            Management]
                       - Selectivity in Country
                         Strategies
                       - Results Frameworks in
                         Country Strategies
 Becoming a Solutions Bank
 Evaluations of        - Learning and Results      - Review of P4R      - Data and               - Process Evaluation
 lending and             Phase 2                                          Knowledge for            of GP/CCSAs
 knowledge                                                                Development
 services and                                                           - RAP Chapter on
 instruments                                                              Managing for
                                                                          Results
 Appraisals of self-                               - Assessment of
 evaluation and                                      WBG Self-
 risk management                                     Evaluation
 systems                                             Systems
 Operational           - Review of DPOs            - DPO: Political     [TBD in prior year, in   [TBD in prior year, in
 learning products                                   Economy Analysis     consultation with      consultation with
                       - IFC Additionality
                                                                          Management]            Management]
                       - Additional Financing      - Transformational
                         Instrument                  Engagements
                                                   - Lessons from WBG
                                                     Joint Projects
 Working in Partnership
 Evaluation of                                                                                   - Engaging Citizens
 partnerships                                                                                    - RAP Chapter on
                                                                                                   Working in
                                                                                                   Partnership
 Learning products     - Working in Partnerships                        [TBD in prior year, in   [TBD in prior year, in
 on partnerships                                                          consultation with      consultation with
                                                                          Management]            Management]


[Note: Deliverables in italics are learning and knowledge sharing products]
