                                         97648




                  FINAL REPORT


 AGRICULTURAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEW AT THE
FEDERAL AND SUBNATIONAL LEVELS IN NIGERIA (2008-12)


                Aderibigbe Olomola
                 Tewodaj Mogues
                Tolulope Olofinbiyi
                        with


                  Chinedum Nwoko
                     Edet Udoh
                    Reuben Alabi
                     Justice Onu
               Sileshi Woldeyohannes

                   22 August 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ......................................................................................................... iii
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...............................................................................................................................v
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................................... vii
 1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................................... 1
 2. STRUCTURE, PERFORMANCE, AND POLICIES OF AGRICULTURE IN NIGERIA ..................................... 9
 3. TRENDS IN PUBLIC EXPENDITURE IN AGRICULTURE....................................................................... 38
 4. EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF AGRICULTURAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ................................ 62
 5. SUMMARY, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS ..................................................................... 88
 REFERENCES.......................................................................................................................................... 96
 ANNEX I. ............................................................................................................................................. 100
 ANNEX II. ........................................................................................................................................... 101
 ANNEX III. .......................................................................................................................................... 110
 ANNEX IV. .......................................................................................................................................... 124




                                                                      ii
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADP            Agricultural Development Project
AETA           Agricultural Extension Transformation Agenda
AgGDP          Agricultural Gross Domestic Product
AgPER          Agricultural Public Expenditure Review
AGRA           Alliance For A Green Revolution In Africa
ATA            Agricultural Transformation Agenda
CAADP          Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme
CADP           Commercial Agriculture Development Project
CARES          Cross River Agriculture and Rural Empowerment Scheme
COFOG          Classification Of The Functions Of Government
DAP            Development Action Plan
FAO            Food And Agriculture Organization Of The United Nations
FDAE           Federal Department Of Agricultural Extension
FGN            Federal Government Of Nigeria
FMARD          Federal Ministry Of Agriculture And Rural Development
FMEnv          Federal Ministry Of Environment
FMF            Federal Ministry Of Finance
FMTI           Federal Ministry Of Industry, Trade, And Investment
FMWR           Federal Ministry Of Water Resources
FSP            Fiscal Strategy Paper
GDP            Gross Domestic Product
GESS           Growth Enhancement Support Scheme
GIFMIS         Government Integrated Financial Management Information System
ICT            Information And Communication Technology
IFAD           International Fund For Agricultural Development
IFPRI          International Food Policy Research Institute
IGR            Internally Generated Revenue
IPPIS          Integrated Personnel And Payroll Information System
LEEDS          Local Economic Empowerment And Development Strategy
LGA            Local Government Area
LSMS-ISA       Living Standards Measurement Study–Integrated Survey On Agriculture
MDAs           Ministries, Departments, And Agencies
MDG            Millennium Development Goal
MTBF           Medium-Term Budget Framework
MTEF           Medium-Term Expenditure Framework
MTFF           Medium-Term Fiscal Framework
MTSS           Medium-Term Sector Strategy
NACRDB         Nigeria Agricultural Cooperative And Rural Development Bank
NAIP           National Agricultural Investment Plan
NCA            National Council On Agriculture
NDDC           Niger Delta Development Commission
NEEDS          National Economic Empowerment And Development Strategy
NEPAD          New Partnership For Africa’s Development
NIRSAL         Nigeria Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System For Agricultural Lending
NPFS           National Programme For Food Security
ODA            Official Development Assistance
PDAs           Parastatals, Departments, And Agencies
PER            Public Expenditure Review



                                    iii
PFM       Public Financial Management
PSFS      Public Spending On Fertilizer Subsidy
R&D       Research And Development
RBDA      River Basin Development Authority
ReSAKSS   Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support System
SCRI      Songhai Cross River Initiative
SEEDS     State Economic Empowerment And Development Strategy
SPARC     State Partnership For Accountability, Responsiveness And Capability
SPEED     Statistics For Public Expenditure For Economic Development
SSA       Africa South Of The Sahara
TSA       Treasury Single Account
VAT       Value-Added Tax




                                iv
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This review of agricultural public expenditure in Nigeria involved many institutions, processes,
and individuals. Covering federal, state, and local governments demanded considerable time and
financial resources. We are grateful to the World Bank for providing the necessary financial
resources and to all those who contributed their time in various ways to ensure that the review
was successfully concluded. Procedurally, the World Bank commissioned four consultants to
undertake the review at the federal level and in each of the case study states of Cross River,
Niger, and Ondo. At the same time, the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) was
commissioned to lead the review at the federal and subnational levels, supervising the state
consultants, providing technical support, and interacting with officials at the state and local
government levels, and to produce a report that presents a holistic picture of agricultural public
expenditure in Nigeria.

We are grateful to Stephen Mink and Olayinka Babalola of the World Bank for their
administrative support and guidance throughout the period of the review. Grateful
acknowledgment is due to the Nigerian federal government and to the governments of Cross
River, Niger, and Ondo states for their willingness to provide necessary information as well as
their active participation and cooperation at various stages of the review. Our special thanks go to
the minister of agriculture, the Honorable Akinwumi Adesina; to the director of finance and
administration of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD); and to
other directors in FMARD who supplied information and gave us feedback at seminars and
workshops during the review process. We acknowledge the assistance of officials from the
Budget Office of the Federation, the Office of Accountant General, the Office of Auditor
General, and the Federal Ministries of Water Resources and the Environment, who participated
actively in our seminars and workshops and offered useful suggestions.

We appreciate the cooperation of the commissioner of agriculture and natural resources in Cross
River state, the Honorable James Aniyom; and the chief statistician in the unit of Planning,
Research and Statistics, Christopher Igwe; as well as Enobong Ikong of Akamkpa local
government. We owe a debt of gratitude to Dr. O. Adelola, the secretary to Ondo state
government, for providing an enabling environment for conducting the study. The commissioner
of agriculture in Ondo state, the Honorable Alhaji Lasisi Oluboyo; the permanent secretary of the
ministry, Peter Ogunsuyi; and other members of the steering committee for the study deserve
special commendation. We are also grateful to the permanent secretary of the Ministry of
Economic Planning and Budget, Chris Kolawole, and his counterparts in the Ministry of Finance
and Ministry of Local Government and Chieftaincy Affairs. The head of the department of
agriculture in Odigbo local government and the director of budget showed tremendous
enthusiasm in conducting our research team to project sites and providing relevant data for the
study, and for this we are very grateful.

Special thanks go to the commissioner for agriculture in Niger state, who acted as chairman of the
steering committee for the study; to Zakari Abubakar, who is permanent secretary of the ministry;
and to the committee secretary, Julius S. Karma, who is director of planning, research and
statistics. We express our deep appreciation for the cooperation of members of the committee
who took the time to provide necessary data and participate in focus group discussions. We also
thank the directors of agriculture and of finance and budget of the Wushishi Local Government
Council for helping us to access public expenditure records at the local government level.

We offer immense gratitude to several other individuals who read drafts of this report and made
useful contributions. We also recognize and deeply appreciate the efforts of Tolu Odetayo and



                                                 v
Motunrayo Oyeyemi for the research assistantships they offered at various stages of the review.




                                               vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction and Objectives

Agricultural expenditure is critical to the transformation of the agricultural sector in Nigeria.
Yet spending on agriculture remains at low levels in spite of the sector’s huge potential for
wealth creation, employment generation, and poverty reduction. This report is a summary of
the findings of the Nigeria agricultural public expenditure review (AgPER) at the federal and
subnational levels. The main objectives of this review are to (1) examine the extent to which
the size and composition of public spending on agriculture is consistent with national and
subnational agricultural policies and development priorities, (2) analyze the efficiency and
effectiveness of public resources allocated to agriculture, (3) understand the cross-tier fiscal
and planning relationships between the federal government and subnational governments, (4)
develop a database of public agricultural expenditures at the federal and subnational levels,
and (5) provide recommendations on how to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
public agricultural spending to advance Nigeria’s Agricultural Transformation Agenda
(ATA).

In addition to the federal-level analysis, the review analyzes agricultural public expenditures
in three case study states: (1) Cross River, (2) Niger, and (3) Ondo, and three case study local
government areas (LGAs): (1) Akamkpa, (2) Wushishi, and (3) Odigbo. The analysis at the
federal level covers the period 2008-12, while the subnational-level analysis covers the period
2000-12.

Agriculture in Nigeria’s Economy: Policies and Performance

The policy framework for agricultural development in Nigeria emanates from the 1999
constitution, the 2001 new agricultural policy thrust, the 2004 National Economic
Empowerment and Development Strategy (NEEDS), the seven-point agenda of the Nigeria
Vision 20: 2020 plan, and the ATA. These policy blueprints together provide insights on
national priorities in agriculture, guiding policies, policy strategies, and responsibilities of the
federal, state, and local governments in delivering public agricultural goods and services.

Despite Nigeria’s being rich in oil, agriculture plays a big role in the national economy. In
2012, the sector accounted for 22.4 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), and it
contributed 44.5 percent of the total employment in 2004. The agricultural sector in Nigeria
has been growing continuously in the last decade and increased roughly threefold between
2002 and 2012, while growing annually at a 5.9 percent average growth rate. Agricultural
growth has been driven mainly by production increases due to expansion of the area planted
in key crops, especially roots, tubers, and vegetables. Similarly, agricultural value-added per
worker has increased by the same factor during the same period (World Bank 2014).
However, its share in total GDP has been fluctuating in the last decade while showing a
decline on average, particularly in the period after 2002—indicating that other sectors are
growing faster than agriculture.

Nigeria’s agriculture sector, the biggest in Africa south of the Sahara (SSA), accounts for
two-thirds of West Africa’s agricultural value-added and almost one-third of that of SSA as a
whole. In terms of agricultural value-added per worker, Nigeria performs the best in West
Africa and also outperforms most countries in SSA.

Data Sources and Challenges
                                                vii
Public expenditure data used for this review were obtained at the federal, state, and local
government levels from ministries of agriculture; ministries responsible for agriculture-
related activities; and other key ministries, departments, agencies, and offices responsible for
finance, revenue, budget, planning, and local government affairs. The review applies a
definition of the scope of agriculture based on the United Nations Classification of the
Functions of Government (COFOG).

Several factors challenged the data collection process for this review at the federal and
subnational levels, including (1) use of outdated recording and reporting systems, (2) poor
organization of public expenditure data leading to discrepancies, (3) loss of institutional
memory in many departments due to staff transfers and destruction of account documents
within a short time frame without ensuring proper record keeping, and (4) unavailability of
audited accounts at the local government level.

Main Findings

Public Spending on Agriculture Remains Low by International Standards

The level of public spending on agriculture remains low regardless of the indicator used.
Agricultural spending as a share of total federal spending averaged 4.6 percent over the study
period (2008-12). Budgetary allocation to agriculture compared with other key sectors is also
low despite the sector’s role in the fight against poverty, hunger, and unemployment, and in
the pursuit of economic development.

Compared with many African countries, the government’s expenditure in agriculture as a
share of total government expenditure and in proportion to agricultural GDP is small in
Nigeria. For the period 2000-10, agricultural spending as a share of total spending averaged
only 3.8 percent. This figure is less than the continental average 5.4 percent, the West African
average of 7.4 percent, and the 10 percent target set by the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture
Development Programme (CAADP). However, there is some improvement in the recent past.
Compared with the 1.8 percent share recorded for the period 2000-05 (Mogues, Morris, et al.
2012), the 3.8 percent share of agriculture in total government spending is an improvement.

The share of agricultural spending in total government spending can be taken as an indicator
to measure how much attention the government gives to the sector. However, it does not tell
us how much money the agricultural sector gets vis-à-vis its contribution to the national
economy. In this regard, the standard method for measuring the adequacy of agricultural
spending relative to its contribution to the economy is to measure government spending in
agriculture as a percentage of agricultural GDP, which is called intensity of spending.

On average, there is a positive correlation between government spending in agriculture and
agricultural GDP in many countries, but Nigeria is one of the few outliers. Nigeria’s
government expenditure in agriculture as a percentage of the agricultural GDP is among the
least in SSA, averaging only 1.5 percent between 2000 and 2010. This figure is far less than
the continental average of 9 percent, the West African average of 4.9 percent, and that of
many African countries. In this regard, Nigeria ranks 28th out of the 37 countries in SSA.

In contrast to the low level of public expenditure in Nigerian agriculture, the share of
agriculture in total GDP and growth in agricultural GDP were high and more or less stable
during the same period. In pursuit of the target set by CAADP in 2003, Nigeria has recorded
a more than 6 percent annual average agricultural growth rate between 2003 and 2010 (World
Bank 2014).

Overall, public agricultural spending in Nigeria is among the lowest in West Africa, SSA, and
the world by all dimensions, whether it is measured as a proportion of agricultural GDP, as a
                                              viii
share of total spending, or as a share of official development assistance (ODA) flow. In
contrast, not only is agriculture playing a big role in the Nigerian economy, but the sector is
also growing fast.

Technical Efficiency Is Low at the Subnational Level

Analysis of the technical efficiency of agricultural spending asks whether implementation of
the budget has been effective. Technical efficiency examines (1) the relationships in budget
execution, that is, between planned and actual spending; (2) development and trends in unit
costs; and (3) sources and extent of leakages and wastes. It also reviews key thematic issues,
such as input subsidies, irrigation, and private/public goods. However, some of these
inquiries are beyond of the scope of this AgPER. Additional information is necessary to reach
conclusive findings on the level of technical efficiency in budget execution for the period
2008-12. Nonetheless, current evidence suggests a low level of technical efficiency at the
subnational level.

The findings show that there is a direct relationship between budget performance and the
hierarchical status of the three tiers of government with constitutionally mandated joint
responsibility for agricultural development in Nigeria. In other words, budget execution is
best at the federal level, followed by the state level, and lowest at the local government level.
Budget execution is also directly related to the resources available to each tier of government
based on the revenue sharing formula.

While the average budget execution rate at the federal level seems to be reasonably high, the
rates at the subnational level are quite below international standards. According to the Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability partnership, actual expenditures should not deviate
by more than 10 percent from the budget in order to qualify as efficient budget execution
(World Bank 2011). At the local government level, budget execution in agriculture is both
low and unpredictable. With virtually no allocation in some of the years, it is impossible to
have a meaningful average figure of performance for the case study local governments during
the period under review.

Deviations between budget provisions and actual spending tend to be larger with capital
expenditures that with recurrent ones, as previous AgPERs show (World Bank 2011). In other
words, the tendency is to execute recurrent budget provisions at the expense of capital budget
provisions. This tendency implies that since the last AgPER in Nigeria there has not been
significant improvement in the efficiency of public spending at the subnational level.

Explanations for different levels of budget execution across the three tiers of government and
persistent inefficiency are not limited to variations in available revenue from statutory
sources. For example, besides the problem of dwindling revenue accruable to some states,
diversion of available revenue constitutes a major threat to the states’ fiscal capacities.
Availability of revenue also depends on the level of indebtedness of states. Some debt
repayments are deducted right from source, implying that the net flow of statutory allocation
to states may actually not be adequate to meet their requirements for financing agricultural
development. In recent times, however, many states have begun to conduct verification
exercises of their accounting systems, including staff audits and use of biometrics. The
expectation is that savings in personnel costs arising from discovering fraudulent practices
will be channeled toward offsetting shortfalls in statutory allocations (Olomola 2012).

Poor budget execution occurs for various other reasons. At the federal level, weak executive
capacity leads to delays in budget approval at all stages of the budget cycle and inability to
reverse an unfavorable expenditure trend. Late completion of proposals, untimely legislative
review, and late presidential approval due to disagreements with the legislature are some of
the factors that delay implementation of the capital budget in Nigeria. Such delays in budget
                                              ix
approval make it difficult to meet due process requirements. Delays in the release of funds
from the federation account, cutbacks in federal statutory transfers, unavailability of donor
funds within capital receipts, inability to diversify revenue sources, low and volatile
internally generated revenue, and excessive bureaucratic bottlenecks are some of the factors
that weaken budget execution at the subnational level.

Allocative Efficiency Is Low across the Three Tiers of Government

Analysis of allocative efficiency of public agricultural spending in this review attempts to
address several ancillary questions. Do budget allocations align with national development
objectives and strategies? Do the allocations address identifiable constraints? How has
allocation changed from previous years? What are the relationships between personnel and
overhead expenditures and between recurrent and capital expenditures? Are these
relationships optimal? Did the budget allocate money to the right public expenditure items
between 2008 and 2012? The answers to these questions are mixed.

There is an alignment of agricultural spending at the federal level with development
objectives in 2012. The budget of the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
(FMARD) supported national objectives and strategies by allocating more public resources
than earlier budgets have done. The capital budget allocated resources to support the ATA
priority areas, which in turn show strong links to the national Vision 20: 2020 plan. The 2012
federal budget allocated more than 73 percent of actual capital expenditures to crop
agriculture (trees and crops). Rural development (construction of rural feeder roads) attracted
only about 10 percent of spending. A large part of the expenditure on value chains went to
subsidization of private goods in the form of subsidies for inputs, including fertilizers,
seedlings, and agrochemicals.

The 2012 budget allocations gave fresh impetus to agricultural research. However, the extent
to which it enabled adoption of research findings and technologies is not clear, since FMARD
had no extension services function until 2012. Poor access to credit, an outdated land tenure
system, and inadequate irrigation and storage infrastructure are some of the constraints that
were not addressed by the 2012 budget allocations. Some of these expenditure items, for
example irrigation, are currently outside the control of FMARD.

There is moderate balance between capital and recurrent expenditures at the federal level.
Capital expenditure was 85 percent of the total budget in both 2008 and 2009, when water
spending formed part of agricultural spending. Between 2008 and 2011, it dropped to an
average of about 60 percent, although much higher than the less than 30 percent achieved
economywide. However, capital spending does not always imply investment because a lot of
it is operations spending, subsidy payments, and expenditures that do not create enduring
assets.

Notably, allocative efficiency of the capital budget was higher in 2012 than in the 2008-10
budgets. The nonavailability of 2011 data makes it difficult to determine whether the
observations in 2012 began in 2011, at the commencement of the ATA. It is therefore not
possible to positively assert that the performance in 2012 heralds a sustainable shift in
practice. However, the evidence suggests that there were efforts to support policy objectives
with the 2012 budget. Allocative efficiency of overhead spending was generally poor
between 2008 and 2012 at the federal level. There was a tendency for overhead spending to
be used to support the bureaucracy rather than operations and service delivery. For example,
overhead spending covered nonoperational travel and office utilities, materials, and supplies.
Thus, overhead allocations thus appear to have inadequate links with the functional
allocations of the capital budget.

At the subnational level, the performance of the states in terms of budget execution and the
                                              x
fact that larger deviations than at the national level are experienced between capital and
recurrent budgets show that there is a need to address the quality of spending: (1) an
appropriate balance between capital and recurrent budgets is needed, and (2) within the
recurrent budget, adequate allocation of resources to overhead expenditures needs to be
maintained. Since personnel costs are more or less an obligation that must be fulfilled, room
to maneuver is available only for overhead spending. This does not detract from the fact that
many states do not find it easy to pay staff salaries as and when due, and therefore resort to
borrowing to meet such obligations whenever they experience revenue shortfalls.

There are three intriguing findings in view of the allocation of resources between personnel
and overhead expenditures at the federal and subnational levels: (1) the share of overhead in
recurrent expenditures is generally low across the three tiers of government; (2) slippages in
the budget share and the share in actual spending seem to be within acceptable limits; (3)
between 2008 and 2012, positive deviation was recorded on the average, but only at the
federal level, and it was marginal. The problems of inadequate monitoring facilities in terms
of transportation and other logistics requirements, lack of maintenance of storage
infrastructure, and suspension of some extension activities are some of the indicators of
inefficiency in the allocation of resources.

The Benefits of Public Spending on Fertilizer Subsidy Are Mixed

As part of the AgPER, a benefit incidence analysis of public spending on fertilizer subsidy
was carried out using the 2009/2010 Living Standards Measurement Study–Integrated Survey
on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA) data of the National Bureau of Statistics. The analysis
emphasized ascertaining whether fertilizer subsidy spending is pro-poor or pro-rich and
whether it is progressive (tending to reduce inequality) or regressive (tending to increase
inequality), with a view to gaining insight into the expenditure performance of the subsidy
program based on targeting and equity considerations. The key questions addressed are these:
How pro-poor are the benefits? Are the benefits progressive or regressive? What are the
participation rates? Are there any gender disparities in the distribution of benefits? How do
the benefits differ between rural and urban farmers? How do the benefits vary across
geopolitical zones?

How pro-poor are the benefits?

       Although the distribution of benefits might have been better in rural areas than urban
        areas, it is generally not pro-poor.
       Even though targeting of farmers was generally poor, female farmers benefited more
        than their male counterparts.
       The variation in benefits is far more pronounced on the basis of geopolitical zones
        than on the basis of gender and rural-urban disparities.

Are the benefits progressive or regressive?

       Benefits are progressive in relative terms; that is, the distribution of benefits is more
        equitable than the distribution of income.
       Benefits are regressive in absolute terms; that is, benefits are lower for the lowest
        income groups (poorest) than for the richest.
       Benefits are regressive for both male and female farmers as well as for both urban
        and rural farmers.
       Benefits in the southwest, southeast, and south-south zones are progressive in
        absolute terms.
       Benefits in the northwest, northeast, and north central zones are regressive in
        absolute terms.
                                               xi
What are the participation rates? Are there any gender disparities in the distribution of
benefits? How do the benefits differ between rural and urban farmers? How do the benefits
vary across geopolitical zones?

       On the aggregate, the participation rate of the program is 43.1 percent in the country.
       The participation rate is marginally higher in rural areas (43.2 percent) than in urban
        areas (42.2 percent).
       The participation rate has a remarkable gender disparity—it is higher for male
        farmers (45.6 percent) than for female farmers (24.9 percent).
       In general, participation rates increase as welfare increases, and this is true in each of
        the regions—that is, the rates are higher among higher-income groups than among
        lower-income groups.

In light of the above findings, it is safe to conclude that the target population of the fertilizer
subsidy program has not benefited as intended. In absolute terms, the benefit is regressive,
implying lower benefits to the poorest compared with the relatively well-to-do groups. The
findings tend to have substantiated the rationale for reform of the fertilizer subsidy program,
which began in 2011, seeking to ensure that subsidy spending is better targeted and indeed
delivered directly to farmers. It remains to be seen, however, whether the subsidy transfer is
indeed pro-poor and whether the delivery is actually effective judging by the participation
rate of small-scale farmers, who are expected to be direct beneficiaries. An application of this
type of benefit incidence analysis to the input subsidy program under the current Growth
Enhancement Support Scheme (GESS) is therefore instructive, considering that resources
allocated to the program are far greater now than they were during the last couple of years
preceding the reform, and also considering the implications of the program on the overall
budget of the agricultural sector.

The Agricultural Sector Has Been Largely Underfunded

The share of agricultural spending in total spending at the federal and subnational levels
indicates an already low commitment to agriculture that has been on the decline over the
years. Agriculture’s share of the total budget at the federal level followed a declining trend
from 2008 to 2011 and moved upward in 2012 but still fell below the 2008 level. Even
though the level of commitment seemed to be higher at the federal level, on average, during
the period 2008-12, the downward trend in spending was common to both the federal and
subnational levels.

The waning commitment of governments at all levels to invest in the agricultural sector is
further revealed when the relationship between agricultural GDP and agricultural public
spending in the country is assessed. Whereas agricultural GDP followed an increasing trend
annually from 2008 to 2012, agricultural public spending was trending downward
precipitously. This paradox is an indication that the agricultural sector was underfunded
during the period. It is little wonder, therefore, that the sector remains a dominant form of
livelihood for the poor, while at the same time huge opportunities and resource endowments
remain untapped.

The trend of agricultural public spending as percentage of agricultural GDP is used to explain
the intensity of spending during the period under review. Between 2008 and 2009, when GDP
was growing, intensity of spending was also moving in the same positive direction. However,
whereas GDP maintained an increasing trend thereafter, spending intensity was declining and
plunged from about 3 percent in 2010 to merely 1 percent in 2012.

By and large, these two indicators, government commitment to agricultural investment and
intensity of spending, show that the agricultural sector has witnessed considerable

                                                xii
underfunding during the period under review. Both indicators followed a downward trend
that highlights the enormity of the neglect of the sector over the years. Government
commitment was at a very low level and trending downward over the period, while at the
same time intensity of spending nosedived dramatically. The vigor that has been put into
reviving the sector and promoting investment from various sources since 2012 is indeed well
deserved and well timed. Given the initial conditions of funding neglect, the commitment of
the authorities to transform the sector and to attract private-sector investment from within and
outside the country provides a ray of hope that in the medium to long term, the growth and
development of the sector will be accorded priority in the real sense of providing funding to
capitalize, modernize, and industrialize the sector. This will enable agriculture to fulfill its
role of economic diversification, wealth creation, and employment generation.

Subnational Agricultural Spending Has Been Increasing

The subnational government has been making a substantial contribution to agricultural
spending. Between 2008 and 2012 the proportion of budgetary allocation to agriculture at the
subnational level has been rising steadily above that of the federal level and, on average,
stood at 62.41 percent over the period. In terms of actual spending, however, the proportion at
the subnational level (47.19 percent) is much lower than at the federal level. This implies that
although the intention to finance agriculture is rather pronounced at the subnational level,
translating that intention into reality has been far more challenging at the subnational level
than at the federal level. In terms of resource allocation to the totality of sectors, the
contribution at the subnational level has been generally higher for both budget and actual
spending. This finding is a reflection of both the different priorities of the various tiers of
government in the allocation of resources for development purposes and the variation in
commitment to agricultural development.

Key Recommendations

Improve the Level and Composition of Public Spending

All tiers of government—federal, state, and local—should increase spending to develop the
agricultural sector. This can be achieved by strengthening weak absorptive capacity by
upgrading the skill of budget officers through training. This will in turn free more funds that
can be effectively deployed in critical areas of need and also create an enabling environment
for more budgetary allocation and actual spending.

State governments should establish revenue stabilization mechanisms to address volatility in
statutory transfers and internally generated revenue (IGR) flows. Specifically, the state
government can establish a revenue stabilization fund. The state house of assembly needs to
pass necessary legislation to provide legal backing for its operations.

The state and local governments should step up efforts to increase IGR so as to reduce
overdependence on allocations from the federation account. This can be done by
strengthening the tax base and intensifying revenue collection drives. The mass media can be
used to sensitize potential taxpayers to be true to their civic responsibility of paying their
taxes at the appropriate time to government coffers.

Enhance the Effectiveness and Efficiency of Public Spending

All tiers of government should establish effective monitoring frameworks for budget
implementation. Funds should be provided in the budget for the monitoring of projects.
Reports of monitoring exercises should be used to refine and strengthen expenditure
decisions for better results.
                                        xiii
Procurement and cash management processes should be strengthened to enhance value and
avoid rushed commitments. Specifically, FMARD, the Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF),
and the Office of the Head of Civil Service need to work together to identify bottlenecks
created by the procurement process in the implementation of projects, identify skill gaps of
procurement officers, and finance the training of the officers who are found to be deficient.

FMARD, FMF, and similar agencies at the subnational level should embark on strengthening
absorptive capacity in the ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) by working together
to determine skill gaps and finance the training of relevant budget officers. Through its
oversight mechanisms, the Office of the Head of Civil Service, along with the legislative arm
of government, will also have a role to play in this regard. The complexity in this process
notwithstanding, it should be noted that unless urgent and decisive steps are taken to
strengthen absorptive capacity in the public sector, insofar as public spending is concerned, it
may not be possible to work toward a significant increase in the efficiency of agricultural
public spending in Nigeria.

Public-private partnership is highly recommended for the financing of new dam and irrigation
projects. The federal government should articulate partnerships with state governments and
the private sector in this regard.

Government should refrain from unrealistic or overambitious budgeting. In preparing
budgets, government must avoid biting off more than it can chew. More often than not,
budget estimates are by far too ambitious vis-à-vis the actual funds expended. Allocative
efficiency can be improved by making budgetary allocations to agriculture more realistic,
adopting the philosophy of cutting one’s coat according to the cloth rather than according to
one’s size.

Improve the Budget Process

The three tiers of government should adopt a system of collaboration in agricultural
development agenda setting and joint financing of projects to minimize waste of financial
resources.

At the budget preparation stage, policy linkages and interagency collaboration are needed
among FMARD; the Federal Ministry of Water Resources (FMWR); the Federal Ministry of
Industry, Trade, and Investment (FMTI); and the Federal Ministry of Environment (FMEnv).
These ministries need to streamline and reconcile their budgets to allow joint financing and
proper coordination to achieve the desired objectives.

Government at all levels should eliminate delays in the budget process. This can be achieved
by stipulating specific time frames to accomplish the tasks at different stages of the budget
cycle.

The National Assembly should enact a budget process act for the federal government, and
each state house of assembly should enact one at the state level to give legal backing to the
stipulated time frames relating to budget preparation, approval, and implementation.

Strengthen the Information System for Agriculture Public Expenditure Management




                                              xiv
Since the dearth of information is likely to undermine the effectiveness of the budget as an
economic management tool, government at all levels should come to grips with this
challenge. In order to improve the flow of information and availability of necessary data for
improved expenditure management, the following actions are recommended.

The federal government should establish and mainstream functional financial management
information systems (Government Integrated Financial Management Information System
[GIFMIS], Integrated Personnel and Payroll Information System [IPPIS], and Treasury
Single Account [TSA]) for improved record keeping and information retrieval. Meaningful
economic planning hinges on accurate and up-to-date data. It is recommended that
governments at both state and local government levels set up an institution responsible for
keeping financial and other relevant records for state and local government authorities.
Budget records, along with other government records, should be stored in electronic form
managed by an information and communication technology (ICT) manager. This will ease the
difficulties MDAs have in accessing public financial records.

The federal and state governments should adopt proper classification of expenditure items
and embark on regular documentation of spending. At the federal and state levels,
government should provide funds for upgrading the capacity of budget officers in MDAs and
projects through regular training to improve their understanding of proper classification of
expenditure items and documentation of budgetary transactions.

FMARD should establish an agriculture expenditure database, which should be supervised
and updated regularly by the Department of Finance and Accounts. All parastatals of
FMARD as well as regional and state offices should be provided with templates to capture
spending on various aspects of their operations, and they should submit data to FMARD
headquarters quarterly.

Conclusions

Despite the importance of the agricultural sector in the Nigerian economy and the priority
often accorded it in development strategies, the sector remains grossly underfunded.
Fortunately, it has been growing steadily in recent times. The impact of growth in the sector
would have been more pronounced if the level of investment had been commensurate with
the huge potentials in various agroecological zones of the country.

Public investment has been stifled by the lopsided manner in which national revenue is being
allocated among the three tiers of government that have responsibility for the development of
agriculture. Invariably allocation of budgetary resources remains inefficient at various levels
of government.

Subnational governments rely heavily on statutory allocations from the federation account to
finance their budgets. Delays in concluding the transfer arrangements and periodic oil
revenue shocks often account for delays or outright nonrelease of funds for budget
implementation. Therefore, technical inefficiency in public spending has been more prevalent
at the subnational level than the federal level.

In relative terms, the problem of technical inefficiency is far more acute than that of
allocative efficiency. Whereas the 2012 capital budget performance shows some
improvement in this regard, allocative efficiency of recurrent expenditures (especially
overhead expenditures) is still a big challenge. The problem is exacerbated by the difficulty
(almost impossibility) of identifying specific overhead items to be associated directly with the
capital budget. This is not unique to the agricultural sector. It is a general problem with the

                                              xv
public expenditure reporting format in the country that must be corrected.

Analysis of information about the share and magnitude of public expenditure on agriculture
in Nigeria is often based solely on public spending by the federal government. This approach
is not tenable anymore. Even though the federal government’s share of the federation account
is almost double that of the states, spending on agriculture does not follow the same pattern of
lopsidedness. This indicates the desirability that states commit to proper documentation of
expenditure activities for effective monitoring and better performance of the agricultural
budget.

Finally, it is important to stress that despite their constitutional mandate to develop
agriculture, local governments have no capacity to formulate policies; neither do they have
the financial independence to meaningfully execute agricultural budgets.




                                              xvi
1. INTRODUCTION
  1.1. Background
1.       Expenditure in agriculture is critical to the transformation of the agricultural sector in Nigeria,
especially in view of the low level of investment in the sector in spite of its huge potentials for wealth
creation, employment generation, and poverty alleviation. Nigeria is the largest country in Africa in
terms of population (177 million) and territorially among the largest, with a total land area of 910,770
km2. Nigeria has the 27th biggest economy in the world, with a GDP of US$523 billion; its per capita
GDP was US$3,010 in 2013 (World Bank 2014). Agriculture is considered to be the sector with the
greatest potential for pro-poor growth in the country. A large proportion of the agricultural labor force is
engaged in subsistence farming rather than large-scale commercial agriculture, which has greater
potential for accelerating economic growth. As recent poverty studies show, agriculture is the main
source of livelihood for Nigeria’s rural population. Moreover, a higher level of poverty is observed
among households whose primary source of income is agriculture. Various studies, including the World
Development Report on agriculture (World Bank 2007), assert that effective resource allocation to the
agricultural sector, such as for the delivery of services like extension, credit, research and development
(R&D), and plant and livestock disease control, are critical to the strong performance of the agricultural
sector. Yet on average, less than 4 percent of total public spending in Nigeria is allocated to agriculture.
This is far below the CAADP target whereby African governments are expected to allocate a minimum
of 10 percent of their national budgets to agriculture.

2.      In Nigeria, intensity of public spending in agriculture—measured by percentage of agricultural
expenditure in agricultural GDP—is among the lowest in the world. When we compare Nigeria with
other federal states in the world (Table 1.1), intensity of public spending in Nigerian agriculture, at 1.5
percent, is far less than that of all the federal states considered. However, it needs to be noted that public
spending in Nigeria is generally low (accounting for only 13.3 percent of the total GDP, while this figure
for the majority of the federal states is above 20 percent), which partially contributes to the low
performance.

Table 1.1: Indicators of the extent of agricultural public spending in Nigeria as compared with other
federal states, average 2000-10

                                                                                               % of
                                   Agricultural       % share of                            agricultural
  Country           Region        expenditure in     agriculture in   % of total           expenditure in
                                      2005               total      expenditure in          agricultural
                                    US$million         spending       total GDP                GDP
Brazil           LAC                       4,752                2.4           21.5                     8.9
Ethiopia         SSA                         361               11.9           24.1                     5.7
India            South Asia                8,604                6.0           15.6                     5.0
Malaysia         EAP                       1,523                4.1           24.7                    11.3
Mexico           LAC                       4,123                2.7           18.0                    12.5
Nepal            South Asia                   82                5.8           16.4                     2.7
Nigeria          SSA                         583                3.8           13.3                     1.5
Pakistan         South Asia                  569                2.5           18.5                     2.2
Russian
Federation       ECA                         1,409               0.8               25.1                 3.6
Venezuela        LAC                           380               1.0               26.0                 6.5
Source: Authors’ computation using IFPRI (2014).
Notes: EAP = East Asia Pacific; ECA = Europe Central Asia; GDP = gross domestic product; LAC = Latin
American countries, SSA = Africa south of the Sahara.

3.       The public sector in Nigeria still plays a major role in providing and financing agricultural
services, although private service providers are also central, for example in input supply and output
processing and marketing. As in other countries, the public sector involved in agricultural investments in
Nigeria is not monolithic but consists, horizontally, of different agencies and parastatals, as well as
vertically of different tiers of government, that is, the federal, state, and local governments. Specifically,
the 36 states of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, the Federal Capital Territory, and the 774 local
governments in Nigeria all perform a critical role in service delivery and public expenditure outcomes.

4.       However, the roles and responsibilities of the three tiers of government in public spending
decisions are not clearly delineated, a situation that leads to overlaps and gaps in the provision of
agricultural services (Mogues, Morris, et al. 2012). Specifically, it is not clear how responsibilities for
activities such as research, extension, and input supply are allocated across government tiers. Moreover,
it remains vague which government tier has the authority for certain coordination functions such as
financing, and agricultural services provision, and standard setting. The government, including FMARD,
is now keenly aware of the importance of coherence of public spending across government tiers. Part of
the ATA, driven by FMARD, is focused on driving income growth, accelerating the achievement of food
and nutrition security, generating employment, and creating wealth for farmers. Among the initiatives
under the ATA, efforts are being made to deconcentrate FMARD in order to achieve better coordination
across federal, state, and local governments on agricultural policy in general and agricultural public
spending in particular.1

5.      Although the ATA is being driven and coordinated by the federal government, it will require the
support and cooperation of state and local governments in coordinating operations in each state and
LGA, harmonizing subnational-level spending in agriculture to federal-level spending, and aligning
agricultural policies at the subnational level with federal policies. In light of the World Bank’s intention
to support the ATA with a US$200 million LGA development policy lending operation, it is critical that
a public expenditure review (PER) focusing on the agricultural sector be carried out at both the federal
and subnational levels. Such a review would be incomplete without an understanding of the policies,
processes, and procedures guiding the allocation of public resources to agriculture at the federal, state,
and local government levels in Nigeria. Thus, this AgPER seeks to understand the features of public
spending in the agricultural sector in the context of Nigeria’s federal structure and decentralized system.
Specifically, the review aims to do the following:

          Examine the extent to which the level and composition of public spending in the agricultural
           sector is consistent with both national and subnational priorities
          Analyze the efficiency of public resource allocation to agriculture in line with stated priorities at
           the federal and subnational levels
          Understand the flow of funds between the federal, state, and the local governments as well as the
           level of autonomy granted to local governments in the formulation of policy, the design of
           projects and programs, and the allocation of funds to implement the local government budget
          Develop a database of public expenditures in agriculture for the federal and subnational levels.
           The database will include a decomposition of public expenditures by economic (such as capital
           versus recurrent and wage versus nonwage) and functional classifications. It will also include
           expenditures on fertilizer subsidy programs, any implicit subsidies, and agricultural credit
           programs
          Provide recommendations on how to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public
           agricultural spending in and contribute to the analytical work for the proposed US$200 million

1
    More details on this organizational restructuring is available in Nigeria, FMARD (2011b).

                                                               2
        development policy lending operation to support Nigeria’s ATA

  1.2. Rationale for Public Expenditure in Agriculture
6.       The rationale for public investment in the agricultural sector emanates from the fundamental
justifications for public-sector intervention in the economy. The most common arguments for public-
sector involvement in the economy can be summarized into two: the market failure argument and the
inequality/poverty argument. According to the market failure argument, sometimes the particular
characteristics of goods and services and the information asymmetries about these goods and services
and about market actors bring economic inefficiency that can be corrected only through government, or
generally public, interventions in the form of regulation, subsidy, and production. Similarly, there could
be undesirable levels of inequality and poverty—that negatively affect the capabilities of the poorest
segment of the population—that need to be corrected through public policy interventions (Mogues, Yu,
et al. 2012).

7.        Market failures are prevalent in developing economies and especially common in the
agricultural sector of such economies. For instance, there are some agricultural public goods—such as
agricultural technology and scientific knowledge—that are essential for the development of the
agricultural sector but cannot be produced by the private sector at a socially optimal level due to the
nonrivalry and nonexcludability nature of the goods. These features of agricultural technologies can be
taken as a rationale for public-sector involvement in agricultural R&D. Similarly, in the presence of
positive externalities—in which the producer does not capture the full value the product—or negative
externalities—in which the producer does not cover the full cost of production—the market produces too
little or too much of the product, both of which are socially suboptimal levels. For example, increased
use of fertilizer can reduce soil erosion, deforestation, and the need for expansion of agriculture into
marginal lands, but these benefits of fertilizer use cannot be fully captured by fertilizer users. This
imbalance calls for public intervention in the form of subsidies in the fertilizers market (Mogues, Yu, et
al. 2012).

8.       Information asymmetries and imperfect information could result in market failures in the
agricultural sector as well as in other sectors that have relevance for agricultural sector. A good example
to show how imperfect information and information asymmetries distort markets is agricultural
insurance and credit markets. Since insurers and creditors don’t have full information about the degree of
risk each farmer faces and about each farmer’s creditworthiness, they set a common premium and
interest rate based on an average level of risk and creditworthiness. This causes lower-risk and
creditworthy farmers not to accept the contract and results in a high concentration of high-risk and non-
creditworthy farmers in the agricultural insurance and credit markets, a situation called adverse
selection; this condition further leads to rounds of adverse selection and renders the agricultural
insurance and credit markets thin or totally absent. In this case, imperfect information calls for public
intervention in the agricultural insurance and credit markets (Mogues, Yu, et al. 2012).

9.       Since in many developing countries the poorest segment of the population gets its livelihood
from agriculture, the inequality and poverty argument for government intervention can also be taken as a
rationale for public investment in agriculture. As indicated in The State of Food and Agriculture, the
2012 annual report of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), smallholding
farmers usually face extreme poverty and weak property rights, have poor access to markets and
financial services, are vulnerable to shocks, and have limited ability to endure risk (FAO 2012). Public
policy interventions to address poverty in the agrarian population take various forms including direct
transfer of cash, food and other in-kind transfers, subsidization of production costs for poor farmers, and
gearing agricultural research toward improving the productivity of smallholders (Mogues, Yu, et al.
2012). Similarly, facilitating the formation of effective producer organizations is indicated as one
possible intervention to overcome the constraints smallholders face in relation to access to markets,

                                                        3
natural resources, and financial services (FAO 2012).

10.      As indicated in the 2008 World Development Report, past policy reforms on trade, price, and
subsidy have improved price incentives for agricultural producers in developing countries. However, the
report says there is still considerable space for further policy improvements and suggests the need for
further trade liberalization in agriculture. The report also indicates the costs associated with liberalization
and argues for complementary policies and programs to compensate losers due to liberalization and to
facilitate rapid and equitable adjustment to emerging comparative advantages. Similarly, it also points
out that supply response to trade reforms depends on the availability of core public goods such as
irrigation, roads, R&D, education, and associated institutional support. Both of these measures call for an
increase in public investment in agriculture as well as improvement in the quality and efficiency of the
spending. Moreover, in the face of dynamic new markets as well as far-reaching technological and
institutional innovations, there is a need for coordination of effort and a comprehensive approach beyond
price adjustment and public investment (World Bank 2007).

11.      Today, private entrepreneurs are leading the emerging new agriculture. Agricultural products are
passing through extensive value chains that link producers to consumers and include many
entrepreneurial smallholders supported by their organizations. New markets are emerging for staple
agricultural crops and traditional export commodities, and they are becoming more differentiated to meet
changing consumer demands, accommodate new uses, and exploit benefits from regional market
integration. In this new context, the role of the state and other actors in the economy is being redefined.
In addition to correcting market failures and regulating competition, the state needs to be engaged in
strategic public-private partnerships in order to promote competitiveness in the agribusiness sector and to
make sure that smallholders, rural workers, and disadvantaged groups including women, tribal groups,
and youth are able to take part (World Bank 2007).

12.     Moreover, today there is a consensus that agriculture continues to be a major instrument for
sustainable development and poverty reduction, and promoting agriculture is taken as vital for meeting
the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving poverty and hunger by 2015 and continuing to
reduce poverty and hunger for several decades thereafter. The 2008 World Development Report gives
three reasons for the importance of agriculture, which complement each other: (1) three of every four
poor people in developing countries live in rural areas, where 2.1 billion live on less than US$2 a day
and 880 million on less than US$1 a day; (2) most of these people depend on agriculture for their
livelihoods; and (3) although agriculture alone will not be enough to massively reduce poverty, it has
been demonstrated to be uniquely powerful for that task (World Bank 2007).

13.      In order to implement the agriculture-for-development agenda and due to the new roles of the
state in the emerging new agriculture, there is an urgent need to strengthen the capacity of the state. In
addition to coordinating across sectors and partnering with the private sector and civil society,
implementation of the agriculture-for-development agenda also requires coordination across ministries.
The agenda is cross-sectoral and encompasses both agricultural and nonagricultural issues of
development. At the national level, ministries of agriculture are trending toward trying to build coalitions
across all the stakeholders of development. To this end, in most countries, ministries of agriculture are
under reform in order to redefine their roles, change their structure, and develop new capacities that fit
their new roles (World Bank 2007).

14.     It should also be noted that there is some rolling back of the boundaries of the state. For
instance, agricultural advisory services that require public finance but not necessarily public provision
are increasingly being contracted out. Similarly, public-private partnership goes beyond outsourcing and
creating joint responsibility for financing and provision of agricultural services and rural infrastructure.
There are also areas where service cooperatives and producer organizations are effectively providing
pro-poor agricultural services. Management authority over irrigation and natural resources is widely

                                                           4
being devolved to user groups. Certain activities that do not necessarily require state involvement are
being left to the private sector (World Bank 2007).

15.      Public spending in agriculture could come from both domestic and external sources. One major
domestic source of public investment in agriculture is government expenditures, which include spending
in a range of areas including administration supervision and regulation; agrarian reform; agricultural land
settlement, development, and expansion; food control; farm price and income stabilization programs;
extension, veterinary, pest control, crop inspection, and crop grading services; production and
dissemination of general and technical information on agriculture; and compensation, grants, loans, and
subsidies to farmers. The other important domestic public spending in agriculture is on R&D, which
includes spending on research on different subsectors of agriculture and socioeconomic aspects of
primary production as well as research on on-farm, postharvest activities and food processing. The major
foreign source of public investment in agriculture is ODA, which is also used to finance most of the
activities mentioned above (FAO 2012).

16.     When we look at the actual impact of public investment in agriculture, evidence shows that
returns on agricultural R&D investments are high and there is significant underinvestment in the R&D
subsector. Similarly, R&D public investment is found to be a high performer in terms of both improving
agricultural outcomes and reducing poverty. However, when we compare returns on other types of
investments in agriculture—such as in irrigation, extension, and markets—results are mixed, and public
investments in agriculture can result in modest returns in aggregate. Similarly, because the impact of
different functional investments in agriculture may vary in magnitude, the returns on agricultural public
spending might also differ according to the commodity being targeted (FAO 2012).

17.      Moreover, investment in agriculture has significant and observable effects on health and
nutrition through access to own-produced food, by lowering food prices, and by raising incomes with
which to buy more food, more nutritious food, and health services (FAO 2012).


  1.3. Methodology

18.      Essentially, this AgPER is diagnostic, with emphasis on examining the size, composition,
efficiency, and effectiveness of agriculture public spending rather than its impact. The focus is not on
causality but rather on understanding the performance of public spending with a view to identifying the
nature of and ways of improving the key indicators. Thus, analytically, we adopt a methodological
framework that is consistent with the standard guidance provided by the PER tool kit of the World Bank
(2011). Specifically, it adopts a budget cycle framework focused on sector policies and development
strategies, budget allocation, budget execution, and effectiveness. This involves the use of basic
indicators for AgPERs such as levels of public spending, relative size of agricultural spending,
functional composition of expenditure, economic composition of public spending (allocative efficiency),
and a succinct description of the budgeting process.


1.3.1. Geographic Coverage

19.      Previous studies suggest that the role of subnational governments in overall public spending is
potentially large. According to the World Bank (2007), for example, state and local governments account
for about 46 percent of public spending across all sectors in Nigeria. The share of subnational
agricultural spending in total agricultural spending may possibly be even higher than that, given that
there is a relatively stronger role for state and local governments in agriculture as compared with several
other sectors such as energy, defense, or certain types of infrastructure. However, resource constraints


                                                        5
hinder this AgPER from covering a large number of states and LGAs; thus a case study approach is used.

20.      In addition to the federal-level analysis, the review provides an analysis of agricultural public
expenditures in three case study states: (1) Cross River, (2) Niger, and (3) Ondo. The review also covers
three case study LGAs in the three states: (1) Akamkpa LGA in Cross River state, (2) Wushishi LGA in
Niger state, and (3) Odigbo LGA in Ondo state. The states were selected on the basis of existing
cooperation between the states and the World Bank, the importance of agriculture in the state economies,
a need to obtain perspectives from different geographical zones in Nigeria, and the fact that public
expenditure management systems in these states are relatively well developed in comparison with other
states in Nigeria. The case study LGAs were selected based on similar criteria, including relevance of
agriculture to the LGA’s economy; anticipated good cooperation of the relevant LGA government
offices; and the core socioeconomic, infrastructure, and agroclimatic characteristics that make the
selected LGA fairly typical in the state. The period covered in this review is from 2008 to 2012.

1.3.2. Data Sources and Collection

21.      The data used for this AgPER were obtained at the federal, state, and local government levels
from ministries of agriculture; ministries responsible for agriculture-related activities; and other key
ministries, departments, agencies, and offices responsible for finance, revenue, budget, planning, and
local government affairs. This AgPER is guided by a definition of the scope and classification of
agriculture based on the United Nations COFOG. The COFOG-based agricultural sector scope and
decomposition is specifically that of the CAADP definition of agriculture as articulated in the guidance
note for agriculture expenditure tracking systems in African countries (AU and NEPAD 2005). Under
this definition, agriculture covers crop and livestock production as well as production (not conservation)
of forestry and fisheries. 2 Public expenditures include annual and supplementary appropriations,
including revisions, special presidential initiatives, and transfers or grants received from the federal
government or any other federal agency. Off-budget public expenditures from donor agencies such as the
World Bank, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), African Development Bank, and
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation were also included.

22.      The core data, which comprise both budget and actual expenditures on agriculture, were
analyzed based on economic and functional classifications. Public finance data, as well public
expenditure data from other key sectors, were also used as appropriate. As stated above, the functional
classification sought to follow the COFOG classification. In many instances, however, expenditures
were available only disaggregated by subsectors (such as crops, livestock, fisheries, and so on), rather
than subfunctions (agricultural research, extension, input subsidies, and so on), with functional
classification available for some subsectors but not others. Similarly, economic classification categories
differed in the extent to which functional breakdown was available. For example, capital expenditures
were more ready available at a level of detail that allowed for a functional or quasi-functional
breakdown, while recurrent expenditures in most cases could not be broken down in this way. The
various subsectors covered (crops, livestock, forestry, and fisheries) involve multiple agencies in
Nigeria, in particular FMARD, FMWR, and FMEnv, autonomous agricultural research institutes, and so
on. They also include some nonfederal government agencies that execute federal programs on food
security and on input subsidies such as fertilizer and seedlings. 3 Some of these agencies are state
government owned. However, the scope of the sector excludes construction of rural roads, which
FMARD sometimes undertakes. The definition covers all qualifying expenditures, whether on-budget

2
  COFOG also includes hunting in its scope, though this area has not been found to apply in any nontrivial way in
the empirical context of this report.
3
  Examples include state ministries and agencies collaborating on the implementation of federal programs such as
the National Programme for Food Security, distribution of fertilizers and inputs, administration of agricultural
finance, and the like.

                                                            6
items or off-budget expenditures on public goods, the latter mostly directly donor-financed projects.

23.      At the subnational level, the data collection approach involved strong participation of the
government. The review was carried out in close collaboration with counterparts in state-level and local
government–level ministries and offices responsible for agriculture and agriculture-related activities,
budget, planning, finance, and local government affairs, among other government agencies. The Ministry
of Agriculture in each state set up a steering committee composed of representatives from the above-
mentioned state- and local-government ministries and offices to ensure ownership and facilitate data
collection and uptake of policy recommendations that may emanate from the review.

24.      Prior to the commencement of the data collection process, all key stakeholders were briefed on
the purpose and proposed outputs of the AgPER, and specific milestones and timelines were agreed
upon. During the stakeholder briefing in each case study state, the local government to be studied was
selected based on the core criteria mentioned earlier through a process initiated by the research team and
counterpart state officials. Also at the briefing, state officials assigned counterpart staff to work with the
research team. To ensure the validity of the AgPER results at the federal and subnational levels and to
allow for feedback, a technical review and validation workshop for the analyses at the federal, state, and
local government levels was held as soon as preliminary findings were available. Following the
harmonization of the federal and subnational analyses, the major stakeholders were brought together in a
debriefing seminar for an exchange of views on the emerging results. Thereafter, the report was
processed for final technical validation by a larger audience to accommodate a second round of feedback
prior to finalization of the review.

1.3.3. Data Challenges

25.     Data gathering for this AgPER was quite challenging at both the federal and subnational levels.
At the federal level, a major challenge was the loss of institutional memory in the finance and planning
departments due to mass transfers and reposting of staff. Thus, it was impossible to obtain expenditure
data from the current, but outdated, Accounting Transactions Recording and Reporting System. In
addition, technology upgrades and migration to better platforms such as GIFMIS and IPPIS caused
additional transition difficulties that introduced considerable delays to the data collection process. Since
expenditure data had to be obtained from individual departments, discrepancies between published
financial statements and aggregates from individual submissions by departments were inevitable.
Furthermore, not all departments and agencies complied with the request to provide data.

26.      These difficulties in data collection derive partly from complexities in institutional coordination.
Given the absence of a functioning steering committee for the federal-level work, some of the data
challenges encountered were difficult to overcome though not totally insurmountable. A committee
comprising FMARD, FMF, the Budget Office of the Federation, and Office of the Accountant General
might have assisted in resolving some of these constraints by contributing to the ownership of the data
collection process and facilitating it. In addition, an inception workshop to agree on goals, processes,
roles, and responsibilities could have been useful. Assistance from these agencies individually eventually
offered some succor, although with considerable delays.

27.     Data collection was equally challenging at the subnational level, particularly in the LGAs.
Examples of specific constraints include (1) inconsistency of data collected from different sources; (2)
poor organization of data, particularly with regard to public expenditures; (3) use of a traditional ledger
system for bookkeeping, which is not systematic and precise; (4) poor attitude of keeping and preserving
data due to the practice of destruction of account documents, particularly voting books, after three to five
years; and (5) unavailability of audited accounts at the local government level. Nevertheless, efforts were
made to ensure that the data used for the study came from credible sources. In addition to the data
collected from the case study states, data from secondary sources such as the World Development

                                                          7
Report, Statistics for Public Expenditure for Economic Development (SPEED), and State Partnership for
Accountability, Responsiveness and Capability (SPARC) were used as appropriate in various parts of the
analyses.




                                                      8
2. STRUCTURE, PERFORMANCE, AND POLICIES OF AGRICULTURE IN NIGERIA
  2.1. Sector Description
28.     Although Nigeria is a mineral- and oil-rich country, agriculture plays a big role in the national
economy. In 2012, the sector accounted for 22.4 percent of GDP, and it contributed 44.5 percent of total
employment in 2004. The agricultural sector in Nigeria has been growing continuously in the last decade
and increased roughly threefold between 2002 and 2012 while growing annually at a 5.9 percent average
growth rate. Similarly, agricultural value-added per worker has increased by the same factor during the
same period (World Bank 2014).

29.      As shown by the solid line in Figure 2.1, agricultural GDP has been growing continuously
throughout the past two decades. However, as depicted by the dotted line, its share in total GDP has been
fluctuating throughout while showing a decline on average—indicating that other sectors are growing
faster than agriculture. Particularly, the share of agriculture in total GDP has substantially declined since
2002.

Figure 2.1: Trend in agricultural GDP and its share

                                             16,000                                                                     60%
  Value-added ( in billions, constant LCU)




                                             14,000
                                                                                                                        50%
                                             12,000




                                                                                                                               Value-added (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                        40%
                                             10,000

                                              8,000                                                                     30%

                                              6,000
                                                                                                                        20%
                                              4,000
                                                                              Agriculture, value-added (constant LCU)   10%
                                              2,000
                                                                              Agriculture, value-added (% of GDP)
                                                 0                                                                      0%


                                                                                   Year
Source: Authors’ graph using World Bank (2014).
Notes: GDP = gross domestic product; LCU = local currency unit.

30.     Agricultural production in Nigeria consists of crop, livestock, fishery, and forestry production
(Table 2.1). In terms of subsector contribution as a proportion of total agricultural sector contribution to
GDP, crop production captures the largest share. In 2012, provisional estimates from the Central Bank of
Nigeria show that crop production accounted for close to 88 percent of total GDP from agriculture,
followed by livestock production (CBN 2014).

                                              Table 2.1: Quantity and growth of agricultural production by subsector in Nigeria, 2002-12

                                              Subsector                            2002                       2012            % change
                                                                                                                                                        9
        Crops (metric tons)
        Roots and tubers                  69,459,000              100,000,000                 44.0
        Cereals                           21,373,000               26,333,000                 23.2
        Vegetables                         8,673,803               11,940,600                 37.7
        Fruits and nuts                   10,372,179               11,898,500                 14.7
        Oil crops                          2,631,105                2,880,568                  9.5
        Pulses                             2,404,789                2,560,000                  6.5
        Fiber crops                          151,116                  112,888                -25.3
        Livestock (metric tons)
        Indigenous meat                     1,168,366               1,491,163                 27.6
        Eggs                                  450,000                 640,000                 42.2
        Milk                                  408,200                 566,000                 38.7
        Sheep and goat meat                   372,207                 469,075                 26.0
        Beef and buffalo meat                 357,425                 390,000                  9.1
        Poultry meat                          190,000                 290,000                 52.6
        Fisheries (metric tons)
        Diadrom fish                          187,242                 312,009                 66.6
        Demersal fish                         114,823                 146,918                 28.0
        Pelagic fish                          112,283                 142,837                 27.2
        Crustaceans                            35,711                  31,976                -10.5
        Marine fish, other                     28,152                  29,677                  5.4
        Mollusks                                2,426                   4,842                 99.6
        Cephalopods                               419                     495                 18.1
        Forestry (m3)
        Wood fuel                          60,064,328              63,999,115                  6.6
        Industrial roundwood                9,418,000               9,418,000                  0.0
        Sawn wood                           2,000,000               2,002,000                  0.1
        Wood-based panels                      95,000                  97,000                  2.1
        Wood pulp                              23,000                  23,000                  0.0
        Paper and paperboard                   19,000                  19,000                  0.0
        Source: Authors’ data compilation using FAO (2014).


31.      In the crop subsector, the relative importance of root and tuber crops is high when compared with
cereals—the next-most-important crop category—national production of root and tuber crops in 2012
having been nearly four times that of cereals. Fiber crops are the least important in Nigeria. As Table 2.1
shows, with the exception of fiber crops, production has grown in all crop categories over the last decade.
Specifically, the highest growth was in the production of root and tuber crops (44 percent), followed by
vegetables (38 percent), cereals (23 percent), and fruits and nuts (15 percent). However, the production of
fiber crops declined by 25 percent.

32.     However, cereal crops account for the lion’s share of crop production land area in the country

                                                                                                        10
(Annex I, Table 1.1). They cover an area that amounts to the production area of roots and tubers, primary
oil crops, and vegetables combined. The fastest expansion in the production area of crops was that of
vegetables (27 percent), followed by root and tuber crops (8.4 percent). Area under cereal crops grew
only slowly (2.4 percent) while that under fiber crops significantly declined (51 percent).


33.     Indigenous meat production is the highest in the livestock subsector, accounting for about two
times the quantity of eggs produced in the country in 2012, by weight (Table 2.1). With respect to growth,
the production of poultry meat grew the most (53 percent) in the last decade, followed by eggs (42
percent), milk (39 percent), indigenous meat (28 percent), and sheep and goat meat (26 percent).

34.      As Table 2.1 shows, freshwater diadrom fish, mainly tilapia, dominate in the fishery subsector,
along with demersal fish (such as catfish) and pelagic fish (such as mackerel), which are both marine
aquaculture species. In terms of output growth, the production of mollusks was the highest and almost
doubled in the last decade (99.6 percent), followed by diadrom fish (67 percent), demersal fish (28
percent), and pelagic fish (27 percent). During the same period, the production of crustaceans fell by 10.5
percent.

35.     In the forestry subsector, wood fuel is the most important product (Table 2.1). Production growth
in the subsector has, however, been stagnant or minimal in the past decade. Output of wood fuel and
wood-based panels increased by only 6.6 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively, during this period.

36.     The most recent data on crop production in Nigeria from the FAO’s statistical unit (FAOSTAT)
show that yam and cassava, followed by rice paddy and groundnuts, are the most important staple food
crops produced in the country, in terms of both value and quantity of production. Maize, sorghum, and
millet are also commonly produced cereal crops, while cashew is the most important among the
commercial crops produced in Nigeria (Table 2.2).

Table 2.2: Value, quantity, and production area of major crops produced in Nigeria, 2012

                                   Value         Quantity (metric
Rank    Crop                    (Int$1,000)          tons)                Area harvested (ha)
   1    Yams                      7,753,338            38,000,000                      2,900,000
   2    Cassava                   5,641,002            54,000,000                      3,850,000
   3    Fruits                    2,278,295             4,760,000                        932,000
   4    Vegetables                1,744,854             7,760,000                      1,015,000
   5    Rice, paddy               1,309,354             4,833,000                      2,685,000
   6    Groundnuts, with shell    1,308,585             3,070,000                      2,420,000
   7    Maize                     1,048,015             9,410,000                      5,200,000
   8    Sorghum                     991,159             6,900,000                      5,500,000
   9    Millet                      850,846             5,000,000                      3,800,000
  10    Cashew nuts, with shell     732,199                836,500                       366,000
  11    Taro (cocoyam)              731,700             3,450,000                        500,000
  12    Okra                        703,442             1,100,000                        385,000
  13    Cowpeas, dry                633,956             2,500,000                      3,200,000
  14    Plantains                   578,082             2,800,000                        456,000
Source: FAO (2014).

37.     Nigerian agriculture is dominated by small-scale farming. The report of the Commercial
Agriculture Development Project (CADP) baseline survey conducted in 2010 indicates that more than 90

                                                                                                        11
percent of the agricultural output is accounted for by small-scale farmers with less than two ha under
cropping (Nigeria, NBS 2010). The other important characteristic of Nigerian agriculture is that the
majority of the farm plots are owned by individual farmers. The report of the 2010 National Agricultural
Sample Survey of Nigeria indicates that of the total land area cultivated by private farmers in 2010,
owner-like possession accounted for 83.9 percent, followed by family land (10.6 percent) and
rented/royalty land (4.1 percent). There are also corporate farms in Nigeria, though it is not exactly
known how much area they account for. The majority of the corporate farms were classified under sole
proprietorship (76 percent), followed by private limited company (10 percent) and partnership (9 percent).
Cooperatives account for only 1 percent of the corporate farms (Nigeria, NBS and FMARD 2012).

38.      The use of modern inputs in Nigeria is still at a low level. Analysis of a representative —at both
the national and subnational level—dataset reveals that only 46 percent of all farm households in Nigeria
use at least one type of modern agricultural input. Those using chemical fertilizer make up 42.8 percent.
Only 7 percent of the farmers use improved seeds and 10.5 percent use pesticide. However, significant
differences in agricultural input use are observed across different regions. In the northwest region, around
80 percent of the farmers use at least one type of modern agricultural input. In contrast, fewer than 40
percent of the farmers in the other regions use modern inputs (Akramov 2010).

39.      Similarly, most farmers in Nigeria do not have access to credit. Of the total farm households in
Nigeria, only 6.8 percent have access to formal or semiformal credit facilities (Akramov 2010). Of the
total amount of financing committed to crop farming by private farmers in 2010, own funds accounted for
the lion’s share (90.1 percent), followed by funds from friends and relatives (4.8 percent). Funds obtained
from a local money lender (0.9 percent) and from cooperative societies (0.7 percent) were insignificant.
Surprisingly, the main source of financing for corporate crop farming are own funds (97.6 percent)
(Nigeria, NBS and FMARD 2012)—an even higher share than the equivalent for small private farms.

40.     Based on their review of a large collection of literature on agricultural productivity, Liverpool-
Tasie, Kuku, and Ajibola (2011) indicated that with some exceptions, Nigerian farmers across all regions
are below their production frontiers, and concluded that there is room to increase agricultural productivity
above existing levels, even without a change in their current levels of input use.

41.     In undertaking an AgPER, it is also useful to see the relative size of the agricultural economy
under consideration as compared with its peers. In SSA, Nigeria’s is the biggest agricultural economy,
while Ethiopia, Sudan, South Africa, and Kenya follow far behind Nigeria. Nigeria’s agriculture accounts
for two-thirds of the agricultural value-added in West Africa4 and nearly one-third of that in SSA (Figure
2.2).

Figure 2.2: Agricultural GDP, 2010 (2005 US$)




4Other West African countries are Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali,
Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.
                                                                                                         12
Others in SSA 25%                                                                             Nigeria (32%)




 Others in West Africa
         16%
                                                                                        Ethiopia (8%)


                 Kenya 5%


                    South Africa 6%                                     Sudan 8%

Source: Authors’ computation using World Bank (2014).

42.    As seen in Table 2.3, Nigeria also performs better than most countries in SSA (and the best in
West Africa) in terms of agricultural value-added per worker, and ranked third following the best
performers, Mauritius and South Africa.

Table 2.3: Agricultural value-added per worker in Africa south of the Sahara

                                          Agricultural value-added per worker,
Country/region
                                          2010 (in constant 2005 US$)
Ethiopia                                                                          235
Kenya                                                                             365
Others in West Africa, average                                                    905
Sudan                                                                           1,175
Africa south of the Sahara, average                                             1,210
Nigeria                                                                         4,063
South Africa                                                                    5,510
Mauritius                                                                       7,355
Source: Authors’ computation using World Bank (2014).


  2.2. Agricultural Policies and Development Priorities
43.     The 1999 constitution, the 2001 new agricultural policy thrust, the 2004 NEEDS, the seven-point
agenda of Vision 20: 2020, and the ATA all serve as the policy framework for agricultural development
in Nigeria. These policy blueprints together provide insights on national priorities in agriculture, guiding

                                                                                                         13
policies, policy strategies, and responsibilities of the federal, state, and local governments in delivering
public agricultural goods and services.

2.2.1. Overview of Sector Strategy and Policies at the Federal Level

44.     In the past decade, the government of Nigeria has designed several policies, strategies, programs,
and projects with the objective of spurring growth in the agricultural sectors. These include NEEDS, the
National Special Program for Food Security, the seven-point agenda, the five-point agenda, the
implementation of CAADP, and the ATA. Similarly, CADP and the Root and Tuber Expansion Program,
as well as other commercial crop–specific programs (such as the presidential initiatives on cassava, rice,
and other crops), were developed in the past decade (Nigeria, NBS 2010). Nigeria signed the CAADP
compact in October 2009 (Nigeria, FMAWR 2009) and launched the National Agricultural Investment
Plan (NAIP) in 2010 (Nigeria, FMARD 2010). FMARD developed NAIP guided by a five-point agenda,
which is drawn from the economywide seven-point agenda and is largely consistent with the four
CAADP principles (Nigeria, FMARD 2010).

45.     The 2004 NEEDS signaled a new paradigm in development programming in Nigeria with the
introduction of institutional reforms and holistic processes for more effective and sustainable
development outcomes. Therefore, NEEDS is the first successful attempt to articulate the government’s
vision for national development and poverty reduction in a coherent manner, give it focus, and outline the
role of the key institutions of the state in the process. This holistic development policy and strategy
provided the framework and set the pace for the ongoing public financial management reforms and
related reforms. The state governments followed suit with equivalent strategies known as the State
Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (SEEDS) and some local governments with the
Local Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy (LEEDS).5

46.      Vision 20: 2020 is Nigeria’s current policy blueprint. Launched in 2010, it is a long-term
planning framework that is intended to transform Nigeria into one of the top 20 economies by 2020 with
at least US$900 billion in GDP and a per capita income of at least US$4,000 per annum (Nigeria, NPC
2010).6 The three strategic pillars of the Vision are (1) guaranteeing the productivity and well-being of the
citizens, (2) optimizing the key sources of economic growth, and (3) fostering sustainable social and
economic development. 7 Anchored to these strategic pillars are long-term national aspirations. For
agriculture, the objective is to achieve a modern technologically enabled agricultural sector that fully
exploits the vast agricultural resources of the country, ensures national food security, and contributes to
foreign exchange earnings. As indicated in the Vision 20: 2020 document, agriculture is central to the
Vision’s agenda. The document also notes that the envisioned accelerated development will be highly
dependent on synergies between key sectors of the economy, including agriculture. However, Vision 20:
2020 recognizes that agriculture is not nearly realizing its potential for spurring increased growth and
employment. For example, the Vision document notes that the sector has not fully exploited the nation’s
land and water resources, has low productivity with high losses, and continues to make suboptimal
contributions to export earnings. The factors outlined as responsible for this are (1) failure to modernize

5 In 2007, NEEDS expired and although the government prepared NEEDS II, it was not implemented.
Subsequently, the seven-point agenda of Vision 20: 2020 and the National Transformation Agenda have all
followed after NEEDS by adopting an integrated development paradigm.
6 The vision statement is that “Nigeria will have a large, strong, diversified, sustainable and competitive

economy that effectively harnesses the talents and energies of its people and responsibly exploits its natural
endowments to guarantee a high standar d of living and quality of life to its citizens by 2020? (Nigeria, NPC
2010, 1).
7 The Vision will be implemented through three medium-term national implementation plans. The first was

from 2010 to 2013, the second will run from 2014 to 2017, and the third will run from 2018 to 2020.
                                                                                                           14
agriculture on a large scale, (2) an outdated land tenure system, (3) low adoption of research findings and
technologies due to weak extension services, (4) high cost of farm inputs, (5) poor access to credit, (6)
piracy in coastal waters, (7) overemphasis on inefficient fertilizer procurement and distribution, (8)
inadequate irrigation and storage, and (9) poor access to markets (National Technical Working Group on
Agriculture and Food Security 2009).

47.      Since 2011, these issues have been articulated in greater detail through the ATA. As a major
component of the National Transformation Agenda, the ATA has the ambition to bring about a paradigm
shift in the perception and planning of agriculture. The vision of the agenda is to “achieve a hunger -free
Nigeria through an agricultural sector that drives income growth, accelerates achievement of food and
nutritional security, generates employment and transforms Nigeria into a leading player in global food
markets to grow wealth for millions of farmers? (Nigeria, FMARD 2011a, 3). The major targets of the
agenda are to (1) create 3.5 million jobs in the agricultural sector by 2015, (2) provide more than US$2
billion of additional income for Nigerian farmers, (3) increase domestic food production by 20 million
metric tons,8 (4) make Nigeria self-sufficient in rice production by 2015, and (5) ensure that Nigeria shifts
from being a net importer of food to a net exporter of food.

48.        To attain success, FMARD is employing the following measures:

          Executing the ATA to support the National Transformation Agenda.
          Putting an end to the era of treating agriculture as a development project and instead treating it as
           a business.
          Eliminating isolated projects that do not clearly grow the agricultural sector in a demonstrable
           and measurable way.
          Moving away from big government that crowds out the private sector.
          Integrating food production, storage, food processing, and industrial manufacturing through value
           chains.
          Focusing on value chains in which Nigeria has comparative advantages.
          Leveraging the agricultural sector to create jobs, create wealth, and ensure food security.
          Promoting strategic partnerships to stimulate investments that drive a market-led agricultural
           transformation through state and local governments, interministerial collaboration, the private
           sector, farmer groups, and civil society.
          Placing an emphasis on youth and women.

49.     Under the ATA, the transformation policies, institutions, and financing structures to drive growth
in agriculture involve (1) deregulation of the seed and fertilizer sectors, (2) marketing reforms to structure
markets, (3) innovative financing in agriculture, and (4) a new agricultural investment framework. Along
the same lines, the four main components of the agenda are as follows:

              Nigeria Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (NIRSAL)
              Growth Enhancement Support Scheme (GESS)
              Staple crops processing zones
              Commodity-marketing corporations

(1) NIRSAL

50.     This incentive-based risk-sharing system is a mechanism that seeks to de-risk lending to the
agricultural sector. Developed in 2010 by the Central Bank of Nigeria in collaboration with the Alliance

8   Tons refers to metric tons throughout the text.
                                                                                                             15
for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), NIRSAL aims to tackle bottlenecks that affect agricultural
value chains and the agricultural financing value chain. To do this, it seeks to secure increased processing
of agricultural production, and by so doing launch an agricultural industrialization process that boosts
economic earnings across the entire value chain.

(2) GESS

51.     This program is a shift from the existing Fertilizer Market Stabilization Programme that puts the
resource-constrained farmer at the center of policy. The program delivers subsidized agricultural inputs to
farmers through an electronic wallet. With unique voucher numbers that are delivered to their phones,
farmers then redeem their input allocation from accredited agro dealers. It is expected that this program
will improve agricultural input distribution and marketing. In addition, it should provide incentives to
encourage actors along the fertilizer value chain to work together toward the common purpose of
improving agricultural productivity, household food security, and incomes. The specific policy goals of
GESS are to

       target 5 million farmers annually for four years for the delivery of agricultural inputs on their
        mobile phones;
       provide direct support to farmers to enable them to procure agricultural inputs at affordable
        prices, at the right time, and at the right place;
       Increase productivity of farmers across the country through increased use of fertilizer—from 13
        kg/ha to 50 kg/ha; and
       transform the role of government from a direct procurer and distributor of fertilizer to a facilitator
        of procurement, regulator of fertilizer quality, and catalyst of active private-sector participation in
        the fertilizer value chain.

(3) Staple Crops Processing Zones

52.      The main idea behind setting up these processing zones is to encourage private-sector
agribusinesses to set up processing plants in zones of high food production to process agricultural
commodities into food products. The staple crop processing zones link clusters of farmers to food
manufacturing plants. The locations of the zones depend on the comparative advantage of the region to
produce the identified commodity and the state government’s support. The role of the government is to
enable this system by putting in place appropriate fiscal, investment, and infrastructure policies for the
zones as well as by developing a code for agricultural investment. Such policies include tax breaks on
import of agricultural processing equipment, tax holidays for food processors that are located in these
zones, and supportive infrastructure, especially complementary investments by the government in roads,
logistics, storage facilities, and power. The Agricultural Investment Code is developed by FMARD in
partnership with FMF, FMTI, and the Central Bank of Nigeria.

(4) Commodity-Marketing Corporations

53.      The objective here is to establish commodity-marketing corporations to help strengthen the
markets for agricultural commodities. The role of the federal government is to support the development of
these private sector–driven marketing organizations in order to grow the agricultural sector. The
elimination of marketing boards during the implementation of the Structural Adjustment Programme
without the introduction of alternative institutions has made market access for millions of farmers very
difficult. To address this challenge, these marketing corporations will coordinate production and export of
target commodities; attract investment into the sector for R&D, infrastructure, and processing; and
stimulate the development of tailored financial services. These private sector–led but government-enabled
marketing institutions would be owned by agricultural value chains and would empower farmers and
                                                                                                            16
other value chain actors to generate value. The agricultural value chains of focus under the ATA are
cassava, cocoa, horticulture, fruit juice, sorghum, fisheries, dairy, cotton, and livestock. Each value chain
has a particular line of activities and targets.

54.      Despite the fact that extension is central to the dissemination of new knowledge and
demonstration of new skills, FMARD did not have an extension service function until 2012, when the
head of civil service of the federation approved an adjustment of the structure of FMARD to create a
Federal Department of Agricultural Extension (FDAE). Compliance with the constitution limited
FMARD’s role in the provision of agricultural extension services. Instead, FMARD relied on states’
extension service departments, known as agricultural development projects (ADPs). The services
provided by ADPs include establishing demonstration farms; identifying lead farmers; providing lead
farmers with information about improved farming practices; facilitating access to improved technology
and inputs, such as improved seed varieties, fertilizer, crop chemicals, and machinery services; and
helping lead farmers to train other farmers (Mogues, Morris, et al. 2012). Although concrete performance
information is limited, it is apparent that FMARD is not satisfied with this relationship. Thus, FMARD
launched the Agricultural Extension Transformation Agenda (AETA) in 2011 under ATA (Box 2.1). The
budgets and actual expenditures that would be able to be fully compared against this policy are those
starting 2013; however, the 2012 budget and spending data begin to partially feature some aspects of the
ATA and AETA.




                                                                                                          17
                   Box 2.1: The agricultural extension transformation agenda
The Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development launched the Agricultural Extension
Transformation Agenda (AETA) in 2011 under the Agricultural Transformation Agenda. The
objectives of the AETA are to
        oversee, monitor, and provide the leadership needed for efficient and effective agricultural
         extension and advisory service delivery in Nigeria;
        review the agricultural extension policies within the subsisting agricultural policies and
         recommend appropriate policies that will ensure the effective participation of all stakeholders
         in a stable policy environment and adequate funding for the delivery of effective and efficient
         agricultural extension and advisory services;
        recommend appropriate institutional structures and arrangements for the delivery of effective
         and efficient agricultural extension and advisory services using a value chain approach; and
        Recommend demand-responsive extension systems or approaches and tools that will ensure
         the delivery of efficient and effective agricultural extension and advisory services for all
         multi-actors in the targeted commodity value chains of interest to the government.
The AETA is a road map for addressing critical challenges of agricultural extension and advisory
services in Nigeria. The purpose is to transform agricultural extension into a participatory, demand-
responsive, market-oriented, and information and communication technology (ICT) –driven service that
provides for the extension needs of all actors along targeted commodity value chains.
Features of the AETA include the following:
        Articulating a functional and inclusive agricultural extension policy, defining roles and
         responsibilities of stakeholders (such as tiers of government, the private sector, farmer groups,
         nongovernmental organizations, and civil society), and addressing issues of funding,
         institutional arrangements, and gender mainstreaming
        Establishing a new Federal Department of Agricultural Extension to provide leadership,
         coordination, monitoring and evaluation, quality assurance, and appropriate extension
         methods and tools
        Adopting an ICT-driven, market-oriented, and knowledge- and skills-based extension service
         delivery, including a farmers’ ICT center or helpline complemented with other appr opriate
         ICT tools suitable for rural communities
        Recognizing existing state agricultural development projects (ADPs) as the best option for
         extension and advisory services. It is expected that state governments will revitalize and
         strengthen their ADPs to key into the AETA, with adequate staffing to attain a minimum ratio
         of one extension agent to 800–1,000 farmers, and improve infrastructure and facilities, with
         assistance from FMARD
        Strengthening and scaling up of funding for the research-extension-farmer-inputs linkage
         system to fulfill its function of bringing all state and nonstate actors together with clearly
         defined roles and responsibilities in technology, development, adaptation, dissemination, and
         utilization
        Building capacity through public-private partnerships with proper incentives for the adoption
         of a value chain approach that requires more knowledge- and skills-based, demand-responsive
         extension and advisory services. Capacity building covers the following groups: unemployed
         youths and graduates, extension field staff at all levels, farmers, producers, processors, and all
         other actors and service providers along the targeted value chains
        Addressing the cross-cutting issues of women, youths, and vulnerable groups, Growth
         Enhancement Support Scheme items (such as fertilizers, agrochemicals, improved seeds, and
         credit), strengthening farmers’ associations, and providing more conducive service conditions
         for extension staff, including mobility for better performance

Source: “Final Report of the Agricultural Extension Transformation Agenda.?
http://unaab.edu.ng/attachments/Final%20Extension%20Report.pdf.

        Further, (FDAE).Overview of sector strategy and policies at the subnational le                        18
55.      In sum, the ATA has been closely aligned with the Vision 20: 2020 plan and supports it through
many of its objectives. It seeks a reconsideration of agriculture as a business and articulates the
government’s role as provider of an enabling policy environment. The ATA recognizes the important role
of agricultural extension in achieving its objectives: the launch of the AETA and FDAE demonstrates
concrete efforts aimed at extension policy implementation. Also on a positive note, FMARD’s 2012
budget signaled attempts to match agricultural policies with resource allocation—a departure from the
case in previous years. However, concerns remain about the sustainability of the ATA. First, compared
with Vision 20: 2020, the consultations that led to the birth of the ATA seem inadequate. As a result,
public awareness and understanding of the agenda also appear limited. This may eventually prove to be
its Achilles’ heel, particularly in terms of its marketability to stakeholders (including state governments,
who must be key harbingers of its success), continued funding by the legislature, and sustainability
beyond the current administration. Second, the ATA does not have an annual plan of investments, and
FMARD has yet to do a detailed costing of the agenda’s activities and programs. Financial implications
of the agenda thus remain unknown. Consistency in public support and funding will depend, to some
extent, on credible costing and a plan of annual investments.

56.      The ATA also appears too ambitious and expensive, which suggests that its four-year life cycle
could prove challenging due to funding and implementation capacity issues. The lack of a results
framework will make it difficult to track the performance of the agenda in terms of output, outcomes, and
efficiency. Results-based monitoring and evaluation frameworks with clear targets, timelines, and
indicators enhance accountability. Furthermore, the institutional structure of the ATA is not clear. Success
of the agenda will depend on clearly defined roles of all stakeholders, such as the federal, state, and local
governments and nonstate actors, as well as effective coordination among them. Finally, continuity of the
agenda beyond this administration could pose another challenge given the tendency for policy reversal by
succeeding administrations in the country. This challenge makes it crucial for the agenda to demonstrate
irreversible results during the duration of the current administration.

2.2.2. Overview of Sector Strategy and Policies at the Subnational Level

Cross River State

57.     The agricultural policy direction of Cross River state is aligned to that of the federal government.
As part of the state’s action plan and in an attempt be in tandem with the federal government’s Vision 20:
2020 plan, Cross River has been promoting a seven-point development agenda since 2007, the first point
of which is to “make agriculture more productive and rewarding by encouraging the adoption of
agricultural best practices and ensuring that investment in the sector is participatory and adaptable.?
According to the policy document for agricultural development, the vision is to make agriculture the
engine of growth and transformation of Cross River state’s economy toward the achievement of overall
economic development. The overarching goal is to harness diverse agricultural resources of the state in
order to develop an agricultural sector that guarantees food security, reduces rural poverty, and facilitates
agro-industrial growth. The document also sets out the action plans for agriculture and provides
recommendations for the development of key subsectors.

58.     Specifically, the broad strategic goals of agricultural policy in Cross River state include the
following:

       Move farm sizes away from fragmented holdings to commercial farm sizes for each of the main
        crops
       Introduce high-value crops into the state’s farming systems
       Increase and move to international average the yield per hectare of major crops such as cocoa, oil
                                                                                                          19
        palm, cassava, and rice
       Access and expand markets for the state’s agricultural produce
       Mechanize farming on a large scale
       Encourage growth in aquaculture, poultry, and animal husbandry
       Establish easy access to credit for farmers

59.      Cross River state is vigorously pursuing policies and action plans in key subsectors for which it
has comparative and competitive advantages. The state is the largest producer of oil palm in Nigeria with
about 250,000 ha of land currently under wild groves, and 20,149 ha and 15,000 ha cultivated by estates
and smallholder farmers, respectively. For cocoa, it is the second-largest producer, with a production of
more than 80,000 tons annually. For rubber, it is the third-largest producer, with about 21,545 ha under
cultivation (64 percent by estates and 36 percent by smallholder farmers). Cross River state is also the
second-largest fish and shrimp producer, with an annual catch estimated at 6,000 tons.

60.     Value addition and increased private investments are critical components of the current
agricultural policy direction in Cross River state. With the government creating an enabling environment
through public-private partnerships, it is expected that the development of agriculture will be private-
sector driven. Value addition and higher private-sector investments are aimed at ensuring technical
changes that are characterized by improved input use efficiency and overall total factor productivity
growth. The major enterprises targeted for value addition and for improved private-sector involvement
include cocoa production and processing; cassava production, processing, and marketing; rice production
and processing; citrus and mango production; poultry production; pig production; honey production; and
aquaculture. To promote these objectives, major oil palm plantation estates have been privatized and
leased to private investors. 9 In addition, all the government-owned cocoa estates are presently under
negotiations for privatization, with much interest from private businesses.

61.    Policies to encourage strong participation by youth and women in agriculture through the
modernization of agricultural production, processing, and marketing are also being pursued. The Cross
River Agriculture and Rural Empowerment Scheme (CARES) and the Songhai Cross River Initiative
(SCRI) are two vehicles through which the government promotes these policies.

62.      The state and the local governments have keyed into the federal government –led ATA. This is
evident through active participation of Cross River state in GESS, a critical component of the ATA.
GESS provides affordable and subsidized agricultural inputs like fertilizer and hybrid seed, rice, maize,
cocoa, and cassava to farmers across the state. For example, about ₦ 125 million,10 ₦ 100 million, and
₦ 262 million were expended for the provision of subsidized fertilizer (urea and NPK) to 50,000, 33,327,
and 87,600 farmers in 2010, 2012, and 2013, respectively, in the state. In addition, about 18 tons and 10
tons of maize and rice hybrid seeds, respectively, were distributed to 33,327 farmers in 2012. In 2013,
about 218 tons of maize hybrid seeds and 35 tons of rice hybrid seeds were distributed to 87,600 farmers.
This initiative is aimed at increasing production yields per hectare in order to make average crop yields in
Cross River state comparable to the international averages.

63.     Similarly, all the LGAs, including Akamkpa LGA, tailor their rural and economic development
agenda to be in consonance with the state’s development agenda. In Akamkpa, the policy objective for
agriculture is the attainment of self-sufficiency in food production and expansion of agro-allied

9 For example, Calaro and Ibiae Oil Palm Estates (established between 1947 and 1950) were leased in 2012 to
Wilmar International Limited, a Singaporean company. Prior to that, Kwa Fall Oil Palm Estate (established in
the 1940s) was leased to IBAD Farms Limited in 2002. In 2001, Cross River Estate Limited, a rubber
plantation established in the 1950s, was acquired by Enghuat Industries Limited.
10 ₦ = Nigerian naira.

                                                                                                         20
processing. Apart from the mandatory contributions to promote GESS, Akamkpa LGA supports the
organization of local farmers into cooperatives for easy access to farm inputs.

Programs, Strategies, and Action Plans

64.      Based on the policy direction of the Cross River state Ministry of Agriculture, specific programs,
strategies, and action plans have been developed to expand the agricultural sector (see Annex I). These
are enterprise specific with the objective of removing bottlenecks along the value chains of targeted
agricultural commodities. The specific areas targeted include cocoa development, oil palm development,
citrus and mango development, farm mechanization, cassava and rice production, aquaculture, pineapple
production, banana and plantain production, livestock production, a food and nutrition program, quality
control services, an agricultural credit program, and agricultural extension services. All of these areas
constitute specific programs under CARES.

Donor-Assisted Projects

65.    There are currently three donor-driven agricultural projects in the state—Cross River CADP,
Fadama III, and the Community-Based Natural Resource Management Programme of IFAD, the federal
government of Nigeria, and the Niger Delta Development Commission (IFAD/FGN/NDDC).

66.     Cross River CADP is a World Bank–supported project with the aim of improving agricultural
production in the state. The project has two main components: (1) agricultural production and
commercialization aimed at complementing national food security and development of domestic and
export markets for targeted crops, and (2) rural infrastructure aimed at providing resources for the
construction of new roads and for rehabilitation and maintenance of selected access roads to farming
communities. This component also aims to connect commercial farms to the electricity grid. Under
component one, the project targets three value chains—cocoa, oil palm, and rice. The main focus is on
technology demonstration and adoption, support for staple crop production systems, market facilitation,
capacity building, farm access road networks, and rural energy. Since its inception in 2005, the project
has sensitized and registered 329 commodity interest groups and has so far disbursed more than ₦ 100
million in grants to 59 commodity interest groups consisting of 1,098 farmers. The project has also
organized 27 training or capacity-building workshops for farmers.

67.      Fadama III targets the rural poor, subsistence farmers, fishers, processors, and other economic
interest groups along the agricultural value chain. The project has provided assistance to more than 2,050
farmers in the state. The objective is to sustainably increase the income of land and water users through
support for asset acquisition and improved rural infrastructure access, input supply, and advisory services.
Beneficiaries are encouraged to organize themselves into Fadama user groups and further as Fadama
community associations. Project resources are disbursed directly to Fadama community associations,
which total about 200 in the state.

68.     The IFAD/FGN/NDDC Community-Based Natural Resource Management Programme targets
mostly women, youths, and vulnerable groups in the rural areas. The objective is to utilize a community
development approach in improving the living standards and quality of life of rural families. The program
aims to reach 57,000 rural households in 27 communities of nine LGAs. This assistance is in the
provision of boreholes to rural communities, provision of agroprocessing mills, construction of roads and
culverts, development of seed nurseries for plantations, and provision of farm inputs such as seeds (rice,
maize, and cocoa) and cassava cuttings. So far the program has reached 71,667 households in the state,
surpassing the target number of beneficiaries.

Niger State
                                                                                                         21
69.      The Development Action Plan (DAP) for Niger state for 2007-11 stipulates the vision and
mission of the state as well as the overall development strategy. The overall development strategy is to
promote agrobased industrialization. This means that agriculture and allied industries and services form
the fulcrum of the state’s development strategy. The DAP identifies great potentials and opportunities that
are yet to be fully explored as well as some constraints to Niger state’s agricultural sector. The policy
thrust of the DAP is to

       take advantage of the diverse agricultural resources of the state to develop an agricultural sector
        that will guarantee food security, reduce rural poverty, and accelerate economic development in
        the state, and
       make agricultural development private-sector driven, with the government creating enabling
        environment through public-private partnerships. Priority will be placed on sourcing private
        investments and promoting public-private partnerships not only for agricultural production but
        also for the production of farm inputs such as tractors, fertilizers, seedlings, and storage
        equipment.

70.     The DAP includes targets to be achieved, strategies to be adopted, resources needed,
responsibilities, and timelines for achieving each of the targets. The cost of achieving each target,
intervention strategies, and performance indicators for effective monitoring and evaluation are also
included in the action plan.

71.      Niger state’s Vision 3: 2020 policy on agriculture is the means by which the state government
works to achieve the goal of leveraging agriculture as a veritable tool for achieving food security,
reducing rural poverty, and accelerating economic development in the state. The agricultural policy
document states that the overall agricultural policy thrust of the state is the attainment of self-sustaining
growth in all subsectors of agriculture, as well as realization of the structural transformation necessary for
the overall socioeconomic development of rural areas. The goals for the development of the agricultural
sector and its subsectors that are specified in the policy document align closely with the goals in the DAP,
although the strategies proposed differ slightly. The Vision 3: 2020 document outlines strategic initiatives
of the agricultural sector. The scope of agricultural development in the state covers crops, livestock,
fisheries, and forestry. The vision is to transform Niger state into one of the three top economies in
Nigeria by the year 2020, by being a model and leader in agrobased industrialization and by making
agriculture the engine of growth and transformation of the state’s economy. It also stipulates the
measurement of progress in achieving targets, expected changes, persons responsible for tracking
progress, and funding options. The specific goals of agricultural policy in Niger state include the
following:

       Attainment of self-sufficiency in basic commodities with particular reference to those
        commodities for which the state has comparative advantage
       Increased production of agricultural raw materials to stimulate growth of the industrial sector
       Higher production and processing of commercial or export crops such as cotton, groundnuts, and
        shea nuts with a view to contributing to the foreign exchange earnings of the nation
       Establishment of guaranteed minimum prices for agricultural commodities
       Modernization of agricultural production, processing, storage, and distribution through the
        infusion of improved technologies and management, so that agriculture can be more responsive to
        the demands other sectors
       Creation of increased rural employment opportunities through improvements in infrastructure so
        as to productively absorb a growing labor force
       Improved quality of life for rural residents through the provision of social amenities like potable
        water and improved health and educational facilities
                                                                                                           22
       Improved protection of agricultural land resources from drought, desert encroachment, soil
        erosion, and flood
       Development of biofuel crops to produce alternatives to firewood, fossil fuel, and inorganic
        fertilizer, particularly on waste and marginal lands
       Increased private-sector investments in agriculture for food security (including increased
        production and processing) through public-private partnerships
       Expansion of commercial agriculture through the provision of timely and affordable credit to
        small-, medium-, and large-scale farmers
       Improved irrigation for year-round farming

72.      The programs for promoting agricultural development as captured in Niger state’s DAP and
Vision 3: 2020 plan are (1) farm mechanization, (2) fertilizer procurement and distribution, (3) a buffer
stock program, (4) a farm institute program, (5) agrochemicals, (6) agricultural research and consultancy,
(7) development of irrigation programs, (8) boosting crop production, (9) fruit tree crops development,
(10) the Fadama III project, (11) Rural Access and Mobility Project II, (12) livestock development, and
(13) fisheries development.

73.      The agricultural policy thrust in Niger state is well aligned with that of the federal government.
With respect to the federal-led ATA, high-value crops that have been identified for the value chain
development initiative are the same at both the federal and state levels. In line with this coordination, a
number of federal government programs are jointly carried out by the federal and Niger state
governments. These programs include the Fertilizer Procurement and Distribution Program through
GESS, NPFS, agricultural extension and research, commodity value chain development for selected high-
value crops, agricultural credit programs of the Central Bank, and livestock and fisheries development,
among others. As part of the ATA, Niger state is promoting a rice investment package. FMARD has
earmarked 14,800 tons of NPK and urea fertilizer to be sold at a 50 percent subsidy price to farmers
captured under the smallholder farmers’ enumeration exercise conducted in the state. As part of the
NPFS, the state government operates a buffer stock program. Under this program, farmers are not only
encouraged to increase their production but are also assured of fair product prices and government
support.

Ondo State

74.      The main features of Ondo state’s agricultural policy include the development of strategies that
will bring about improvements in the levels of technical and economic efficiency of food and tree crop
production. Ondo state offers tremendous potential to increase agricultural output. It is the largest
producer of cocoa in Nigeria, accounting for about 60 percent of cocoa production. Higher-than-average
yields in crops such as cassava, yam, sweet potato, and maize suggest that the state has comparative
advantages in producing these food crops. Cassava, for example, has an average yield of about 22 tons/ha
compared with the national average of 12.8 tons/ha. These food crops must continue to be prioritized in
the state’s agricultural policy agenda. The state embarks on different programs to help achieve its
agricultural policy objectives, including those for (1) youth in agriculture, (2) input delivery, (3) food
crops development, (4) tree crops development, (5) irrigation agriculture, (6) livestock production, (7)
fisheries development, (8) sustainable forestry development, (9) agriculture extension services, and (10)
rural development.

75.      The role of the private sector in agricultural development is limited in Ondo state. The most
visible initiative is the Leventis Foundation Agricultural Training School in Ido-Ani. Leventis Foundation
(Nigeria) Limited has been conducting agricultural training for youths in Nigeria since 1987 through six
agricultural training schools—one located in Ido-Ani. The Ido-Ani agricultural training school is
                                                                                                        23
cofinanced by the state government and Leventis Foundation. The school offers free training to young
farmers desirous of making a good career in farming. The comprehensive one-year training program
exposes participants to most areas of agriculture and farm business. The objective of the training program
is to create a new generation of committed young hands-on farmers who will act as catalysts for
agricultural development in their communities. In addition, the state government is currently constructing
a large-scale abattoir for which the government intends to enter into a memorandum of understanding
with private sector to manage it for the state. However, it is doubtful that the private sector was involved
in the planning process of the abattoir project given its exclusion from the agricultural development
policy formulation process, in which it is supposed to play an active role.

  2.3. Cross-Tier Fiscal and Planning Relationship between the Federal and
  Subnational Levels
76.      Intergovernmental fiscal relationships in Nigeria are currently a subject of intense controversy
and irrepressible conflict. The major areas of concern have been the inherent inequities, imbalances in the
interplay of interjurisdictional forces, and inability of the seeming fiscal unitarism to contribute
significantly to social, political, and economic development (Olomola 1999). Against this backdrop, this
section provides a brief overview of the distribution across tiers of responsibilities in agriculture. It
examines how cross-tier dynamics between the federal, state, and local governments affect agricultural
policy formulation and how these dynamics bear on the delivery of goods and services in the agricultural
sector. It also examines the extent to which the spending of each government tier is coordinated with that
of other tiers to result in coherent aggregate public resource allocation for agriculture, the main barriers to
expenditure coherence, and recent initiatives aimed at promoting such coherence. Theoretical and
empirical literature show that proper fiscal and planning relationships aimed at promoting decentralization
matter for efficiency of public spending. Empirical evidence from Fin, Lin, and Triesman (2009), for
example, emphasizes that countries with a large number of administrative tiers and public employees are
characterized by more rent-seeking expenditures and lower provision of public goods. The multiplicity of
layers and cross-links in the planning and budget processes between higher and lower tiers of
government, and between sectoral and cross-sectoral agencies, and the matrix relationship that these two
dimensions represent have significant implications for expenditure decisions. These consequences matter
for the smooth functioning of the budget process as well as for the de facto influence of the various tiers
on ultimate allocation of resources in any sector.

77.      In terms of resource allocation in Nigeria, the Federation Account Allocation Committee at the
federal level meets monthly for revenue sharing among the three tiers of government, as mentioned
earlier. At the state level, the joint local government account allocation committee for each state ensures
that allocations made to local government councils are promptly paid into the joint state-local government
account and distributed to the councils based on provisions under the laws enacted by each state’s house
of assembly. The federal government can sometimes undertake projects on behalf of state governments
and thereafter make deductions at source from the statutory allocations of the concerned state. There are
also instances when the federal government and state governments embark on joint projects.

78.      Recent reforms of the budget process in Cross River state, for example, seem to have spurred
considerable coherence between the state and LGAs regarding income generation and expenditure
arrangements, particularly with respect to shared responsibilities. Thus the state has a central budget
coordinating system. In recognition of the strategic role of the local governments as the grassroots
government, the state government insists on integration of local governments into the state’s fiscal and
economic policies and programs. This integration is considered critical to realization of Cross River
state’s vision. As it concerns revenue generation in Cross River state, the structure of the tax system is
well defined at the state level, but not at the local government level. In reality, such a structure is virtually
                                                                                                              24
absent in local governments. As mentioned, both tiers of government depend on the flow of funds from
the federation account. The observation is that the IGR mechanism at both state and local levels is not
strong enough to achieve consistent fiscal objectives. At the local government level, the fiscal policy
mechanism is particularly poor. The annual 10 percent mandatory statutory allocation from Cross River
state government to the local government level is consistent, but the actual amount disbursed usually
reflects the financial position of the state government.

2.3.1. Cross-Tier Statutory Responsibilities for Agricultural Development

79.      According to the constitution, agricultural production does not fall within the purview of the
executive legislative list. This means it is treated as a residual item within the domain of state
responsibility. The federal government cannot therefore participate directly in agricultural production or
even legislate on it. However, it can participate in promoting agricultural development activities as
provided under the concurrent legislative list. The constitution defines the extent of the federal
government’s involvement in agricultural activities with regard to (1) “the establishment of research
centers for agricultural studies? and (2) “the establishment of institutions and bodies for the promotion or
financing of industrial, commercial or agricultural projects.? This is a limited role. Although the
constitution limits the federal government’s role to agricultural research, agricultural financing, and
promotion of agricultural projects, it does not preclude participation of state governments in these
activities. Essentially, the intention is to make all aspects of agriculture important responsibilities of state
governments. However, the federal government has the responsibility to pursue the attainment of
macroeconomic goals of sustainable growth, employment, and price stability. It cannot achieve these
goals without setting targets for every sector of the economy, including agriculture, and deliberately
encouraging the participation of subnational governments in the process. This means the federal
government needs to find ways to harmonize subnational government activities in every important sector
to avoid dysfunctional policies. This is the primary challenge of coordination.

80.      In addition, the 2001 new agricultural policy thrust defines the roles of both public- and private-
sector stakeholders in agriculture. It defines the role of the federal government to encompass three areas:
development, support, and service delivery. The role of the private sector includes agricultural
production, processing, storage, and marketing. According to the policy thrust, local governments are
expected to take over the role of state governments over time in a progressive manner as they find their
foothold.

81.      In Ondo state, the state government has always been the major player in implementing the state’s
agricultural policy. The new focus is to develop a tripartite arrangement between the state government,
local governments, and the private sector (Table 2.4 summarizes roles of each actor as indicated in the
state’s policy document). In accordance with the 2001 new agricultural policy thrust, Ondo state expects
local governments to take over the responsibilities of the state government in the future. However, the
process through which responsibilities will be agreed upon is not clear.

Table 2.4: Roles of state government, local government, and the private sector in agricultural
development in Ondo state
    State government                     Local government                     Private sector
Promoting primary production of      Providing effective agricultural     Investing in all aspects of
agricultural produce through         extension services                   agricultural production
providing effective extension
services and a supply of
improved inputs for crops,
livestock, fisheries, and forestry
                                                                                                             25
Facilitating access to land for       Providing rural infrastructure      Storage, processing, and
those who wish to engage in                                               marketing of agricultural
farming                                                                   produce
Promoting appropriate farm            Managing irrigated areas            Agricultural input supply and
mechanization strategies                                                  distribution
Training and manpower                 Mobilizing farmers for              Producing improved seeds,
development                           accelerated agricultural and        seedlings, brood/breeding
                                      rural development through           stock, and fingerlings under
                                      cooperatives, local institutions,   government certification and
                                      and communities                     quality control
Liaising with appropriate             Facilitating access to land for     Agricultural mechanization
institutions to secure credit for     new entrants into farming in
farmers                               accordance with the provisions
                                      of the state’s land use laws
Controlling and preventing plant                                          Supporting research in all
and animal pests and diseases                                             aspects of agriculture
Investing in rural infrastructure,                                        Providing enterprise-specific
particularly rural feeder roads                                           rural infrastructure
and water supplies
Partnering with communities to
manage and control forest
reserves
Providing irrigation systems
through dams, wells, or running
streams
Supporting research
Source: Ondo state Ministry of Agriculture.

  2.4. Links from Policies and Strategies to Public Expenditure

82.      Although considerable efforts have been made to identify development priorities and articulate
policies and strategies for improved performance of the agricultural sector, there has been no sharp
connection with the expenditure policy. It is usually difficult to see how the various policies and strategies
dovetail into the budgetary process. The inherent disconnect with the budget cycle implies that
government cannot easily keep track of the expenditure implications and realistically predict the
implementation outcomes. At the federal level, the situation is beginning to improve in the aftermath of
the articulation of the ATA and alignment of expenditures toward the attainment of targets set in various
strategic components of the agenda. At the subnational level, expenditure decisions do not follow a
results-based framework, and there is no analytical basis for a logical assessment of expenditure impact.
What is more, there are no systematic monitoring and performance indicators that can provide the basis
for remedial actions in situations in which the budget process runs into troubled waters. Repeatedly over
time, the country expresses concerns about the weakness in the budget process, the suboptimal
performance, and the inability of the sector to surmount development challenges. Adherence to the
development priorities outlined is essential in the design of budgets and in expenditure decisionmaking. It
is by so doing that claimants of the budget can appreciate the benefits of budget implementation and the
services delivered. According to Olomola (2012), many states in Nigeria have a poor history of designing
budgets to reflect key development priorities, and the problem seems to be worsening in recent times.

83.     The defective linkage between expenditure decisions and prioritization of projects manifests in
                                                                                                           26
the selected states in particular where some activities that were not budgeted for ended up being funded
whereas those already budgeted for receive no funding at all. This situation keeps recurring because there
is no effective monitoring and evaluation in either principle or practice to provide both useful lessons to
mitigate recurrence and a credible framework for monitoring progress and evaluating results. In addition,
activities that are pronounced as priorities even through a rigorous procedure of prioritization end up
being downgraded during budgeting; either they are not accommodated in the budget or no funding is
released for their implementation. The notion of priority is another dimension of the dysfunctional
relationship. Some activities are adjudged to be development priorities but are not recognized as spending
priorities by the government during the budgeting exercise. For instance, in Cross River state, fertilizer,
seeds, agrochemicals, a credit program, and extension are visible in the functional composition of the
agricultural budget. Indeed, fertilizer falls within the topmost priority while agricultural credit falls within
the second priority. However, there was no budgetary allocation to fertilizer procurement from 2004 to
2007. In 2008 and 2011, when there was some allocation, there was no release of funds. In the case of
credit, there was no funding from 2000 to 2009. There was no budget for seeds in 2001 and 2002, but
there was funding, whereas in 2005 and 2006, when there was budgetary allocation, there was no release
of funds. Extension was another activity adjudged to be a priority; nonetheless, there was no funding for
this activity from 2000 to 2009.

84.      In the same vein, agricultural activities that are regarded as priorities in Niger state have been
poorly funded. For instance, agrochemicals received no funds from 2003 to 2012 except for three years,
2005, 2009, and 2010. Land clearing suffered the same fate except in 2006, and tractor hiring received no
funds except in 2005 and 2008. Although tractor hiring was not directly funded from the budget of the
Ministry of Agriculture in 2010, a number of tractors were purchased by the CADP, a World Bank–
assisted project that is also involved in providing tractor hiring services. In the forestry subsector, the state
accorded priority to pulpwood plantation, forest plant seed production, and industrial wood production;
however, no funds were released for these activities from 2003 to 2008. There was also no funding
release for fishery development from 2004 to 2012 except for one year (2010). The pattern is not different
in Ondo state, where the key priority areas of development are just receiving budgetary attention in recent
times. For example, there was no release of funds for food crop development activities from 2000 to
2003. Agricultural input services were not funded from the budget between 2000 and 2002, while
extension services did not attract any funding from 2000 to 2004.

85.     The fact that these problems are widespread and continue unabated shows that the root cause
transcends the conceptualization of priority in understanding the relationship between planning and
budget by policymakers. Procedural or methodological and governance issues are involved. First,
government defines priorities without involving other stakeholders. Second, the farmers are easily
convinced and manipulated by the political class. Third, the beneficiaries (farmers) hardly question the
poor service delivery that arises from a lack of appropriate alignment between planning and budget.
Farmers are powerless and worry less about demanding accountability than about eking out a living from
the only business in which their economic and social background quality them to engage. Yet unless there
is appropriate linkage, no amount of money spent on the agricultural sector will result in a significant
growth rate that is commensurate with the country’s resource endowment and capable of lifting farmers
out of poverty.

86.      An important consideration in addressing planning and budget linkages and in articulating
spending priorities is to identify possible collaborations and coordination of activities in the delivery of
services that will promote growth and development of the agricultural sector. Are agencies of government
other than those in the agricultural sector providing parallel services (such as credit/microfinance, private
extension, capacity building and empowerment, and so on) to farmers? Where such opportunities exist, as
is often the case, they need to be identified, integrated into the planning exercise, and brought to bear on
                                                                                                              27
decisionmaking during the budget process. At the federal level, such harmonization is imperative for
agriculture-related functions of FMWR and FMEnv. The same synergy in planning is also necessary in
states such as Ondo and Niger, where the agricultural activities being financed with public funds do not
emanate from a single ministry of agriculture. For instance, Niger state has a Ministry of Agriculture, a
Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries Development, and a Ministry of Environment and Forestry. In Ondo
state, agricultural services are rendered mainly by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and
the Ministry of Natural Resources, the latter responsible for the development of livestock, fisheries, and
forestry.

87.      The lingering trend of a disconnect between planning and budgeting in spite of shifts in
agricultural development strategies raises the question of whether the design and implementation of
policies have any significant influence on the size and structure of agricultural public spending or indeed
whether the varying policy regimes have been accompanied by adjustments in expenditure pattern. If such
relationships are discernible at the federal and subnational levels, it should be possible to have a better
understanding of the performance of public expenditure in the country in terms of efficiency and cost-
effectiveness. The relevance of varying policy regimes for public expenditure restructuring can therefore
be ascertained with a view to maximizing the benefits of policies and strategies and having a regime of
public spending that is more efficient and result oriented. With the available expenditure data, there is no
clear-cut evidence as to whether or not sectoral policies and strategies really matter in agricultural public
expenditure decisionmaking.

88.      At the subnational level, for the period covered in this AgPER, there are three important policy
regimes: the era of NEEDS (associated with presidential initiatives for agricultural development) during
the administration of President Obasanjo, the seven-point agenda era of President Yaradua, and the era of
Vision 20: 2020 of President Jonathan. The first implementation plan of the Vision (2010-13) took off in
2010. We examine the trend in public expenditure on key items that have widespread visibility and are
crucial to achieving the development objectives in the sector over these policy regimes (Table 2.5). In
Cross River state, the pattern of expenditure on fertilizer, seed, and agrochemicals does not vary
remarkably over the three policy junctures. In Niger state, the expenditure share of fertilizer dipped
during the era of the seven-point agenda and rose considerably during the implementation of Vision 20:
2020. However, the same cannot be said about seeds and agrochemicals, which received virtually no
funding in 2010 and 2011. In Ondo state, tree crops received a boost in expenditure share following
Vision 20: 2020, whereas the share of agricultural inputs and produce services plummeted. These
observations are contrary to expectation. Given the need for expansion in the use of agricultural inputs,
the emphasis on agricultural transformation and modernization, and the participatory approach in the
articulation of the Vision policies and strategies for agricultural development, an increasing trend in
expenditure share of the various items and services is expected. These findings lead to the conclusion that
changes in policies are not being effectively reflected in the budget process and expenditure
decisionmaking. More often than not, policies change in a cosmetic fashion in such a way as to enhance
the political influence of providers of associated services while the business and politics of public
expenditure go on as usual. As we shall see shortly, it is not surprising that agricultural public spending
has failed to attain the expected level in spite of the huge investment gaps and high priority often ascribed
to the sector by successive administrations at the federal and subnational levels.

Table 2.5: Trend in public expenditure on selected items as percentage of crop development expenditure
by policy regime
                   2005     2006    Average     2008     2009      Av.      2010        2011       Average
Item                       NEEDS era              Seven-point agenda era           Vision 20:2020 era
Cross River
Fertilizer         0.00      0.00    0.00       0.00     20.87     10.44    100.00      0.00      50.00
                                                                                                             28
Seeds                0.00      0.00      0.00       0.00      7.20       3.60      0.00     0.00       0.00
Agrochemicals        0.00      0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00     0.00       0.00
Niger state
Fertilizer           73.71     92.71 83.21          19.49     9.27       14.38     99.89    88.57      94.23
Tractor hire         22.66     0.00      11.33      80.32     0.00       40.16     0.00     0.00       0.00
Agrochemicals        0.41      0.00      0.20       0.00      86.18      43.09     0.11     0.00       0.05
Ondo state
Agric. inputs        24.59     26.19 25.39          59.9      78.60      69.25     49.44    26.00      37.72
Tree crops           10.79     9.70      10.25      14.31     6.46       10.39     6.29     37.12      21.71
Produce services     11.90     14.46 13.18          10.81     16.13      13.47     10.18    14.48      12.33
Federal capital expenditure (constant 1990 naira, millions)
Agriculture                                         0.0       0.5        0.25      0.5
Livestock                                           0.2       1.1        0.65      0.2
Fisheries                                           0.0       0.0        0.00      0.5
Fertilizer subsidy                                  0.6       3.2        1.9       2.6
Source: Authors’ computations based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Cross
River state Ministry of Agriculture, Niger state Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, and Ondo State
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Note: NEEDS = National Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy.


  2.5. Resource Availability for Financing the Agricultural Budget
89.      The sources of revenue available for financing agricultural budgets are important elements in
understanding the drivers of public expenditure decisions. There are several revenue sources that come
together as funds available to finance expenditures in the agricultural sector. More often than not the
focus of budget analysis is on the expenditure. The revenue component is not often adequately considered
in making decisions about resource allocation and improved budget performance. Between 2008 and
2012, annual average revenue consists of 79 percent oil revenue, 19 percent nonoil revenue, and 2 percent
federal government independent revenue. The oil revenue, which is the most important source of revenue
to the federation account (distributable to all the three tiers of government), consists mainly of crude oil
sales, oil taxes, and royalties. Of the total oil revenue between 2008 and 2012, crude oil and gas sales
constitute an annual average of 54 percent, followed by petroleum profit tax at 33 percent, royalties at 12
percent, and rent and others at 1 percent. On the average, during the same period, the nonoil revenue
consists of 37 percent company income tax, followed by 33 percent VAT, 21 percent customs and excise,
and 9 percent federal government independent revenue (Nigeria, BOF 2014). The revenue that
accumulates in the federation account is shared in the ratio of 52.68 percent to the federal government,
26.72 percent to the states, and 20.60 to the local governments. The revenue derived from VAT, which
accumulates in the VAT pool account, is shared in the ratio of 15 percent to the federal government, 50
percent to the states, and 35 percent to the local governments.

90.      The horizontal allocation formula among states is based on derivation (50 percent), equality of
states (40 percent), and population (10 percent). A similar arrangement applies to revenue sharing of the
VAT pool account among local governments. For the federation account, the vertical and horizontal
allocation formulas are more complex. Oil-producing states first enjoy 13 percent of revenue from oil
sources only. This is deducted from the federation account as a first-line charge. The horizontal allocation
formula for sharing the 13 percent derivation varies directly with the ratio by which states contribute to it.

91.      Since the bulk of the revenue comes from the oil and gas sector, the volatility often experienced
in international oil prices often has deleterious consequences on the performance of the budget. High
revenue volatility not only disrupts budget implementation and creates slippages between budget and
actual expenditure, but the attempt to hedge for such effects through a fiscal rule that benchmarks the oil

                                                                                                             29
price to revenue projections annually actually limits the amount of resources available to the various tiers
of government to finance their budgets. To make public spending less unpredictable in the face of
uncontrollable oil revenue volatility, government adopts a notional price often lower than the current oil
market price. If oil is sold above this budget benchmark price, the extra revenue is saved in the excess
crude oil account. The savings are then available to finance future spending shortfalls in case the price of
oil later falls below the budget benchmark price, or it may be used where other pressing spending needs
arise. In this manner, the government can minimize the likely effects of periodic fluctuations in oil prices
on its spending plans. In what follows we examine how the three tiers of government have fared in terms
of the trends in resource availability for financing their budgets between 2008 and 2012. On account of
recent developments in the international oil market, including the discovery of oil in commercial
quantities in some African countries and the expansion in the production of shale oil in the United States,
the potency of the fiscal rule of thumb of benchmarking oil price for budgetary purposes may be
undermined and the country may face serious revenue shocks that can adversely affect economic growth
and development. Rather than relying on this placebo, concerted efforts will need to be geared toward
developing nonoil revenue sources, and in this regard the agricultural sector is a good candidate, although
it requires huge private-sector investment and expansion in public spending.

2.5.1. Federal-Level Revenue Sources
92.     Revenue available to finance the federal government’s agricultural budget derives from two main
sources—shared and independent (Figure 2.3). Shared revenue is mostly from crude oil–related earnings
and VAT, which accrue jointly to the three tiers of government. Earnings from VAT accumulate in the
VAT pool account while other types of earnings accumulate in the federation account for formulaic
sharing among the three tiers of government periodically. The Federation Account Allocation Committee,
comprising representatives of the three tiers of government, convenes monthly to apply vertical and
horizontal formulas to the balances of both accounts. The federal government depends mostly on shared
revenue to finance its budget. This source of revenue constitutes the bulk of its earnings, contributing
about 92 percent of total federal revenue on average between 2008 and 2012.

Figure 2.3: Major sources of federal government revenue, 2008-12 (constant 1990 naira, millions)

800                          Shared
                                                                      701.9
                             Independent
                                                       649.5
        627.1                                                                         615.6
600                     577.1
                                        522.6



400




200
                                114.5
                                                49.9           43.8                           55.7
                33.4                                                          37.0

   0
           2008           2009            2010           2011            2012          Average
Source: Based on data from federal government budget books, financial statements, and audit reports, 2008-12.


                                                                                                                30
93.      Dependence on crude oil earnings exposes Nigeria’s finances to external shocks and volatility
and exerts pressure on budgetary expenditures. For example, the country seriously depleted sequestered
excess crude oil earnings to finance budgetary expenditures in the wake of the 2008-09 global financial
crises. Oil prices fell sharply from an all-time high of US$147/bbl to about US$38/bbl in a few months.
Even then, the contribution of crude oil to national finances was still high, at 78 percent in 2009, even
while oil prices were at their lowest point.

94.      Independent revenue comes from various sources, including taxes, licenses, mining rents and
royalties, fees and fines, earnings and sales, and rent on government property, as well as interest and
investment earnings. This source of revenue also includes reimbursements —refunds of expenses incurred
on behalf of other governments. Here, the inclusion of reimbursements as revenue is merely to indicate
their availability for financing expenditures rather than to endorse the accounting error of treating a
financing item as revenue. The federal government has independent revenue sources that do not accrue to
the federation and VAT pool accounts, which it administers on its own. These sources include the
education tax;11 personal income and capital gains taxes of residents of the Federal Capital Territory and
Abuja, members of the Nigerian Armed Forces, and foreign service personnel; sale of federal
government–owned assets;12 and investment earnings.

95.     The trend in federal revenue between 2008 and 2012 does not seem to support a high degree of
performance in public spending. In real terms, revenue grew haphazardly, declining by 17 percent in 2010
and thereafter growing at a decreasing rate to give an average growth rate of 3.8 percent over the period
(Table 2.7). Moreover, independent revenue fell below the average annually except in 2009, and from
then on its share of total revenue trended downward. Thus, the revenue constraints on budget
implementation during the period have both external and internal dimensions.

2.5.2. Revenue Sources at the Subnational Level
96.     At the subnational level, the major sources of revenue can be broadly categorized as coming from
federal government statutory allocation (such as from the federation, VAT pool, excess crude, and
mineral derivation accounts); IGR (such as from taxes, levies, and fines); and loans (such as from donor
funds, domestic loans, and other foreign loans). Tables 2.1 to 2.6 in Annex II show the major sources of
revenue available to finance agricultural budgets in the three case study states —Cross River, Niger, and
Ondo—as well as the respective case study LGAs—Akamkpa, Wushishi, and Odigbo. Overall, total state
revenue has increased significantly over time, but unevenly across the three states. It grew the most in
Niger state, by 8.6 percent on average between 2008 and 2012. In Cross River state and Ondo state,
revenue grew on average by 4.1 and 1.5 percent, respectively, during the same period. In general, there is
a heavy reliance on statutory allocations to finance state budgets. As shown in Table 2.6, total revenue
also witnessed considerable fluctuations. These fluctuations are popularly attributed to instability of the
federal government’s sources of revenue, especially the uncertainties surrounding international crude oil
prices. Basically, the prioritized areas of the federal government, relative population, and the economic
buoyancy of federating units constitute major determinants of federal transfers to states.

Table 2.6: Comparison of main sources of revenue, 2008-12 (constant 1990 naira, millions)
                                                                                                    Average
Source                                   2008        2009       2010        2011        2012      (2008-12)
Federal government


11 The education tax accumulates in the tertiary education tax fund, an independent fund managed solely for
funding tertiary education.
12 Sale of nationally owned assets accrues to the federation account.

                                                                                                          31
Total revenue                           66,044.2 69,164.9 57,255.8 69,326.1               73,889.0          67,136.0
Total revenue growth (%)                       -      4.7    -17.2     21.1                    6.6               3.8
Independent revenue                      3,337.8 11,451.6 4,994.2 4,378.5                  3,701.6           5,572.7
Independent revenue share (%)                5.1     16.6      8.7      6.3                    5.0               8.3
Cross River state
Total revenue                            2,072.0     1,336.6      1,078.2     1,765.2      1,896.6           1,629.7
Total revenue growth (%)                       -       -35.5        -19.3        63.7          7.4               4.1
Internally generated revenue               183.3       206.0        175.6       204.2        279.2             209.7
IGR share (%)                                8.8        15.4         16.3        11.6         14.7              13.4
Niger state
Total revenue                            1,306.8     1,428.2      1,178.8     1,767.2      1,634.7           1,463.1
Total revenue growth (%)                       -         9.3        -17.5        49.9         -7.5               8.6
Internally generated revenue                74.2        86.0         73.5        80.7         86.3              80.1
IGR share (%)                                5.7         6.0          6.2         4.6          5.3               5.6
Ondo state
Total revenue                            2,433.1     2,250.4      1,660.5     2,061.0      2,381.1           2,157.2
Total revenue growth (%)                       -        -7.5        -26.2        24.1         15.5               1.5
Internally generated revenue               134.4       124.5        143.1       167.8        103.9             134.7
IGR share (%)                                5.5         5.5          8.6         8.1          4.4               6.4
Akamkpa LGA
Total revenue                                54.9        60.5        45.9          0.0          0.0             32.3
Total revenue growth (%)                        -        10.2       -24.1          0.0          0.0             -3.5
Internally generated revenue                  0.0         0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0              0.0
IGR share (%)                                 0.0         0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0              0.0
Wushishi LGA
Total revenue                                35.1         0.1         1.0        72.7           0.0             21.8
Total revenue growth (%)                        -       -99.7       770.3     7,490.3           0.0          2,040.2
Internally generated revenue                  0.0         0.0         0.1         0.1           0.0              0.0
IGR share (%)                                 0.0         0.0         6.5         0.1           0.0              1.3
Odigbo LGA
Total revenue                                15.5        15.4        23.9        20.0           0.0             15.0
Total revenue growth (%)                        -        -0.5        55.3       -16.4           0.0              9.6
Internally generated revenue                  0.0         0.0         0.0         0.0           0.0              0.0
IGR share (%)                                 0.0         0.0         0.0         0.0           0.0              0.0
Source: Authors’ compilation using data from federal, state, and local government budget books, financial
statements, and audit reports, 2008-12 and SPARC (2014).
Notes: IGR = internally generated revenue; LGA = local government area.

97.     Allocations from the federation account dominate total federal transfers to state governments,
ranging from about 78 to 86 percent of total state revenue on average during the periods for which data is
available. In addition to the volatility of these transfers, they are also not always disbursed in a timely
manner. This implies that any disequilibrium to revenue sources of the federal government will

                                                                                                                 32
significantly affect the revenue of the states, impacting both the timeliness and the quality of budget
implementation. As an oil-producing state, Ondo state enjoys federal transfers from the mineral derivation
account in addition to other federal transfers.

98.      Another important source of revenue is IGR. It can be used to ameliorate economic shocks and
risks associated with overdependence on federal transfers. Between 2008 and 2012, IGR followed an
uneven trend. In real terms, Cross River state has the highest average (₦ 209.7 million) followed by Ondo
state (₦ 134.7 million) and Niger state (₦ 80.1 million). As share of total revenue, IGR is also highest in
Cross River state (13.4 percent), followed by Ondo state (6.4 percent) and Niger state (5.6 percent).
Within IGR, taxes constitute the major component, ranging from 46 to 58 percent of IGR, on average.
This shows the importance of taxes as one of the fiscal instruments used in financing government
budgets. The irregular patterns in levels of IGR observed across states suggests either that the institutions
and agencies tasked with the responsibilities of generating internal revenue for the state are not doing a
good job or that issues of corruption prevail. Loans from domestic and foreign lenders, including from
major donor agencies, represent the third major category of revenue sources used to finance state budgets,
representing approximately 3 percent to 11 percent of state revenue, on average. Domestic and foreign
loans are for either short or long terms with concessionary or market-determined interest rates. Domestic
loans are mostly used to make up for shortfalls of federal allocations in meeting recurrent expenditures,
such as salaries. Loans from foreign donors, on the other hand, are usually project based. The
accumulation of loans can pose a serious obstacle to economic development, with loan repayment
becoming a major disincentive to investments. It is worth nothing, however, that data on loans are
irregular across the years, implying that a true assessment of trends is not likely.

99.      At the local government level, federal statutory allocations are also the major sources of revenue
available to finance local government budgets, averaging about 98 percent across both years and states.
State statutory allocations, which should represent 10 percent of state IGR, are about the second-largest
source of revenue. But a combination of limited data availability at the local government level and
inadequate transfers from states hampers an accurate and comparative assessment of this source of
revenue. The IGR base of the LGAs is much lower than that of the states, as the magnitude of dependence
on federal transfers shows. Of the three case study LGAs, Akamkpa in Cross River state had the highest
average total revenue (₦ 32.3 million) between 2008 and 2012, followed by Wushishi in Niger state with
₦ 21.8 million, while Odigbo in Ondo state had the lowest (₦ 15.00 million) (Table 2.6).



  2.6. The Budget Process
2.6.1. The Budget Process at the Federal Level

100.     To begin the budget process, federal MDAs submit their budget proposals to the Budget Office of
the Federation in response to a call circular. The call circular follows the completion of the fiscal strategy
paper (FSP), which is approved by the Federal Executive Council. The FSP includes the medium-term
fiscal framework (MTFF) and the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) at an aggregate level.
The National Assembly must also approve the FSP as required by the Fiscal Responsibility Act 2007.
Without this approval, the National Assembly will not allow a presentation of the budget. The idea behind
this constraint is to approve a binding fiscal framework for budget formulation and implementation in the
medium term, which will then form the basis of the budget. However, it could sometimes cause practical
difficulties that contribute to delays in approving the budget.

101.   The Budget Office of the Federation conducts first-level budget negotiations with the MDAs,
during which discussions of the capital budget feature prominently. Within the recurrent budget, the
                                                                                                 33
personnel budget is fairly straightforward, with the parameters and variables easy to determine. But one
major complicating factor with personnel costing is the perennial problem of ghost workers. Overhead
costs also pose some challenge during negotiations, with no clear rules for determining appropriate levels.
The main cause of the problem is that overheads cover mostly the cost of running the administration and
rarely, if ever, include operations and maintenance costs, which are classified under capital expenditures.
When a resolution is reached, the Federal Executive Council then reviews and forwards the draft
proposals to the National Assembly for final approval.

102.     Each chamber of the National Assembly conducts a detailed review of the proposed MTFF and
MTEF. The Committee on Finance and Appropriation of each chamber conducts a detailed review of the
budget proposals using specialized sectoral committees as subcommittees. These specialized committees
scrutinize the budget proposals and invite the MDAs to defend or negotiate their proposals. Capital
expenditure proposals feature prominently in these negotiations. The National Assembly then presents a
harmonized appropriation bill to the president for approval. The approved appropriation act has the power
of law, and the executive is to implement it as made. After budget approval, the federal minister of
finance releases funds through quarterly warrants to the federal treasury. The warrants authorize payment
for expenditures listed in them. Nowadays, warrants may not always represent cash availability, as was
the case in the past. Consequently, the treasury has devised a process of cash backing for capital projects,
which transfers funds to MDA accounts at the Central Bank of Nigeria. The MDAs use these funds to
implement their capital projects, although they may not be able to utilize all of these funds for various
reasons. The difference between the cash backing and balances in the MDA accounts at the end of the
period thus represents the actual funds expended by the MDAs.

103.    Further, FMF produces quarterly implementation reports in compliance with the Fiscal
Responsibility Act 2007. The act requires FMF to submit quarterly budget performance reports to the
Joint Finance Committee of the National Assembly and the Fiscal Responsibility Commission. FMF also
publishes implementation reports on the Budget Office of the Federation’s website. 13 However, these
reports get published too late to be effective as budget monitoring reports, despite assertions to that effect.

104.     Delays in budget approval have negatively affected budget implementation over the years. Late
completion of proposals, untimely legislative review, and late presidential approval due to disagreements
with the legislature are some of the factors responsible for these delays. These delays affect the
implementation of the capital budget only, because the recurrent budget is usually disbursed fully.
Delayed implementation of the capital budget complicates the tracking and reporting of expenditures
because financial reports have to compare budget and actual expenditure figures of different periods.
Specifically, while reported budget figures are for the current year, some of the actual expenditures are
part of the preceding year’s budget executed in the current year. It is thus difficult to distinguish between
the preceding and current year’s budget. The recently passed 2013 budget attempts to correct this by
automatically integrating any unexecuted portion of the 2012 budget into the 2013 budget. This will,
however, not entirely correct the issues of budget tracking.14

2.6.2. Budget Process at the Subnational Level

Cross River State

105.    The budget process in Cross River state has undergone several modifications following

13 The report is a sampling of capital projects and programs carried out by the Budget Office of the
Federation. It is put together in collaboration with selected MDAs, civil society organizations, and the media.
14 To further improve the budget process, continuing reforms include introduction of additional modules in

GIFMIS, the IPPIS, and TSA.
                                                                                                            34
economic, institutional, and political imperatives. The seemingly unending and huge variance between
budgetary allocations and actual spending in the state over the years necessitated a rethinking of the
state’s public finance management. Prior to 2006, the budget process adopted in Cross River state
involved budget incrementalism at different levels of aggregation and use of different thresholds for small
changes. The state initiated a budget reform process in 2006 and after a successful pilot program adopted
the MTEF approach of budgeting. This budgeting approach is inherently designed and structured to
ensure both horizontal and vertical coordination of activities among different key government institutions,
from policy formulation to budget implementation. Each of the institutions has specific roles to perform
in ensuring that the different phases of the budget cycle are undertaken. These institutions are statutory
and hierarchical in the flow and sharing of fiscal information. Basically, 12 distinct institutions and three
committees are involved in budgeting and budget execution in the state (see Annex II, Table 2.1).

106.     Cross River state develops a multiyear medium-term budget framework, which encompasses
three separate, but related, frameworks—MTFF, medium-term budget framework (MTBF), and MTEF.15
Adoption of the MTEF approach has entrenched the principles of accountability, transparency, and
performance-based budgeting. These principles, in turn, led to the creation of the Department of Budget
Monitoring and Evaluation, which is headed by a state executive member (special adviser) in the state and
the Department of Budget, Monitoring and Due Process at the local government level. Under this system,
the Department of Budget, Monitoring and Evaluation of the state, in conjunction with the Ministry of
Local Government Affairs, conducts an annual local government budget stakeholders’ consultative forum
to solicit the input of different stakeholders for the state budget. There is also periodic training of local
government budget officers to build their capacities for the MTEF budgeting approach. With proper
identification, documentation, and review of relevant policy documents,16 the annual budget allocation
process in the Ministry of Agriculture usually begins with a statewide budget stakeholder’s consultative
forum. The forum brings together different stakeholders including civil society organizations,
nongovernmental organizations, farmers’ associations, leaders of the state elders’ forum, bureaucrats from
the ministry, and departments and agencies of agriculture to examine the performance of the previous
year’s budget and contribute to the expected budget.

107.     The medium-term sector strategy (MTSS) document sets in motion the basis for fiscal direction in
the Ministry of Agriculture. It begins with a review of existing budget commitments. The budget review
involves comparing current budget execution and commitments against the state’s targets for improved
service delivery. This specifically involves the review of both capital and recurrent budget items. The
review of relevant policy documents as well as external and internal environments thus provides the basis
for setting new targets. The criteria are that these new targets be consistent with the state’s agricultural
policy objectives and be properly aligned with the Ministry of Agriculture’s vision, mission, core values,
and strategic issues, and with stakeholders’ needs or expectations. Based on the new set of targets,
specific budget commitments are scored based on five criteria: clarity of current justification for budget
commitment, risk of current budget commitment’s failing to perform due to negative events, current
impact of budget commitment, likelihood of the time frame and budget, and expected future impact of
budget commitments. Assessing the performance of existing budget commitments requires giving
consideration to initiatives that are not performing well but have the potential to be improved for better
service delivery. Potential steps to improve such initiatives are clearly documented and given a higher
score contingent on revision of the current level of spending.


15 According to OPM (2000), MTFF, the first step toward an MTEF, contains a report of fiscal policy objectives
and a set of integrated medium-term macroeconomic and fiscal targets and projections. An MTBF builds on
the MTFF and contains medium-term budget estimates for individual spending agencies. An MTEF develops
the approach further, adding elements of activity and output-based budgeting to the MTBF.
16 Such documents include the economic blueprint, MDG documents, SEEDS, and LEEDS.

                                                                                                           35
108.     The Ministry of Agriculture then develops specific strategies based on the new targets that have
been agreed upon and formulated. These strategies are usually in two parts for each target: (1)
continuation of existing programs included in the previous year’s budget and (2) new initiatives that the
ministry decides on to bridge the gap between existing programs and new targets. Each initiative may
consist of one or more programs, and it may combine more than one budgeting approach. If there is a
noticeable gap between services provided under existing programs and the MTSS targets, actions to be
taken can include the following: expansion of the existing program; modification of an existing program
to improve coverage and performance; introduction of a new program, in parallel with the existing
program, to supplement the current level of service; and introduction of a new program to offer a new
service. Any of the stated actions may involve an increase in the recurrent budget alone, or an increase in
the capital budget accompanied by an increase in the recurrent budget. Outcomes to indicate results of
initiatives, budget impact from additional costs on both recurrent and capital budgets, and value for
money are the three main criteria specified against each initiative when developing strategies. After all
initiatives have been prioritized, the Ministry of Agriculture then costs the MTSS in a clear and
transparent manner based on credible and complete information from various relevant sources. Activity-
based budgeting is the standard method used by all MDAs for developing costed strategies.

109.     Finally, the costed MTSS is integrated into the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget, prepared
according to the format prescribed by the state Ministry of Finance. After review and approval by the
commissioner of agriculture, the MTSS and budget are submitted to the Department of Budget,
Monitoring and Evaluation. This department then prepares a consolidated MTEF and the state
government budget at the same time and convenes a meeting to resolve any inconsistencies and cross-
cutting issues. When all issues have been resolved, the Department of Budget, Monitoring and Evaluation
then submits the consolidated MTEF to the state Budget and Performance Review Committee for review.
The MTEF is then submitted to the governor for comments and later to the Executive Council for
deliberation. On the Executive Council’s recommendation, the governor approves the MTEF and then
submits the MTEF and MTFF to the House of Assembly for approval as the state multiyear medium-term
budget framework. The annual budget proposal is then submitted for legislative review and enactment at
the same time.

Niger State

110.     The budget process in Niger state is both policy driven and priority determined depending on the
availability of funds. It involves the State Planning Commission, MDAs, and the state legislature. Each
MDA formulates its programs based on its sector-level policies. The beginning of the budget process in
Niger state involves efforts to link sector-level policy, planning, and budgeting. This requires, at its core,
the development and effective implementation of a comprehensive MTFF as well as a sector-level MTFF.
To formally commence the process, the Niger State Planning Commission sends out call circulars
requesting that all MDAs submit budget proposals for the upcoming financial year. The MTSS is used to
develop the budget proposal on the basis of the priorities of MDAs. Budget proposal submissions must
take into account existing guiding documents (strategy papers) that have been produced by the Niger state
government. These guiding documents include the DAP and Vision 3: 2020. For the agricultural sector,
these guiding documents include the Niger state agriculture and rural development policy and Niger state
ATA. These documents lay out goals, objectives, and challenges for all sectors of the state economy.
Each proposed project is then costed, after which the budget is submitted to the State Planning
Commission. From the overarching policies and strategies that come in the form of the MTFF, the
stakeholders then link the upcoming financial year’s activities with the medium- and long-term priorities
of the state government.

111.    Niger state government is now in the second phase of implementing an MTFF. The state uses the

                                                                                                           36
MTFF for linking its development policies for education, health, agriculture, or any other sector to
planning. The MTFF is critical in the budget process. It guides resource allocation during budget
screening exercises that follow submission of budget proposals. Budget proposals received by the State
Planning Commission are then subjected to an internal screening process by key stakeholders from all
MDAs. These stakeholders include the commissioner, permanent secretary, directors, and other heads of
departments. The next stage is the resubmission of the proposed budget to the State Planning Commission
for further screening. Each MDA usually appears before a budget defense panel on a scheduled
appointment to defend its submission. During the screening, priority projects are identified and agreed
upon using the MTFF as a guide. In addition, strategies for implementation of the projects are clearly
outlined. Further, the state observes an expenditure ceiling or envelope for every MDA, which is decided
upon by the Ministry of Finance. This envelope is usually discussed at the screening forum. Once a
ministry has finalized its budget and the final structure of the budget is established, it is submitted to the
Ministry of Finance for additional intersectoral meetings and revisions before the finalized copy is sent to
the House of Assembly for approval.

112.    The IGR component of the budget is screened by the Niger state Board of Internal Revenue,
while the Department of Budget of the Ministry of Finance screens the personnel costs. Subsequently, the
Planning Commission harmonizes all MDA submissions and forwards them to the state Executive
Council for further screening. Next, the proposed budget is sent back to the State Planning Commission
for additional harmonization and afterward presented to the state legislature. Copies of the proposed
budget as presented are distributed to every MDA. Circulars for screening are then issued to all MDAs
inviting them to go before the legislative committees for budget defense. The House of Assembly
Committee on Agriculture screens the agriculture budget, while the MDAs, Board of Internal Revenue,
State Planning Commission, other stakeholders, and the press are in attendance. After this budget defense
exercise, the house committee presents the budget to the House of Assembly for approval of the
appropriation bill. The bill is then presented to the governor for approval.

113.     After the governor’s approval of the appropriation bill, the budget is then ready to be
implemented. The procedure to access funds then follows a due process. First, the MDAs obtain
clearance, in principle, from the Planning Commission, and the Planning Commission verifies whether
the MDAs have budgetary allocations for the proposed projects. The MDAs then prepare memos and
attach them to the clearances, which are then submitted to the Executive Council. Typically, expenditure
limits are set. For example, if the governor has a spending limit of ₦ 10 million, any amount above this
spending threshold would have to be submitted to the state Executive Council for approval.

114.    Each MDA has a resident due process team that examines projects for approval. The resident due
process team comprises the following: (1) permanent secretary (chairman); (2) director of planning,
research, and statistics (secretary); (3) director of administration; (4) director of engineering services; (5)
chief accountant; (6) chief store officer; and (7) representative of the State Public Procurement Board.
Attendance at the due process meeting is mandatory for members of the resident due process team, and
the directorate undertaking the procurement must be represented. The project is then passed to the
Procurement Board, which issues a certificate of no objection to execute the project. Request for release
of funds is then submitted to the Ministry of Finance through the State Planning Commission. Each MDA
then conducts an open competitive bidding process for public procurement of goods and services. The
State Planning Commission records all requests made by the MDAs and tracks expenditures.

Ondo State




                                                                                                            37
115.     Based on NEEDS 17 and Vision 20: 2020 18 and in consultation with the state governor, the
Ministry of Economic Planning and Budget prepares an envelope for each ministry in the state (the limit
for each ministry’s budget). Each commissioner or permanent secretary then allocates the envelope to
various departments and units within each ministry. Directors and heads of units in each ministry are
allowed to provide inputs into the budget at this stage, but they are not allowed to exceed the envelope
limits. The budgets allocated to various ministries are then harmonized and submitted as the proposed
budget to the state governor through the Ministry of Economic Planning and Budget, which assesses the
accuracy of the proposed capital and recurrent expenditure estimates.

116.    The governor then submits the proposed budget to the House of Assembly for review. The House
of Assembly Committee on Finance and Appropriation then screens the budgets of the MDAs. The heads
of MDAs defend their budgets with a presentation to the committee, which is expected to be backed up
with the necessary documents in order to ensure accuracy and accountability. Next, needed modifications
are made at the secretariat of the committee, and the committee presents the revised budget to the full
house for approval. At this stage of the approval process, little or no amendment is made to the budget.
The budget process in Ondo state occurs as fast as possible.19



3. TRENDS IN PUBLIC EXPENDITURE IN AGRICULTURE
117.     The magnitude of funds allocated to agriculture either at the federal, state, or the local
government level depends on the amount of funds available to the tiers of government and priorities of
the current government, among other considerations. An analysis of the levels and composition of
spending is important to determine the allocative efficiency of agricultural spending. Such analysis
provides information on whether agricultural public expenditures are strategically prioritized across
policies, programs, and projects (World Bank 1998, 2011). In other words, it provides answers to the
question of whether public funds for agriculture are being allocated for the right expenditure items. In
addition, the types of agricultural expenditure that each government tier undertakes can reveal the de facto
distributions of spending responsibilities across tiers. An understanding of the levels of agricultural
spending is a starting point in determining allocative efficiency. The size of agricultural spending in
relation to total spending indicates the fiscal costs of agricultural policies (World Bank 2011).

     3.1. Relative Size of Agricultural Spending at the Federal Level
118.    On the basis of the CAADP target, which recommends that 10 percent of the national budget be
allocated to agriculture, federal agricultural spending is low in Nigeria. Between 2008 and 2012, federal

17 SEEDS in Ondo State is a derivative of NEEDS. It is a follow-up action plan of the state’s Road Map to
Progress. The document was put together with the full participation of a cross-section of people in the state
and through a broad consultation with various interest groups and stakeholders. For the first time in the
history of development plan formulation in Nigeria, people are being involved in charting the way they want
to be governed. It is a reform development strategy subscribed to as a home-grown initiative in response to
development challenges.
18 To develop this medium-term plan, subject matter specialists and budget officers were drawn from various

MDAs. The specialists were grouped into teams according to their sectors of expertise, responsible for
reviewing initiatives or programs in the Ondo state component of Nigeria Vision 20: 2020, developing
activities that are required to implement the initiatives or programs, and also costing these activities.
19 For example, the 2013 budget defense at the Ondo State House of Assembly commenced on January 21,

2013, and by February 5, 2013, the governor had signed the appropriation bill into law.

                                                                                                          38
agricultural budget and actual expenditure shares averaged 5.5 and 4.6 percent, respectively (Annex III,
Table 3.1), showing an overall declining trend during the same period (Figure 3.1).20 Actual expenditure
on agriculture rose by 57.7 percent in 2009 from its 2008 level, but it consistently declined after that until
2012. This declining trend in spending suggests a waning emphasis on the agricultural sector. However,
the breakup of agriculture and water resources into two distinct ministries in 2010 also contributed to this
decline. Therefore agricultural expenditures for 2008 and 2009 include an indeterminate amount of
nonagricultural spending. Attempts in this analysis to isolate nonagricultural spending were unsuccessful
for 2008 and only partially successful for 2009. Agricultural spending for 2009 excludes capital
expenditures of nonagriculture parastatals that could be identified from the 2009 financial statements. But
there are relatively few such parastatals because the 12 river basin development authorities (RBDAs) are
parastatals of the water subsector under the current arrangement. An attempt to isolate nonagricultural
recurrent spending was also not successful.




20 Specifically, the decline in 2011 would have been more pronounced but for a revolving treasury loan of
₦22.3 billion to FMARD to help fund its fertilizer subsidy program and the investment of ₦3.2 billion into the
Nigeria Agricultural Cooperative and Rural Development Bank (NACRDB). The books do not show any new
fertilizer loan in 2012, and the federal government injected only ₦0.77 billion into NACR DB in 2012.
                                                                                                           39
Figure 3.1: Share of agriculture in total spending in Nigeria, 2008-12

                                              14
                                                                  Federal
   % share of agriculture in total spending



                                                                  Cross River State
                                              12
                                                                  Niger State
                                                                  Ondo State
                                              10

                                               8

                                               6

                                               4

                                               2

                                               0
                2008        2009         2010        2011           2012        Average
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from the ministries of agriculture and finance of the federal
government, Cross River, Niger, and Ondo states.

119.     Agricultural spending for 2008-12 thus includes expenditures by the RBDAs. Because these
authorities supervise the 12 dams and about 42 irrigation projects of the federal government, their
expenditures are an important component of agricultural spending. However, 2010-12 agricultural
spending (after the breakup) does not include expenditures incurred on the construction of new dams and
irrigation projects. Expenditures of the RBDAs also include nonirrigation- and nonagriculture-related
costs such as water supply to the community and desertification and erosion control programs, but
inadequate information made it impossible to isolate these expenditures from the agricultural spending
data for 2010-12.

  3.2. Relative Size of Agricultural Spending at the Subnational Level
120.    Both budget and actual shares of agricultural spending in total state spending for all three case
study states are presented in Annex III, Table 3.2. In Cross River state, the agricultural sector budget
accounted for 1.2 percent of the total state budget, on average, between 2008 and 2012. The share of
actual agricultural expenditure in actual total state expenditure was 0.9 percent in the same period. Both
budget and actual shares show a general down trend, with actual agricultural spending falling to less than
1 percent from 2009-12 (Figure 3.1). In Ondo state, the budget and actual shares of agricultural
expenditure in total state expenditure (although a little higher, at 3.8 percent and 3.6 percent, respectively,
compared with Cross River state) have been more variable, with a highly uneven trend between 2008 and
2012. In Niger state, budget share has been unstable while actual shares trended downward, from an all-
time high of 11.9 percent in 2010 to 3.5 percent in 2012. Nonetheless, the average budget and actual
shares (4.6 and 5.6 percent, respectively) are the highest among the three states.

121.     Insufficient data hamper a proper assessment of the size and pattern of agricultural spending in
the three case study LGAs. For this analysis and others where data gaps are many, it is not clear whether
it is due to poor budget reporting or whether the items were not budgeted for or spending just did not
occur. In such cases and subsequent ones, the assumption in this report is that spending did not occur. For
                                                                                                            40
          Wushishi LGA, data were not available at all. In Akamkpa LGA, average agricultural spending as share
          of total Akamkpa LGA expenditure was 2 percent between 2008 and 2012. The trend of agricultural
          spending in Odigbo LGA (with the most data) mirrors that at the state level, showing similar variability
          (Annex III, Table 3.3). The share of actual agricultural expenditure in actual total Odigbo LGA
          expenditure was 0.9 percent during the same period.

          122.     Of the three case study states, Niger state had the highest share of agricultural spending in total
          public spending when compared with other selected states across different regions of the country during
          the period under review (Table 3.1). Niger state’s average level of agricultural spending compares
          favorably with that of states like Anambra, Enugu, Lagos, Jigawa, Kaduna, and Yobe. The level of
          agricultural spending in Ondo state is suboptimal, falling below that of six out of the nine comparator
          states. Cross River state’s level of agricultural spending is the lowest, falling below that of eight of the
          nine comparator states. These trends provide only a comparison of magnitude of spending; it is the
          importance of agriculture in each state that determines performance across states. The expectation is that
          higher spending should be observed in states where agriculture is more important and lower spending in
          states where agriculture is less important.

          Table 3.1: Average budget and spending in the agricultural sector across different states and regions of
          Nigeria, 2004-12

                                               All sectors                  Agricultural sector                                       Spending
                                     Average   Average                Average    Average                                Share of     per capita
  State       Region   Population*   annual     annual                annual      annual                   Share of    agriculture        in
                                     budget    spending               budget     spending                agriculture        in       agriculture
                                      (MN)       (MN)      Variance    (MN)        (MN)       Variance    in budget     spending       (naira)
Zamfara       NW         3,259,846    43,660     28,170     -35.5%       4,459       2,913     -34.7%         10.2%         10.3%           894
Katsina       NW         5,792,578    58,239     42,970     -26.2%       4,395       3,264     -25.7%          7.5%          7.6%           563
Kano          NW         9,383,682    69,813     62,087     -11.1%       7,234       4,037     -44.2%         10.4%          6.5%           430
Niger         NC         3,950,249    68,494     41,388     -39.6%       3,146       2,052     -34.8%          4.6%          5.0%           519
Kaduna        NW         6,066,562   100,453     59,410     -40.9%       8,335       2,653     -68.2%          8.3%          4.5%           437
Yobe          NE         2,321,591    49,565     37,096     -25.2%       2,343       1,629     -30.5%          4.7%          4.4%           701
Jigawa        NW         4,348,649    57,117     51,121     -10.5%       2,418       1,875     -22.5%          4.2%          3.7%           431
Enugu         SE         3,257,298    46,944     39,152     -16.6%       1,542         869     -43.6%          3.3%          2.2%           267
Anambra       SE         4,182,032    53,929     36,347     -32.6%       1,223         656     -46.4%          2.3%          1.8%           157
Lagos         SW         9,013,534   295,371    230,372     -22.0%       1,127       1,234       9.5%          0.4%          0.5%           137
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from SPARC (2014).
Notes: * Population figures are from Nigeria’s 2006 census. MN = million naira; NC = north central; NE = northeast; NW =
northwest; SE = southeast; SW = southwest.

          123.    Among the comparator states, average agricultural expenditures ranges between 0.5 percent and
          10.3 percent of total expenditure for the period between 2004 and 2012. The highest share is observed in
          Zamfara state (10.3 percent), followed by Katsina (7.6 percent) and Kano (6.5percent), while the lowest
          share of agriculture in total expenditure is observed in Lagos state (0.5 percent), followed by Anambra
          (1.8 percent) and Enugu (2.2 percent).

          124.    One common feature observed when budget and actual expenditures are compared is that actual
          expenditures are almost always less than those in the budget. In addition, the variance is even higher for
          the agricultural sector, implying that the share of agriculture in actual expenditure is usually less than the
          share of agriculture in the budget. In a given year, the variance between budget and actual expenditures
          could reach as high as 61 percent when all sectors are considered and 99 percent for agriculture.
                                                                                                                                     41
  3.3. Share of Agricultural Spending Relative to That of Other Key Sectors
125.     The importance that governments assign to agriculture compared with other sectors is evident
when the share of agricultural spending in total spending is used to assess the relative allocations of funds
to other key sectors in the economy (World Bank 2011). Given the stated agricultural policy objectives of
the governments of the three case study states, the expectation would be that adequate public funds will
be provided to fund agricultural programs and projects. Generally, however, the allocation of government
resources for agricultural development has not been one of the key priorities in the three states.

3.3.1. Comparing the Share of Agriculture in Total Federal Spending with Spending in Other
Key Sectors

126.    At the federal level, the share of agricultural spending in total spending is lower than the
corresponding shares of most of the sectors (Annex III, Table 3.4). For example, compared with an
average of 4.6 percent for agriculture, corresponding shares for economic affairs, public order and safety,
general public services, and defense averaged 24.4 percent, 15.3 percent, 13.3 percent, and 9 percent,
respectively, between 2008 and 2012. Spending shares for similar key sectors such as education and
health are relatively closer in magnitude to that of agriculture, averaging 7.4 percent and 5.4 percent,
respectively, during the same period. However, agriculture was the only sector that saw a decline in
spending, falling on average by 14.8 percent from 2008-12. In contrast, spending on education and health
increased on average by 41.4 percent and 33.8 percent, respectively (see Annex III, Table 3.4).

127.     These trends suggest that budgetary allocation to agriculture is low compared with that of other
key sectors despite its recognized role in the fight against poverty, hunger, and unemployment, and in the
pursuit of economic development. It may seem that related sectors (health and education) have some sort
of protection compared with agriculture, given that both sectors see upward trends in spending despite
declines in total federal spending (see Annex III, Table 3.5). For more in-depth inquiry, it is necessary to
examine how agricultural spending fared in comparison with other subsectors within the economic affairs
sector. Economic affairs is the largest functional sector of the federal government in terms of expenditure
share (Annex III, Table 3.4). However, the sector is not a single sector similar to education and health but
instead comprises several activities, including works (roads and public infrastructure), agriculture, power,
petroleum, transport and aviation, water, communication, and mines. An assessment of spending trends
within the economic affairs sector shows that works is the top-priority subsector, accounting for 24
percent of total spending on average between 2008 and 2012 (Figure 3.2). Agriculture ranks second,
accounting for 18 percent of total economic affairs spending, followed by power (15 percent) and
transport and aviation (14 percent). It is important to note that expenditures for the 12 RBDAs are
included here as agricultural expenditures rather than as expenditures incurred for the water resources
subsector. Spending on the power and the trade and investment sectors also declined alongside spending
for agriculture, falling by 14.5 percent and 1.2 percent, respectively, on average from 2008-12.
Conversely, spending on communications, transport and aviation, and mines increased on average by 24.1
percent, 18 percent, and 17.2 percent, respectively (see Annex III, Table 3.6).

Figure 3.2: Sectoral shares of actual economic affairs spending, 2008-12




                                                                                                          42
                      Communication          Trade and
                           s                investment
            Petroleum     2%                    2%           Mines
               6%                                             1%

                                                                     Works
       Water resources                                               24%
             7%


                Other
                11%


                                                                     Agriculture
             Transport and
                                                                        18%
                aviation
                 14%
                                                     Power
                                                      15%
Source: Based on data from Federal Ministry of Finance.


128.    There are, however, good justifications for the large expenditures on the works, power, and
transport and aviation subsectors within economic affairs. Infrastructure deficits in roads, power, energy,
transport, and aviation constitute some of the most critical impediments to achieving sustainable growth
and development in Nigeria. Public investments in these subsectors have suffered neglect in the past, and
these infrastructures are in dire need of rehabilitation and even new investments. This perhaps explains
the increase in expenditures in those subsectors. However, the challenges to agriculture are no less
daunting, and the performance of the sector remains inconsistent. Sustainable development is barely
possible without exploiting the potentials of the agricultural sector to achieve food self-sufficiency,
promote employment and economic growth, and enhance foreign exchange earnings. However, achieving
the ambitious goals set out for agriculture both in the ATA and CAADP require no less spending
commitment.21


     3.3.2. Comparing the Share of Agriculture in Total Spending with That of Other Key Sectors
     at the Subnational Level

129.      In Cross River and Ondo states, the shares of actual agricultural expenditures in total
expenditures are low compared with those of other key sectors such as education, health, and works. In
Cross River state, while the share of actual agricultural spending in actual total spending averaged 0.9
percent from 2008 to 2012, the corresponding shares for education, works, and health averaged 9.7
percent, 5.9 percent, and 2.6 percent, respectively, during the same period (Annex III, Table 3.7). The
agricultural sector is also less favored in Ondo state; with an average of 3.6 percent in actual agricultural
spending, corresponding shares for education, works, health averaged 11.6 percent, 10.7 percent, and 5.5
percent, respectively, between 2000 and 2012 (Annex III, Table 3.9). These findings show that among the
critical sectors examined, the majority of Ondo state funds were expended on education and works.

21It is important to note that aggregate agricultural spending discussed in this chapter does not represent the
country’s total consolidated expenditure on agriculture because agricultura l development is a concurrent
function of the federal government and subnational governments.
                                                                                                            43
130.     Similar to the state level, agricultural spending as a share of total LGA spending compares
unfavorably with that of other sectors. In Akamkpa LGA, agriculture received the least attention in terms
of actual expenditures (1 percent on average between 2008 and 2012), while most of the funds (29.1
percent on average during the same period) were expended on works (Annex III, Table 3.8). In Odigbo
LGA, agriculture is also clearly not a top priority. Actual spending on agriculture as a share of total LGA
spending was 1.1 percent on average compared with about 21.2 percent and 3.4 percent for health and
works, respectively, for the period 2008-11 (Annex III, Table 3.10). It should not be surprising that these
local governments are not able to maintain agricultural programs and projects in their domains or initiate
new ones. Odigbo LGA, for example, is no longer able to supply seedlings to farmers, a function it has
performed previously. The thin allocation of funds to agriculture is also evident in other areas such as the
inability of the local government to maintain the only tractor that it owns.

  3.4. Agricultural Public Expenditure in Nigeria Compared with That of Other
  African Countries
131.     In the last decade, the agricultural sector in Africa has received more attention than previously. A
decade has already passed since the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) launched its
Africa-wide initiative, CAADP, in Maputo, and many African countries including Nigeria pledged to
allocate at least 10 percent of their national budgets to the agricultural sector in order to boost the growth
of the sector at least by 6 percent annually (NEPAD and AU 2003). In fact, the Regional Strategic
Analysis and Knowledge Support System (ReSAKSS) dedicated its 2012 Africa-wide Annual Trends and
Outlook Report to looking at trends and patterns in public agricultural expenditures, and in particular
examining how countries are performing against the Maputo Declaration benchmarks (Benin and Yu
2013).

132.     Compared with many African countries, government’s expenditure in agriculture as a percentage
of total government expenditure and in proportion to agricultural GDP is small in Nigeria. As depicted in
Figure 3.3, of the total government expenditure of Nigeria, the share of the agricultural sector is only 3.8
percent—on average—for the period between 2000 and 2010. This figure is less than the continental
average of 5.4 percent, the West African average of 7.4 percent, and the 10 percent target set by CAADP.
In this regard, the country is ranked 18th out of the 32 SSA countries included in the SPEED 2012 dataset
(IFPRI 2013). Several countries in West Africa, including Burkina Faso (18.3 percent), Niger (15
percent), Mali (14.7 percent), Senegal (11.4 percent), and Benin (5.9 percent), as well as countries in
other parts of the continent, including Malawi (13.6 percent), Ethiopia (11.9 percent), and Zambia (10.8
percent), have spent a far higher share than Nigeria during the period. However, compared with the 1.8
percent share registered for the period between 2000 and 2005 (Mogues, Morris, et al. 2012), the 3.8
percent share of agriculture in total government spending is an improvement. Moreover, the country’s
relative position has also improved over time. As presented in Mogues, Morris, and others (2012), in
2000 Nigeria’s agricultural public spending as a share of total spending was the lowest of all African
countries for which data were available.




                                                                                                           44
Figure 3.3: Average share of agriculture in total government expenditure in Nigeria compared with that of
other African countries, 2000-10

                                              20
  Share of agriculture in total spending, %




                                              18
                                              16
                                              14
                                              12
                                              10
                                               8
                                               6             [VALUE] %
                                               4
                                               2
                                               0
                                                                      Liberia




                                                                     Malawi
                                                                     Angola
                                                                      Ghana




                                                               Côte d'Ivoire




                                                              Mozambique
                                                                 Zimbabwe




                                                                     Nigeria




                                                                       Kenya




                                                                       Benin
                                                                     Zambia
                                                                  Mauritius




                                                                    Senegal
                                                                    Ethiopia
                                                                  Botswana




                                                               Burkina Faso
                                                                         DRC
                                                                      Congo




                                                                Cape Verde
                                                   Central African Republic
                                                                 Seychelles




                                                                    Uganda




                                                                   Namibia
                                                                    Rwanda
                                                                   Tanzania




                                                                         Mali
                                                               South Africa




                                                                        Togo




                                                                        Niger
                                                         Equatorial Guinea




                                                                    Lesotho




                                                                 Swaziland
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from IFPRI (2014).

133.     The percentage of agricultural spending in total government spending can be taken as an indicator
to measure how much attention government gives to the sector. However, it does not tell us how much the
agricultural sector gets vis-à-vis its contribution to the national economy. In this regard, the standard
method for measuring the adequacy of agricultural spending relative to its contribution to the economy is
to measure government spending in agriculture as a percentage of agricultural GDP, which is called
intensity of spending (Mogues, Morris, et al. 2012).

  3.5. Composition of Agricultural Public Expenditure
134.     The composition of public spending provides further insights into allocative efficiency in relation
to priorities, level, and balance (World Bank 2011). The economic composition of public expenditures is
based on the types of expenditures made according to the economic process involved. Such expenditures
are mainly classified as capital and recurrent, and within recurrent, expenditures are mostly classified as
wage and nonwage or personnel and overhead costs. The functional composition, on the other hand, is
based on the purpose or function for which expenditures are made by governments (IMF 2014).

3.5.1. Economic Composition of Agricultural Spending

3.5.1.1. Economic Composition of Agricultural Spending at the Federal Level

135.    Nigeria still uses the dual approach to budgeting with separate (and mostly unrelated) recurrent
and capital expenditure components. Recurrent expenditures consist mainly of personnel expenditures
(including workers’ benefits) and overhead costs (mainly administrative expenses). Capital expenditures
include investment spending, although a significant but indeterminate proportion of these expenditures
also include noninvestment spending. Noninvestment spending includes items such as repair of motor
vehicles; purchase of computers; furniture, fittings, and office equipment; workshop expenses; and
operations and maintenance costs, including those for agriculture, water resources, and roads. It is not in
                                                                                                         45
all circumstances, however, that all these items can be regarded as noninvestment, implying that
considerable effort must be made to understand the classification of public expenditure activities into
recurrent and capital. For illustrative purposes, if FMARD undertakes an investment project for small-
scale irrigation and during the investment period expends it to establish a project implementation unit,
with vehicles and office, computers, and so on, to run the investment phase, say, over three years, these
expenditures are appropriately counted as investment. However, if the same project establishes extension
capacity to support the farmers in the new irrigation areas and hires extension agents, provides them with
vehicles, and so on, these costs will continue to be needed beyond the investment phase and are therefore
recurrent costs, which should not be carried on the investment budget. This classification distinction is
pretty clear in theory but hard to implement in practice, so most countries’ investment budgets carry some
recurrent costs inaccurately. Another expenditure item that can easily be classified both in theory and
practice but is still not being accurately classified in Nigeria relates to public spending on input subsidies.
On account of its huge size in Nigeria, over the years the tendency has been for the government to
continue to refer to it as capital expenditure. Essentially, subsidies on inputs are transfers from the public
sector to private-sector entities who, in the case of agriculture, are expected to be farmers. Clearly, such
transfers are current expenditures, not capital expenditures. Thus, spending on input subsidies (for
fertilizer, seeds, and agrochemicals as well as relevant inputs for fisheries and livestock) needs to be
classified henceforth as a recurrent expenditure and wherever it is recorded in the budget books it should
not be counted as capital/investment expenditure. Invariably, much of what the budget refers to as capital
expenditures do not create new assets or prolong the life of existing assets, or are otherwise completely
consumed in the year the expenditures are incurred. According to a recent World Bank–commissioned
study, a substantial share of costs recorded as capital expenditures are not real investments (World Bank
2012). This is a common practice that cuts across all sectors of government in Nigeria. In the agricultural
subsector, for example, nearly all of the capital expenditures of the RBDAs are incurred for operations
and maintenance and should therefore be classified instead as recurrent expenditures.

136.     At the federal level, capital expenditures account for the largest share of federal agricultural
spending, with budget and actual expenditure shares averaging 79.2 percent and 82.3 percent,
respectively, between 2008 and 2012 (Table 3.2). Before the split of agriculture and water resources into
two separate ministries in 2010, the capital expenditure share of agricultural spending was even higher,
but this share has steadily tapered since then. This tapering trend suggests that agriculture has a higher
recurrent cost component than water resources. The capital-to-recurrent expenditure ratio for agriculture,
however, exceeds the rule of thumb, which is a 60:40 balance. But the ratio for agricultural spending is
higher than that of total federal spending. The capital expenditure share of total federal spending 22
averaged just 34.3 percent between 2008 and 2012.

Table 3.2: Economic composition of agricultural spending, average 2008-12
                                                                                        Share of
                      Recurrent             Capital                 Total               recurrent      Share of capital
                   Budget    Actual    Budget      Actual     Budget        Actual   Budget   Actual   Budget      Actual
Division                          (Constant 1990 naira, millions)                                            (%)
Federal
government          713.6     580.0    2,948.9    2,992.6     3,662.4   3,572.6        20.8     17.7     79.2        82.3
Cross River
state                 10.5     11.1       20.3         9.5      30.8          20.7     36.6     63.7     63.4        36.3
Niger state           23.8     23.3       79.7        51.8     103.5          75.1     27.5     37.5     72.5        62.5
Ondo state*           27.3     25.8       78.8        38.0     106.1          63.7     28.2     43.7     71.8        56.3

22   Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
                                                                                                                   46
Source: Based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Cross River state Ministry of
Agriculture, Niger state Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, and Ondo State Ministry of Agriculture
and Rural Development.
Note: *Data for Ondo state in 2012 are from January to June.

Figure 3.1: Federal agricultural spending versus total spending, 2008-12 (%)


     94.9             Agriculture                                              Total
               86.6
                         82.5
                                   77.4                                                                67.2
                                                               66.5     65.5       64.1      65.8
                                               70.2




                                                               33.5     34.5       35.9      34.2      32.8
                                               29.8
                                   22.6
                         17.5
               13.4
     5.1


     2008      2009      2010      2011       2012             2008     2009       2010     2011       2012
                 Recurrent        Capital                               Recurrent + NIE      Capital

Source: Based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and Federal Ministry of
Finance.

Note: NIE = not included elsewhere.

137.      Decomposition of recurrent expenditures by personnel and overhead expenditures provides
additional insights into the efficiency of spending (World Bank 2011). Inadequate data restricted the level
of analysis that was possible for the decomposition of recurrent expenditures in agriculture at the federal
level. 23 Detailed personnel expenditures were not available. Though incomplete, a disaggregation of
FMARD’s overhead expenditures was provided (see Annex III, Table 3.11). As Table 3.3 shows,
expenditures on travel and transport accounted for the largest share (20.6 percent) of overhead spending at
FMARD, on average, between 2008 and 2012. Expenditures on materials and supplies were the second-
highest priority (18.6 percent) followed by miscellaneous expenditures (14 percent).24

Table 3.3: Decomposition of Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development overhead
expenditures, 2008-12 (%)
Category                     2008         2009        2010      2011     2012 Average
Travel and transport          21.6          23.5        20.7     16.1     20.9   20.6
Materials and supplies        17.9          12.1        16.3     32.1     14.8   18.6
Miscellaneous                 11.2          16.4        16.9     12.3     14.0   14.2
Maintenance                   14.8          13.5        13.9     10.7     13.0   13.2
Fuel and lubricants           10.5          11.6        11.8      9.0     10.5   10.7

23 As a result, this review could not investigate the size of personnel expenditures for technical and
professional staff salaries versus administrative staff salaries.
24 Miscellaneous includes grants and contributions (including membership subscriptions to international

organizations) for ease of analysis. These grants and contributions are small, however.
                                                                                                              47
Utilities                      8.1       7.7         6.1       7.8       9.0        7.7
Training                       7.1       6.7         6.0       5.4       6.7        6.4
Other services                 4.1       4.0         3.7       3.7       6.5        4.4
Consulting services            2.5       2.0         2.5       2.2       2.3        2.3
Financials                     2.2       2.5         2.1       0.6       2.3        1.9
Source: Based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

138.     Although operations and maintenance expenditures should be classified as part of overhead
expenditures, it appears that public officials classify these costs as part of capital expenditures. For
example, a new and ongoing study in FMWR shows that the capital expenditure budget of the RBDAs
comprises almost exclusively operations and maintenance expenditures. The RBDAs currently do not
award contracts for new investments because FMWR headquarters does that. The RBDAs only award
contracts for the maintenance of existing dams, canals, and drainages, and they make provision for these
expenditures in their capital expenditure budgets. The overhead budgets are, however, for regular
administrative expenses. Further enquiries show that the practice is the same in FMARD and its
parastatals (see Annex III, Table 3.11 for overhead spending of FMARD’s parastatals) and across all
sectors of the federal government. This practice differs from international practices, which regard
operations and maintenance costs as recurrent rather than capital expenditures. International practices
reserve capital budgets for commitments that create new investments or new development assets, a
definition that Nigerian public officials also agree with. Yet there is no official government policy
stipulating that operations and maintenance costs be classified as capital expenditures. The practice has
just evolved unofficially out of staff desire to protect their operations and maintenance budgets for work
purposes. The standard practice within the ministries is that political heads (ministers and permanent
secretaries) cannot interfere with capital costs, but must release them to the director under whose mandate
the activity falls. The ministries are expected to properly account for capital expenditures to show that the
disbursement of funds was for the intended purpose. Once a director secures admittance of an item into
the capital budget, however, the funds become sacrosanct once released, and political heads do not accord
the same accountability criteria to overhead expenditures, which are simply spent and accounted for with
receipts and any documentation necessary.

139.     Examination of the structure of FMARD’s overhead spending in 2012 suggests that overhead
expenditures mainly support the bureaucracy, rather than operations and service delivery. For instance,
travel and transport costs covered mostly nonoperational costs and accounted for 16 percent of overhead
spending.25 These costs include travel costs to international and local events and for other travel. Of this
16 percent, travel to attend training (both international and national) accounted for 37 percent while other
international and local travel accounted for the rest (see Annex III, Table 3.12).26 Because FMARD’s
parastatals have a similar structure of overhead spending, it may be fair to assert that overhead spending
constitutes very little real operational costs.

140.    It is important to stress that the budgeting process and expenditure decisions should be cognizant
of the essential role of recurrent expenditure. It has to be adequate and complementary to investment

25 It is possible to argue that FMARD headquarters does not allocate its spending in exactly the same way as
its parastatals, since it is mainly the administrative headquarters. The counterargument to this would be that
the headquarters comprises both the technical and service divisions and the divisions that perform technical
coordination and supervisory functions. Besides, the breakdown of overhead spending does not suggest that
there is a significant difference between the pattern of overhead spending of FM ARD’s parastatals and that of
the headquarters. The main drawback for this inference, however, is the use of only 2012 FMARD data, which
may not be sufficiently representative of all the years.
26 Other items of FMARD’s overhead spending are not really oper ational costs either (Annex 3, Table 3.12).

                                                                                                           48
spending within the sector. Recurrent expenditures (salaries, overhead) are essential to fund adequately so
as to provide the agricultural sector with appropriate levels of important public goods, some of which
need regular maintenance year in and year out. Many public goods in the agricultural sector are basically
recurrent activities and therefore require recurrent budgeting. Extension (personnel and travel costs),
much of research (scientist salaries), seed and fertilizer regulatory functions to ensure quality products in
markets (inspectors, travel, laboratory analysis of samples), and animal health through public vaccination
campaigns for contagious diseases (veterinarians, travel, vaccines) are all recurrent activities.
Governments neglect adequate funding of such recurrent activities at the peril of negative results for
agricultural sector performance.

3.5.1.2. Economic Composition of Spending at the Subnational Level

141.                                                               Details of the economic composition of
agricultural spending, by recurrent and capital expenditures, for the three case study states are presented
in Annex III, Tables 3.13 to 3.16. However, data for budget recurrent and capital expenditures in
agriculture are not available for Niger state on an annual basis. In Cross River state, the budget provisions
for capital expenditures (63.4 percent on average) are much larger than those for recurrent expenditures
(36.6 percent) from 2008 to 2012. For actual spending, however, the reverse is the case. Recurrent
expenditure shares (63.7 percent on average) were larger than capital expenditure shares (36.3 percent)
during the same period (Annex III, Table 3.13).

142.     For Ondo state, budget provisions for capital expenditures were also larger (71.8 percent) than
those for recurrent expenditures. In the case of actual spending, capital expenditure remains consistently
larger. It stood at an average of 56.3 percent compared with 43.7 percent for recurrent expenditure
between 2008 and 2012. A similar pattern, in which both capital budget and capital spending were larger
than recurrent budget and recurrent expenditure, is observed in Niger state. Average capital budget during
the same period stood at 72.5 percent, compared with 27.5 percent recurrent budget. Also, capital
spending averaged 62.5 percent, compared with 37.5 percent recurrent expenditure.

3.5.2. Functional Composition of Agricultural Spending

143.    Further data challenges made it difficult to present a uniform functional composition analysis of
agricultural spending at the federal level across the years.27 For example, budgetary allocations from 2012
followed the distinct priorities established under the ATA, which were different from those of previous
years. As a result, this review analyzes 2012 FMARD data separately from other data.

3.5.2.1. Functional Analysis of Agricultural Spending at the Federal Level

144.   To better understand FMARD’s functions, it is important to note that the ministry comprises 13
departments (8 technical departments and 4 service departments). 28 The technical departments are (1)
Crop Agriculture (trees and crops), (2) Fisheries, (3) Livestock, (4) Land Resources, (5) Fertilizer, (6)
Food Reserve and Storage, (7) Rural Development, and (8) Cooperatives. The service departments are (1)
Human Resources, (2) Finance and Accounts, (3) Planning, Policy and Statistics, and (4) Procurement.29



27 It was not possible attempt a uniform (re)classification of all agricultural spending, after due consultation
with and receiving additional relevant information from FMARD.
28 Each of these departments is led by a director. The directors report to the permanent secretary, who is the

administrative head of the ministry.
29 The FMARD website lists a fifth service department as Planning, Research and Statistics, but it is not clear

how this department is different from the Planning, Policy and Statistics department.
                                                                                                             49
There are also about 42 parastatals, consisting of 17 research institutes, 20 colleges of agriculture,30 and
13 agencies.31 Various technical departments within FMARD coordinate the activities of these parastatals
and agencies. In addition, the Knowledge-Based Management Unit of the Agricultural Research Council
of Nigeria coordinates the activities of the research and training institutes, except for the cooperative
colleges, coordinated by the Department of Cooperatives.

145.    As Table 3.4 indicates, average expenditures on irrigation (40.9 percent), fertilizer subsidy (17.2
percent), and FMARD parastatals (15.7 percent) account for the largest shares of capital expenditures
from 2008 to 2010. Actual capital spending did not exactly follow appropriation. Consequently, actual
spending increased nearly threefold in 2009 over its level in 2008, to ₦ 19.6 million, before falling by
about half in 2010, to ₦ 9.74 million. The pronounced increase of 2009 over 2008 is because of the
particularly poor funds disbursement rate in 2008. Analysis of available data shows that utilization of
released funds was at its lowest in 2008 (Annex G, Table G.1) at only 32.7 percent. Utilization or
disbursement of released funds was 100 percent from 1999 to 2005, and at least 80 percent in every other
year up to 2010.32

Table 3.4: Decomposition of federal capital expenditures, constant 1990 naira, millions, 2008-2010

                                      2008          2009          2010        Average
 Category                        Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
 Crop agriculture                   2.1    0.0    0.5    0.5    0.5    0.5    1.0     0.3
 Livestock                          0.6    0.2    1.1    1.1    0.2    0.2    0.7     0.5
 Fisheries                          0.2    0.0    0.3    0.0    0.5    0.5    0.3     0.2
 National Agricultural
 Quarantine Service                   0.0      0.0        0.1      0.1       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0
 National Agricultural Food
 Reserve Agency                      2.4       0.0       0.0       0.0       3.2       3.3       1.9       1.1
 Administration                      0.7       0.0       0.2       0.1       0.1       0.1       0.3       0.1
 Monitoring and evaluation           0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0
 Rural development                   0.0       0.0       1.2       0.2       1.5       1.5       0.9       0.5
 Irrigation                         18.9       3.8      15.4      12.7       0.0       0.0      11.4       5.5
 Agricultural research               0.2       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0       0.1       0.0
 NFRA—fertilizer subsidy             0.0       0.6       3.2       3.2       2.6       2.6       1.9       2.1
 NFRA—cooperatives                   0.1       0.0       0.1       0.1       0.0       0.0       0.1       0.0
 NFRA—National
 Programme for Food
 Security                             0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.2       0.2       0.1       0.1
 Parastatals—colleges and             2.5      2.0        1.8      1.5       1.7       1.0       2.0       1.5

30 This number may not be definitive because the list includes only one of the three universities of agriculture
in the country.
31 See Annex IV for a comprehensive list of the parastatals, culled from the ministry’s website.
32 It is not exactly clear what to attribute this development to, but coincidental occurrences at the time may

provide some insight. The federal government first announced the merger of the ministries of agriculture and
water resources in 2006 as part of its public service restructuring reforms that took effect in January 2007.
However, pressures and uncertainties trailed this merger, and the government briefly demerged and
remerged them in 2008/2009. The ministries finally became separated in April 2010. Whether and to what
extent these developments influenced the coincidental outcomes during this period is not clear.

                                                                                                             50
                                     2008          2009          2010         Average
 Category                        Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
 research institutes
 Contribution to international
 organizations                       0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0        0.1     0.1      0.0       0.0
 Total                              27.6       6.6      24.1     19.6       10.3     9.7     20.7      12.0
Source: Based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Note: NFRA = National Food Reserve Agency.

146.     It is not surprising that irrigation accounted for the largest share of capital expenditure in 2008
and 2009, when agriculture and water resources formed one ministry. Indeed, irrigation almost crowded
out other agriculture-related spending in these years, more so in fiscal 2008 than in 2009. Irrigation
expenditure here includes costs of dams (both large and small earthen dams), drainage, and the
expenditure of the numerous RBDAs. The functions of RBDAs are wide, falling beyond the scope of
agriculture, but the manner of record keeping makes it difficult to isolate the portions not specific to the
agricultural sector. Usually, RBDAs design integrated projects with various components. The scope of
RBDA functions includes development of water resources for multiple purposes but with particular
emphasis on the provision of irrigation infrastructure, control of floods and erosion, and watershed
management. Consequently, RBDAs are responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance of
dams, dykes, polders, wells, boreholes, and irrigation and drainage systems, among others. Regarding
fertilizer payments, Druilhe and Barreiro-Hurlé (2012) emphasize that expenditures on subsidies do not
represent a suitable policy option in the long run, because such expenditures do not address the root
causes of low fertilizer use in input or output markets and lead to unsustainable fiscal costs to the
economy. Direct government involvement in the procurement and distribution of fertilizers and
corruption, aggravated by the use of intermediaries, amplify these inefficiencies.

147.    Expenditures on crop agriculture (crops and trees), livestock, and fisheries were low between
2008 and 2010, accounting for only 3.4 percent, 2.5 percent, and 1.7 percent, respectively, of capital
expenditures, on average. This trend suggests that agricultural policy did not sufficiently focus on
agricultural development before introduction of the ATA. Crop agriculture (crops and trees) dominates
2012 FMARD capital expenditure, accounting for 59.4 percent of actual spending (Annex G, Table G.2).
When other agricultural value chains are included, the share becomes 63.6 percent. Allocations to
parastatals of the ministry follow at a distant second with 18.9 percent, followed by rural development,
which accounts for 7.9 percent. Expenditures for agricultural R&D and monitoring and evaluation are low
(1.6 percent and 1.8 percent, respectively), but show improvements compared with previous years. This
trend suggests the increasing recognition of these components under the ATA.



3.5.2.2. Functional Analysis of Agricultural Spending at the Subnational Level

148.     The functional composition of spending within the agricultural sector in Cross River state is
presented in Table 3.5. A breakdown of expenditures by function was available only for crop
development and general services, making it impossible to assess trends in other key areas such as
livestock, fishery, and forestry development. Concerning crop development in Cross River state,
fertilizers accounted for the biggest share of actual nongroup spending, averaging 44.2 percent from 2008
to 2012. Because many farmer groups regularly demand these inputs, there are several fertilizer and seed
distribution points across the state where these inputs are provided at subsidized prices. Irrigation has not
really been a top priority of the state government owing to good rainfall in Cross River state, which
explains why there was no spending on irrigation from 2008 to 2012. Overall, miscellaneous expenditures
                                                                                                          51
accounted for the largest share of crop development expenditures, averaging 54.4 percent during the same
period, and have been relatively consistent. The large share may be due to increased expenditures on
contingencies as well as unaccounted for expenditures incurred for crop development by the Ministry of
Agriculture.




                                                                                                     52
Table 3.5: Functional composition of agricultural expenditures in Cross River state, 2008-12 (%)

                          2008                  2009                      2010                       2011                      2012            Average
Category              Budget   Actual Budget           Actual Budget              Actual Budget            Actual Budget             Actual Budget      Actual
                                                                          Share of total crop development
Seeds                    5.7       0.0           6.7       7.2           22.7           0.0          0.0         0.0         10.4       0.0     9.1        1.4
Fertilizers              4.0       0.0          33.3    20.9             28.7      100.0           89.5          0.0         41.4     100.0    39.4       44.2
Agrochemicals            0.0       0.0           0.0       0.0            0.0           0.0          0.0         0.0          0.0       0.0     0.0        0.0
Irrigation               0.0       0.0           0.0       0.0            0.0           0.0          0.0         0.0          0.0       0.0     0.0        0.0
Miscellaneous           90.3     100.0          60.0    71.9             48.6           0.0        10.6     100.0            48.2       0.0    51.5       54.4
                                                                    Share of total general services
Research                 5.0       0.0          14.1    50.8              6.6           0.0          3.6         0.0          4.5       0.0     6.7       10.2
Extension                0.0     100.0          69.9       0.0           14.0           9.8          6.0         0.0         23.8       0.0    22.7       22.0
Credit program          95.0       0.0           0.0       0.0            8.6       12.9             1.8         2.1          5.0       7.1    22.1        4.4
Rural
                         0.0       0.0          10.0    39.7             32.5       48.5           71.0      79.0            45.1      63.9    31.7       46.2
infrastructure
Agroprocessing           0.0       0.0           0.0       0.0            0.0           0.0          0.5         0.0          1.1       0.0     0.3        0.0
Advocacy
                         0.0       0.0           0.4       0.0           33.7       28.2           16.1      17.9            17.0      24.0    13.4       14.0
program
Market
                         0.0       0.0           5.6       9.5            4.5           0.6          1.0         1.1          3.6       5.1     2.9        3.3
development
Source:       Based       on      data   from      Cross         River          state         Ministry      of         Agriculture     and    Natural       Resources.




                                                                                                                                                                   53
149.     As Table 3.5 shows, expenditure items under general services in agriculture have been given
priority. Since 2008, the Cross River state government consistently budgeted for and expended on items
such as a credit program, rural infrastructure, and an advocacy program. This is a reflection of the new
policy thrust of the current state government, which aims to fully privatize and commercialize agriculture
and achieve the first of Cross River state’s seven-point development agenda, among other objectives.
Within the general services portfolio, actual expenditures on rural infrastructure, extension, and research
had the largest shares, averaging 46.2 percent, 22 percent, and 10.2 percent, respectively, between 2008
and 2012. Compared with rural infrastructure expenditures, which were consistently prioritized from 2009
to 2012, expenditure on research occurred only in 2009 despite the fact that budget provisions were made.
While spending on extension constituted a significant share of general services expenditures, actual
disbursements occurred in only 2008 and 2010. But presumably all of the funds available in 2008 for the
general services portfolio were directed toward extension.

150.     In Niger state, fertilizer procurement also gets the highest priority in the crop development
portfolio, averaging 63.2 percent between 2008 and 2012 (Table 3.6). The next major priorities were
agrochemicals and a tractor hire program, averaging 17.1 and 16.3 percent, respectively, during the same
period. Despite the fact that budget allocations were made for several items under livestock development,
actual spending did not occur. For the exceptions—livestock improvement and breeding center, and
research and consultancy—all available funds were expended only in 2012. The trend is similar for
forestry development—budgetary allocations were generally made, but actual spending did not occur.
Here the exception is that of expenditures incurred for forest plant seed production in 2008. For fishery
development, actual expenditures on fish conservation and multiplication averaged 20 percent, but these
expenditures were incurred in 2010 only. Given the large potential of fish farming in Niger state,
spending       on       fishery       development      needs       to      be       better     prioritized.




                                                                                                        54
Table 3.6: Functional composition of agricultural expenditures in Niger state, 2008-12 (%)

                           2008           2009         2010          2011          2012         Average
Category               Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
                                                                 Share of crop development
Agrochemicals              0.2      0.0       0.0     86.2       0.6      0.1       2.1    0.0       0.7     0.0    0.7   17.3
Land clearing              0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       9.5      0.0       0.0    0.0       0.0     0.0    1.9    0.0
Tractor hire program      62.3     80.3       0.0      0.0       8.9      0.0       4.2    0.0      35.5     0.0   22.2   16.1
Home econ.
                           0.2      0.0       0.0       0.0      0.4      0.0       0.0       0.0    0.0     0.0    0.1    0.0
multipurpose
College of agric.          5.8      0.2       7.0       4.6      4.3      0.0       8.4       0.0   10.6     0.0    7.2    1.0
Fertilizer
                          28.8     19.5      93.0       9.3     74.6     99.9      84.0      88.6   53.2    98.6   66.7   63.2
procurement
Nigerian agric.
                           0.1      0.0       0.0       0.0      0.4      0.0       0.0      11.4    0.0     0.0    0.1    2.3
insurance corp.
Research &
                           2.6      0.0       0.0       0.0      1.4      0.0       1.3       0.0    0.0     1.4    1.0    0.3
consultancy
                                                               Share of livestock development
Grazing reserve &
                           6.1      0.0      80.0       0.0     56.3      0.0      16.6       0.0    7.7     0.0   33.3    0.0
range mgt.
Stock route &
                           4.1      0.0       0.0       0.0      8.3      0.0      27.0       0.0    6.2     0.0    9.1    0.0
control post
Poultry production        12.1      0.0      20.0       0.0      9.9      0.0      18.4       0.0   23.1     0.0   16.7    0.0
Regional cattle
                          69.6      0.0       0.0       0.0     13.3      0.0       0.0       0.0    0.0     0.0   16.6    0.0
market
Livestock improv. &
                           8.1      0.0       0.0       0.0     11.9      0.0      36.8       0.0   61.5   100.0   23.7   20.0
breeding center
Research &
                           0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0      0.3    100.0       1.2       0.0    1.5     0.0    0.6   20.0
consultancy
                                                               Share of forestry development
Pulpwood plantation       33.3      0.0       0.0       0.0     27.8      0.0      22.2      0.0     0.0     0.0   16.7    0.0
Forest plant seed         66.7    100.0     100.0       0.0     33.3      0.0      22.2      0.0    37.5     0.0   51.9   20.0

                                                                                                                                 55
production
Industrial wood
                             0.0       0.0        0.0      0.0      39.0       0.0       55.6      0.0    62.5   0.0   31.4    0.0
production
                                                                    Share of fishery development
Fish conservation &
                             0.0       0.0        0.0      0.0      73.3    100.0       100.0      0.0   100.0   0.0   54.7   20.0
multiplication
Fishing inputs               0.0       0.0       0.0       0.0      26.7       0.0        0.0      0.0     0.0   0.0    5.3    0.0
Oxbow lakes, dams            0.0       0.0     100.0       0.0       0.0       0.0        0.0      0.0     0.0   0.0   20.0    0.0
Source: Based on data from Niger state Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.




                                                                                                                                     56
151.    Data on the functional composition of agricultural expenditures in Ondo state are much more
consistent compared with those from Cross River and Niger states. In Ondo state, expenditures on
forestry accounted for the largest share of spending (72.1 percent on average from 2008 to 2011) on
natural resources development (Table 3.7). The fact that the state has a lot of forestry potential may
explain why it is given top priority in the expenditure portfolio of natural resources development. The
forestry policy thrust in Ondo state is to promote conservation practices and forest regeneration as
vehicles for sustainable development. Although spending on produce services is next to forestry in terms
of priority (averaging 12.9 percent from 2008 to 2011), the observation is that there is room for
improvement. The produce service unit enforces and maintains good quality standards for both export and
local products such as cocoa, palm kernel, and coffee. In addition to serving as a quality control unit, it
also generates revenue for the state. During the same period, produce services contributed about 24
percent of total IGR from agriculture. Fishery is accorded the least priority in natural resources
development, averaging 2 percent during the period 2008-11.




                                                                                                        57
Table 3.7: Functional composition of agricultural expenditures in Ondo state, 2008-11 (%)

                            2008                 2009                   2010               2011                 Average
Category               Budget   Actual      Budget Actual          Budget Actual      Budget Actual          Budget Actual

Produce services          10.7    10.8        16.3          16.1       8.4     10.2       14.9     14.5        12.6    12.9
Forestry                  81.3    82.0        52.1          68.3      52.7     68.0       58.1     69.9        61.0    72.1
Afforestation              1.6     1.5        26.3           8.6      36.8     20.0       10.6      8.9        18.8     9.7
Agroclimatology            4.8     4.1         3.4           2.7       1.5      1.0       11.7      5.6         5.3     3.3
Fishery                    1.6     1.6         2.1           4.3       0.6      0.8        4.7      1.1         2.2     2.0
                                                              Share of crop development
Food crops                13.1     8.8         2.1           1.6        2.7      1.6     2.3        3.8         5.0     3.9
Extension services         1.4     0.6         0.4           0.0        0.0      0.0     0.3        0.0         0.5     0.2
Tree crops                21.1    14.3        11.2           6.5        5.9      6.3    25.9       37.1        16.0    16.0
Agric. inputs             39.9    59.9        66.9          78.6      61.9     49.4      9.0       26.0        44.4    53.5
Agric. engineering        24.5    16.4        19.5          13.3      29.6     42.7     62.6       33.1        34.0    26.4
                                                            Share of livestock development
Livestock                 34.2    62.7        41.5          53.3       38.8      54.5      20.7    54.9        33.8    56.4
Veterinary
                          65.8    37.3        58.6          46.7      61.2     45.5       79.3     45.1        66.2    43.6
services
                                                             Share of rural development
Rural
                           0.0      0.0        9.0          10.0       7.9     13.6       11.6     22.2         7.1    11.5
development
Agric. service unit      100.0   100.0        91.0          90.0      92.1     86.4       88.4     77.8        92.9    88.5
                                                         Share of general administration
Admin. & finance          65.7    38.9        20.7      100.0       17.2     70.0       80.4           0.0     46.0    52.2
Planning &
                          34.3    61.1        79.4           0.0      82.8     30.0       19.6    100.0        54.0    47.8
research
Source:        Based        on       data            from          Office       of        Accountant         General     of   Ondo   state.
                                                                                                                                       58
152.    For crop development, expenditures on subsidized agricultural inputs such as fertilizers, seeds,
and seedlings constituted the largest share (averaging 53.5 percent between 2008 and 2011). Actual
spending on agricultural engineering services, such as subsidized tractor hire, and on tree crops follow,
averaging 26.4 and approximately 16 percent of total crop development expenditure, respectively, during
the same period. In contrast, very little funding was actually expended on extension services (about 0.2
percent on average in the period 2008-11). This explains the high ratio of 1 extension agent to about 2,000
farmers in Ondo state, while the recommended ratio is 1 extension agent to 800 farmers (Ondo state ADP
2012).33 To achieve this recommended ratio, improvements in spending levels as well as efficiency for
extension services are needed.

153.    With respect to livestock development, the expenditure pattern is more balanced between
livestock and veterinary services. From 2008 to 2011, spending on livestock averaged 56.4 percent and
spending on veterinary services averaged 43.6 percent (Table 3.7). For rural development, spending on
the agricultural service unit was the most prioritized expenditure item, averaging 54.5 percent during the
same period. The unit is responsible for farm settlement and generation of new programs for farmers. The
farm settlement programs, however, have not been successful and have been abandoned by farmers. The
observation is that factors that led to the failure of earlier farm settlement programs seem not to have been
addressed in the newly introduced programs. For general administration, the largest share of funds was
spent on administration and finance activities, averaging 52.2 percent in the period 2008-11.

154.    At the local government level, functional composition of agricultural public expenditures is
available only for Akamkpa and Wushishi LGAs. Data at this level are even sparser than at the state level,
making the assessment of specific priorities limited. Although budget proposals were prepared for some
years from 2008 onward in Akamkpa LGA, nearly all of the budgets were not implemented (Table 3.8).
Between 2008 and 2012, purchase of seeds (only in 2008) and miscellaneous expenditures (only in 2011
and 2012) were the only items under crop development that received the priority of having used all funds
available in these years. The pattern is similar for general services spending: extension was prioritized
only in 2008 and the advocacy program in 2011. In Wushishi LGA, none of the expenditure items under
agricultural and rural development received priority (Table 3.9). Construction of poultry houses (the
single expenditure item under livestock development) was prioritized in only 2012. For forestry
development, the pattern is no different with parks and gardens spending, which was also prioritized only
in 2012. Similar to the state level, fishery development was also not prioritized, and for the period 2008-
12, no expenditure was reported.




33   The national average is 1 extension agent to 1,700 farmers, and this ratio is also very high.
                                                                                                          59
Table 3.8: Functional composition of agricultural expenditures in Akamkpa local government area, 2008-12 (%)

                              2008          2009               2010              2011        2012      Average
 Category                Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
                                                 Share of total crop development
 Seeds                     66.7 100.0     0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0    0.0  0.0    0.0 13.3    20.0
 Fertilizers               33.3    0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    40.7     0.0 64.3    0.0 27.7     0.0
 Agrochemicals              0.0    0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    25.9     0.0 35.7    0.0 12.3     0.0
 Irrigation                 0.0    0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      0.7    0.0  0.0    0.0  0.2     0.0
 Miscellaneous              0.0    0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0    32.6 100.0    0.0 100.0   6.5    40.0
                                                         Share of total general services
 Research                   23.5      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0        0.0      0.0   0.0    4.7    0.0
 Extension                   0.0    100.0        0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      13.2        0.0     20.8   0.0    6.8   20.0
 Credit program             23.5      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      32.2        0.0     37.5   0.0   18.6    0.0
 Rural infrastructure       15.1      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       2.1        0.0      0.0   0.0    3.4    0.0
 Agroprocessing             15.1      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0        0.0      0.0   0.0    3.0    0.0
 Advocacy program           21.9      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0      52.6      100.0      0.0   0.0   14.9   20.0
 Market development          0.8      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0        0.0     41.7   0.0    8.5    0.0
Source: Based on data from Department of Agriculture, Akamkpa local government area, Cross River state.




                                                                                                                                     60
Table 3.9: Functional composition of agricultural expenditures in Wushishi local government area, 2008-12 (%)
                         2008          2009             2010               2011           2012 Average
 Category            Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
                                              Share of agricultural and rural development
Tractor hire
                          0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0    84.8     0.0   17.0    0.0
program
Tractor
                          0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0      55.6       0.0     8.5     0.0   12.8    0.0
equipment
Fertilizers               0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0      44.4       0.0     6.8     0.0   10.2    0.0
Staff training &
                          0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
development
Consultancy               0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
Entertainment &
                          0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
hospitality
Miscellaneous             0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0        0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
                                                               Share of livestock development
Poultry houses            0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0      100.0   100.0   20.0   20.0
                                                               Share of forestry development
Parks and
                          0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0   100.0   100.0   20.0   20.0
gardens
                                                                Share of fishery development
Fisheries                 0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0       0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0     100.0     0.0   20.0    0.0
Source: Based on data from Department of Agriculture, Wushishi local government area, Niger state.




                                                                                                                                   61
4. EFFICIENCY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF AGRICULTURAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE
155.    Budget predictability is crucial to the assessment of technical efficiency in spending or the
efficiency of budget system implementation and programs (World Bank 2011). One of the ways to
determine the predictability of a budget is to assess the relationship between the budget as approved and
planned vis-à-vis actual spending. This section examines budgeted and actual agricultural expenditures by
national and state spending and also by economic and functional classifications to note any divergence.
The timeliness of budget releases based on final approved budgets is also assessed. Timeliness is
important because large time lags between actual releases and approved budgets lead to the accrual of
expenditure arrears and undermine public spending efficiency.

  4.1. Analysis of Technical Efficiency
4.1.1. Technical Efficiency at the Federal Level

156.    Analysis of the technical efficiency of spending asks whether implementation of the budget has
been effective. Thus, it investigates the efficiency of achieving strategic outputs and outcomes. It
examines (1) the relationships in budget execution, that is, between planned and actual spending; (2)
development and trends in unit costs; and (3) sources and extent of leakages and wastes. It also reviews
key thematic issues, such as input subsidies, irrigation, private/public goods, and the like. However, some
of these issues are beyond the scope of this study and require different kinds of tools to assess, for
example, public expenditure tracking surveys, cost-efficiency analysis, incidence analysis, impact
evaluation, and so on. As far as execution of budgets from 2008 to 2012 is concerned, current evidence
suggests a low level of technical efficiency, as explained below.

157.    Budget deviations. Annual deviations between budgeted and actual spending were high, except in
2010, but there are important issues with the manner of the disbursement that year. During fiscal 2010,
more than 55 percent of the budget was committed and disbursed in the last two weeks of the fiscal year.
The level of deviation was at least 55 percent two weeks from the end of the fiscal year. High budget
deviations connote fiscal indiscipline, which is inimical to stable growth. They may also embody waste.

158.     Trends in unit costs. Information on physical outputs, outcomes, population of target beneficiaries
or participants, and so on, is necessary to calculate unit costs and establish a trend. This information is not
currently available.

159.    Sources and extent of leakages. More information on procurement and cash management
practices, as well as audit reports, are important to understand leakages and their sources. These are also
currently unavailable. However, the manner of disbursement of funds in fiscal 2010 suggests a high level
of waste. As already indicated variously in this section, data supplied by FMARD suggest commitment
and disbursement of up to 55 percent of the budget in the last two weeks of the extended fiscal year. It
will be useful to read what the audit report has to say about the level of haste involved in this process.
There is no indication that the manner of fiscal 2010 disbursements is representative of what happened in
other years; otherwise, disbursements would embody a high degree of waste.

160.    Input subsidies. The most pronounced subsidies are in fertilizer supplies, but there are also
subsidies in the supply of seedlings, agrochemicals, and development of youth and women in business.
However, the scope of these subsidies is not yet clear, with the exception of fertilizer payments. Future
work should attempt to review the old and new fertilizer policies as well as other input subsidies,

161.    Private versus public goods. The key question to ask is whether the government’s policy on
dams, irrigation, water supply, and rural development is the right one. In other words, is government
                                                                                                            62
justified in devoting huge proportions of its budget to the construction and rehabilitation of dams, roads
and bridges, and integrated rural development? Is the expenditure efficient and sustainable? Is it time to
review policy and seek private-sector involvement in some of these activities, the way that the fertilizer
policy has done? This debate will continue for some time to come.

162.     An ongoing World Bank study (forthcoming) is looking into this question and will help provide a
useful guide. The preliminary findings, however, already indicate the huge role of the dams and irrigation
projects in realizing the country’s agricultural potentials. In other words, Nigeria is unlikely to achieve its
goals in the sector without the valuable contributions of the dams and their irrigation projects. However,
both the dams and their irrigation canals and drainages are in a poor state of maintenance. The
government has not yet completed several of them, but the completed ones lack proper attention, despite
huge annual expenditures. A key question that the study would address is whether public expenditures can
sustain the current level of investments and inefficiencies in running the dams or whether there is need for
some public-private partnership options.

4.1.2. Technical Efficiency at the Subnational Level

163.     The main focus in analyzing technical efficiency at the subnational level is budget
implementation. This stage of the budget cycle is very critical since all claimants to the budget wait to see
what they are likely to gain from the goods and services being provided by the government. It also shows
the extent to which an important arm of the government (the legislature) is committed to the performance
of its oversight functions. Details of the performance of the states and LGAs are presented in Annex IV,
Tables 4.1 to 4.4, broken out by year. The emerging results show that there is a direct relationship
between budget performance and the hierarchical status of the three tiers of government with
constitutionally mandated joint responsibility for agricultural development in the country. In other words,
budget execution is best at the federal level, followed by the state level, whereas it is lowest at the local
government level. This also has a direct bearing on the resources available to each tier of government
based on the revenue sharing formula elaborated in an earlier section of this report.

164.    Between 2008 and 2012, federal government budget execution averaged 104.0 percent in terms of
the capital budget and 98.1 percent in terms of total budget. At the state level, capital budget execution
was highest in Niger state (62.4 percent), followed by Ondo and Cross River states, with 53.0 percent and
43.8 percent, respectively. In terms of total budget execution, however, the best performer is Niger state
(74.8 percent), followed by Cross River and Ondo states, with 68.3 percent and 63.2 percent, respectively
(Table 4.1). Whereas the average budget execution rate seems to be reasonably high, the rates at the
subnational level are substandard.

Table 4.1: Agricultural budget execution performance (%)
                                                                                                     Average
Division                       2008           2009          2010           2011           2012     (2008-12)
Capital budget
Federal government              99.9         112.7           90.2         157.2           60.0          104.0
Cross River state               99.5          69.1           20.9          19.2           10.3           43.8
Niger state                     73.7          35.8           75.6          83.6           43.3           62.4
Ondo state*                     91.9          46.1           71.0          21.6           34.6           53.0
Total budget
Federal government             99.5          108.2           90.3         131.3           61.1           98.1
Cross River state             106.9           96.6           60.2          39.3           38.5           68.3
                                                                                                            63
Niger state                      89.8           71.2           79.3           91.6            42.0           74.8
Ondo state*                      89.9           61.7           74.6           38.5            51.1           63.2
Sources: Authors’ computation based on data from ministries of agriculture and finance of the federal government,
Cross River, Niger, and Ondo states.
Note: * Data for Ondo state in 2012 are for January–June.

165.     Despite the fact that some states perform better than others, the observed budget execution rates
for the three case study states are quite below international standards. According to the Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability partnership, actual expenditures should not deviate by more
than 10 percent from the budget in order to qualify as efficient budget execution (World Bank 2011). At
the local government level, budget execution in agriculture is lower and even more unpredictable than at
the state level. With virtually no allocation in some of the years, it is impossible to have a meaningful
average figure of performance for the case study LGAs during the period under review. Deviations
between budget provisions and actual spending tend to be larger with capital expenditures than with
recurrent expenditures, as previous AgPERs show (World Bank 2011). In other words, the tendency is to
execute recurrent budget provisions at the expense of capital budget provisions. This implies that since
the last AgPER in Nigeria there has been no significant improvement in the efficiency of public spending
at the subnational level.

166.     The explanation for the varying level of budget execution across the three tiers of government
and the persistent inefficiency cannot be limited to variations in available revenue from statutory sources.
There are other revenue-related arguments that generally account for the substandard performance of
states in budget execution. Apart from the problem of dwindling revenue accruable to some states,
diversion of available revenue constitutes a major threat to their fiscal capacity. Some state governors
have threatened to deal with civil servants found tampering with IGR or siphoning the revenues through
dubious means. In general, availability of revenue also depends on the level of indebtedness of states.
Some debt repayments are deducted right from source, implying that the net flow of statutory allocation
to states concerned may actually not be adequate to meet their requirements for development financing. In
recent times many states are carrying out verification exercises of their accounting systems, including
staff audits and biometrics, with the expectation that the savings in personnel cost arising from
discovering fraudulent practices will be channeled to offset the shortfall in statutory allocations (Olomola
2012).

167.    Moreover, previous studies have also considered other dimensions of the problem of poor budget
execution. As argued by the World Bank (2011), variance in budget execution rates can occur for two
reasons. First is the divergence between approved budgets and actual funds disbursed to the ministries.
This occurs due to delays in funding releases and reductions in approved budgets as a result of either
revenue deficits or unexpected demands on available funds, among other factors. Second is the low
disbursement of funds by ministries for planned activities. This arises due to delays in procurement, low
accountability, lack of transparency between state and local governments, weak monitoring systems to
track late disbursement of funds, poor expenditure recording systems, and unauthorized expenditures.
Cash flow availability affects the timing of funds releases and thus budget execution. Delays in the
release of funds from the federation account, cutbacks in federal statutory transfers, unavailability of
donor funds within capital receipts, and low internally generated revenue are some of the factors that
weaken budget execution at the subnational level. For example, when most of the approved capital
budgets for agriculture are not released to ministries of agriculture until toward the end of the year, these
ministries may not be able to execute important projects or may execute them haphazardly. Because
agricultural activities are time bound, and because Nigerian agriculture is mainly rainfed, the release of
approved capital budgets in the latter part of the year (the dry season for agriculture) may negatively
impact the performance of agricultural expenditures. Delays in the release of approved capital budgets
                                                                                                          64
may also lead to unspent budgets.

168.     In point of fact, the case study states are not alone in their record of weak technical efficiency in
budget execution. A recent study of 12 states across the country made a similar observation (Akande,
Olomola, and Olokesusi 2013). The authors examined state-level implementation of budgets in the
selected states beginning with the views of various categories of respondents on the timeliness of
activities (budget preparation, screening, approval, and release of funds) in the budget cycle, as well as
compatibility with development priorities, over a period of four years (2007 to 2010). The results showed
that there was a major problem with timeliness of budgetary activities in a majority of the states. Overall,
the poor budget performance was attributed to dwindling revenue flow from the federation account, a low
level of IGR, and untimeliness of release of available funds quite apart from leakages and weak capacity
in the MDAs.

  4.2. Analysis of Allocative Efficiency
4.2.1. Allocative Efficiency at the Federal Level

169.     Analysis of the allocative efficiency of spending addresses the basic question of whether the
budget allocates money to the right things. It does this by addressing several ancillary questions: (1) Do
budget allocations align with national development objectives and strategies? (2) Do the allocations
address identifiable constraints? (3) How has allocation changed from previous years? (4) What are the
relationships between wage and nonwage, and recurrent and capital expenditures, and are these optimal?
For this AgPER, we ask, Did the budget allocate money to the rights things between 2008 and 2012? The
answer is mixed. For ease of discussion, we differentiate between capital and overhead costs; detailed
personnel costs were not available for this analysis. Allocative efficiency in overhead spending was
generally poor between 2008 and 2012. Spending did not focus on operating or running costs, but on
supporting the bureaucracy. Thus, overhead spending stressed nonoperational travel and office utilities,
materials, and supplies, among other such costs. Spending must deemphasize these bureaucratic
tendencies to improve its level of efficiency; otherwise, it needs to expand reasonably to accommodate
operations spending. Discontinuing the current uniform classification of overheads across government
will help MDAs to include operation-related spending. Budget classification must be sufficiently flexible
to allow for inclusion of sector-specific overhead items.

170.    Allocative efficiency of the capital budget was greater in the fiscal 2012 budget than in the 2008-
10 budgets. Nonavailability of fiscal 2011 data makes it hard to learn whether the observations in fiscal
2012 started in 2011, at the commencement of the new ATA. It is therefore too early to establish a trend
and positively assert that fiscal 2012 performance heralds a sustainable shift in practice. Such a
conclusion will be too hasty, especially in a system where policy tumbles and reversals are usual
occurrences with every change in administration. However, it is apparent that there were efforts to
support policy with the budget in 2012. Analysis of future results will determine the extent to which the
government intends to sustain this effort.

Alignment of Spending with Development Objectives

171.    This analysis shows that the 2012 budget allocated the bulk of its resources to the 10 or so value
chains it earlier defined in its policy. The 2012 budget also allocated resources to development of youth
and women in agribusiness. Further, it supports establishment of market corporations for key products. In
addition, the 2012 budget attempted, though only partially successfully, to “correct? the trend of
peripheral activities dominating the capital budget. Consequently, rural development did not dominate the
budget, and fertilizer policy became entrenched within the value chains. The budget allocated more than
73 percent of actual expenditures to crop agriculture (trees and crops) and about 79 percent to value
                                                                                                           65
chains, including crop agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and development of land resources; rural
development (construction of rural feeder roads) attracted only about 10 percent of spending. 34 Thus, the
expenditure on crop agriculture (trees and crops) encompassed a wide spectrum of activities, including (1)
supply of improved seedlings, (2) fertilizer, (3) agrochemicals, (4) market development, (5) R&D, (6)
food processing, and (7) establishment of processing zones. However, a big part of the value chain
expenditure was government subsidy of private goods in the form of input subsidies: fertilizers, seedlings,
agrochemicals, and the like.

The Extent to Which Allocations Address Identifiable Constraints

172.     Fiscal 2012 capital allocations attempted to address some inherent challenges facing agricultural
production, but not the 2008 to 2010 budgets. The 2012 budget included identifiable measures to address
the following: (1) modernization of agriculture and large-scale production, (2) commercialization of
agriculture, (3) high cost of farm inputs / access to improved seedlings, (4) improving access to markets,
and (5) inefficiency in fertilizer procurement and distribution. In addition, of the constraints identified in
Section 3, the 2012 budget sought to give agricultural research new impetus, but it is not clear the extent
to which it secured adoption of research findings and technologies. There are also ongoing efforts to
address poor access to credit, but budget allocations do not track them. However, there were no
identifiable measures in the 2012 budget to address the following three constraints: the outdated land
tenure system, piracy in coastal waters, and inadequate irrigation and storage. These are issues outside the
control of the ministry, being either constitutional or handled by other agencies. However, 2009 and 2010
budget allocations stressed irrigation.

Variability in Allocation of Spending

173.     Capital spending showed a high degree of variability between 2008 and 2012. Year-on-year
variability was high in both budgeted and actual expenditures. The level of variability was so high as to
make spending unpredictable, as this section has shown. Managers dislike unpredictability of resources
because it affects their ability to plan resource commitment ahead. It is no consolation that agriculture
was not alone in being unpredictable; indeed, the entire public spending of the federal government was.

Optimality in Economic Classification of Spending

174.    Spending maintained a good relationship between recurrent and capital expenditure between
fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2011. Capital spending was an average of about 60 percent of the budget, much
higher than the average achieved economywide of below 30 percent. Capital expenditure was 85 percent
in both 2008 and 2009, when water spending formed part of agriculture. However, capital spending does
not always imply investment; a lot of it is operations spending and expenditures that do not create
enduring assets. MDAs find a way of passing off operations expenditure as capital, since regular overhead
spending includes little operational expenditure.

4.2.2. Allocative Efficiency at the Subnational Level

175.     Based on the performance of the states in terms of execution of the total budget and the fact that
larger deviations are experienced in the capital compared with the recurrent budget, there is a need to
address the quality of spending first in terms of striking the appropriate balance between recurrent and
capital, as noted earlier, and maintaining adequate allocation of resources to overhead within the recurrent
budget. Personnel costs are more or less an obligation that must be fulfilled; thus, room to maneuver is


 However, allocations to forestry, irrigation, and so on, are yet not available. They are outside the control of
34

FMARD, which provided the data used here.
                                                                                                             66
available only for overhead. This does not detract from the fact that many states do not even find it easy
to pay staff salaries as and when due, and they even resort to borrowing to meet such obligations
whenever they experience a revenue crunch.

176.     Considering the allocation of resources between personnel and overhead, there are three
intriguing findings. First, the overhead share is generally low across the three tiers of government.
Second, slippages in the budget share and the share in actual spending seem to be within acceptable
limits. Third, between 2008 and 2012, positive deviation is recorded on the average only at the federal
level, but it is marginal. Among the states, Ondo state has the highest overhead share (21.3 percent of the
budget), exceeding that of Cross River state (with the lowest) fivefold. In terms of the share of overhead
in actual agricultural spending, Ondo state also has the highest (16.7 percent), rising almost six times
above that of Cross River state, which has the lowest share, at only 2.6 percent (Table 4.2). Given the
nature of agricultural services that have to be provided by the public sector (as elaborated upon earlier),
the share of overhead in public spending observed in the case study states is unlikely to be adequate at the
state level. The usual complaints of inadequate monitoring of facilities in terms of transportation and
other logistic requirements, lack of maintenance of storage infrastructure, and suspension of some
extension activities are indicators of inefficiency in the allocation of resources. Even the weaknesses in
executive capacity for project implementation, record keeping, and expenditure tracking suggest that
allocative efficiency can be very challenging across the tiers of government. These issues have to be
addressed if budget performance is to witness significant improvement to propel the transformation of the
agricultural sector in Nigeria.

Table 4.2: Share of overhead in recurrent expenditure (%)
                         2008           2009           2010           2011           2012
                                                                                                  Average (2008-12)
   Division              B       A      B       A      B       A      B       A      B       A         B         A
  Federal             41.3   38.5      8.4   10.8    10.0   11.5     8.7   10.1     6.4     9.7      15.0      16.1
  Cross River state    5.4      3.6    5.1     3.5    2.2     2.0    3.2     1.9    2.8     2.0       3.7       2.6
  Niger state          5.4      4.4    6.2     1.7    4.5     0.7    3.5     5.6    2.5     5.1       4.4       3.5
  Ondo state          21.8   18.7     19.1   14.9    26.4   21.5    26.8   17.8    12.1   10.7       21.3      16.7
  Odigbo LGA           0.00 0.00 0.00 12.0 0.00 0.00 0.00 38.7 0.00 0.00                           0.00     10.1
Source: Authors’ computation using data from ministries of agriculture and finance of the federal government, Cross
River, Niger, and Ondo states and the departments of agriculture and finance of Odigbo local government area.
Notes: A = actual; B = budget; LGA = local government area.

4.2.3. International Comparison of Agricultural Public Expenditure Performance in Nigeria

177.    This section undertakes an assessment of the efficiency of agricultural public expenditure in
Nigeria relative to that of other countries across the world by mapping the latest available data on the
degree of association between government spending in agriculture and agricultural GDP (Figure 4.1). In
addition, we assess the average spending in agriculture in Nigeria as a percentage of the agricultural GDP
in comparison with other SSA countries over the period 2000 to 2010.




                                                                                                                  67
Figure 4.1: Government spending in agriculture versus agricultural gross domestic product, 2008

                                                9



                                                8
                                                                          Spain


                                                7
 Ag. government spending (2005 US$, billions)




                                                                                                Turkey


                                                6



                                                5
                                                                                                              Brazil


                                                4



                                                3
                                                        Ireland


                                                2
                                                                                       Russia

                                                1                                          Nigeria


                                                0
                                                    0             20              40                     60            80
                                                                       AgGDP (2005 US$, billions)

Source: Authors’ computation based on data from World Bank (2014) and IFPRI (2014).
Note: AgGDP = agricultural gross domestic product.

178.     On average, government spending in agriculture and agricultural GDP have a positive
association, and most countries lie either above or near the diagonal line. This suggests a linear
relationship between agricultural public spending and agricultural GDP. However, Nigeria—with only
few other countries—is an outlier. As compared with its agricultural GDP, Nigeria is the country that
spends the least in agriculture. For instance, Turkey—which lies along the diagonal line and has an
agricultural GDP more or less equal to Nigeria’s—spends around seven times more than Nigeria on its
agricultural sector.

179.    Similarly, Nigeria’s government expenditure in agriculture as a percentage of the agricultural
GDP is among the least when we consider a longer period. As seen in Figure 4.2, Nigerian government
expenditure in the agricultural sector as a share of the agricultural GDP was only 1.5 percent on average
over the period between 2000 and 2010. This figure is also far less than the continental average of 9
percent, the West African average of 4.9 percent, and that of many African countries, and the country is
ranked 28th out of the 37 African countries in this regard. During the period, West African countries
                                                                                                       68
including Senegal (17.3 percent), Cape Verde (13.6 percent), Burkina Faso (12.1 percent), Niger (7.7
percent), and Benin (3.7 percent), as well as countries in other parts of the continent, including Namibia
(14.3 percent), Zambia (11 percent), and Malawi (10.9 percent) have spent in their agricultural sector far
more than Nigeria in proportion to the size of their agricultural economy.



Figure 4.2: Average spending in agriculture as percentage of agricultural gross domestic product in
Nigeria compared with other countries in Africa south of the Sahara, 2000-10

                          70

                          60
  Ag. spending/AgGDP, %




                          50

                          40

                          30

                          20

                          10
                                    [VALUE]%
                          0
                                     Equatorial Guinea
                                             Zimbabwe




                                               Tanzania
                                                 Nigeria




                                                 Zambia
                                          Mozambique



                                            Madagascar




                                              Mauritius
                                                Burundi




                                           Côte d'Ivoire




                                                   Benin




                                                Ethiopia




                                                Senegal
                                                     DRC




                                                   Kenya




                                                 Malawi
                                                  Liberia




                                           Burkina Faso




                                              Botswana
                                                     Mali




                               Central African Republic




                                                 Angola




                                            Cape Verde
                                                  Ghana




                                                Uganda




                                             Seychelles
                                             Cameroon




                                                Rwanda
                                                  Congo




                                               Namibia
                                                    Niger
                                         Guinea-Bissau

                                           Sierra Leone


                                                    Togo




                                                Lesotho
                                           South Africa




                                              Swaziland


Source: Authors’ computation based on data from IFPRI (2014).
Note: AgGDP = agricultural gross domestic product.

180.    Even in the distant past, between 1980 and 2000, Nigerian government expenditure in the
agricultural sector as a share of the agricultural GDP had been between 1 and 2 percent, except for the
observed surge in 1986, and the average share was less than the Africa-wide average (Mogues, Morris, et
al. 2012). This suggests that Nigeria did not do much to improve the adequacy of agricultural public
spending relative to the contribution of the sector to the national economy.

181.    Moreover, in most of the years between 2000 and 2010, both the trend in the share of the
agricultural sector in total government spending and the trend in government spending in agriculture as a
percentage of the agricultural GDP do not show a clear pattern in Nigeria. However, the two indicators
were comoving throughout the decade. As depicted in Figure 4.3, the lowest shares of the agricultural
sector in government spending were registered in 2000 (1.6 percent) and 2003 (1.3 percent) while the
highest were recorded in 2001 (6.4 percent) and 2008 (6 percent). Similarly, the trend in spending as a
percentage of agricultural GDP has been fluctuating throughout the last decade.


                                                                                                       69
Figure 4.3: Agricultural expenditure as percentage of agricultural gross domestic product and total
government expenditure in Nigeria

                                       7%                                                                          4.5%
  Ag. expenditure/ total expenditure




                                       6%                                                                          4.0%




                                                                                                                          Ag. expenditure/AgGDP
                                                                                                                   3.5%
                                       5%
                                                                                                                   3.0%
                                       4%                                                                          2.5%
                                       3%                                                                          2.0%
                                                                                                                   1.5%
                                       2%
                                                                                                                   1.0%
                                       1%                                                                          0.5%
                                       0%                                                                          0.0%
                                         2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
                                                                        Year
                                                   Agriculture expenditure share in total government expenditure
                                                   Agriculture expenditure share in agriculture GDP


Source: Authors’ graph using IFPRI (2014).
Note: AgGDP = agricultural gross domestic product.

182.    However, the fluctuations observed in the share of the agricultural sector in total government
spending and in the share of agricultural government spending as a percentage of the agricultural GDP are
not unique to Nigeria. In this regard, what is observed between 2000 and 2010 is mixed, and this is true
both in West Africa as well as in other parts of SSA. For instance, among West African countries,
Burkina Faso has shown dramatic swings in both indicators that is marked by a long-term average
decline, while Senegal’s trend in both indicators was characterized by moderate swings marked by a long-
term average increase. Cape Verde’s agricultural government spending as a percentage of the agricultural
GDP has shown a more or less stable trend over the decade. Among countries in the other parts of SSA,
Kenya has shown stable trends in both indicators while Seychelles has shown moderate swings marked by
a long-term average decline in its trend in the share of the agricultural sector in total government spending
(Figures 4.4 and 4.5).




                                                                                                                                                  70
Figure 4.4: Expenditure in agriculture as share of total government expenditure, selected African
countries, 2000-10

                                          35

                                                                                                          Burkina Faso
                                          30
                                                                                                          Kenya
                                                                                                          Mauritius
                                          25
                                                                                                          Senegal
  Ag. expenditure / total expenditure %




                                                                                                          Seychelles
                                          20
                                                                                                          Nigeria

                                          15


                                          10


                                          5


                                          0
                                           2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009      2010
                                                                              Year

Source: Based on data from IFPRI (2014).




                                                                                                                           71
Figure 4.5: Spending in agriculture as percentage of agricultural gross domestic product, selected African
countries, 2000-10

                             40

                                                  Burkina Faso
                             35
                                                  Cape Verde
                                                  Kenya
                             30
                                                  Mauritius
                                                  Senegal
  Ag. expenditure/AgGDP, %




                             25
                                                  Nigeria

                             20


                             15


                             10


                             5


                             0
                              2000     2001     2002      2003    2004      2005      2006     2007     2008    2009               2010
                                                                            Year

Source: Based on data from IFPRI (2014).
Note: AgGDP = agricultural gross domestic product.

183.     In contrast to the low level of public expenditure in Nigerian agriculture, the share of agriculture
in total GDP and growth in agricultural GDP were high and more or less stable during the same period in
Nigeria (Figure 4.6). Pursuant to the target set by CAADP in 2003, Nigeria has registered a more than 6
percent annual average agricultural growth rate between 2003 and 2010 (World Bank 2014).

Figure 4.6: Share of agricultural GDP and annual agricultural GDP growth in Nigeria, 2003-10

                             45%                                                                               8%
                             40%                                                                               7%
    AgGDP/GDP




                             35%                                                                               6%
                                                                                                                    AgGDP Growth




                             30%
                                                                                                               5%
                             25%
                                                                                                               4%
                             20%
                                                       Agriculture, value-added (% of GDP)                     3%
                             15%
                                                       Agriculture, value-added (annual % growth)              2%
                             10%
                              5%                                                                               1%
                                                                                                                                          72
                              0%                                                                               0%
                                2003     2004     2005        2006    2007         2008      2009     2010
                                                                     Year
Source: Based on data from World Bank (2014).
Notes: AgGDP = agricultural gross domestic product; GDP = gross domestic product.


  4.3. Benefits of Agricultural Public Expenditure

4.3.1. Trend in Government Spending on Fertilizer Subsidy

184.     Due to paucity of data, the analysis of public spending on fertilizer subsidy (PSFS) covers the
period 2003 to 2008 at both the federal and state levels. Whereas the federal government provided a 25
percent subsidy annually over the period, the states provided different rates of subsidy, which even varied
from year to year, ranging from 10 percent to 74 percent. Federal government spending on fertilizer
subsidy rose from ₦ 290.8 million in 2003 to ₦ 5.7 billion in 2008 while the total during the period stood
at ₦ 12.3 billion. Spending on fertilizer subsidy by all the states rose from ₦ 256 million to ₦ 5.8 billion
with a total of ₦ 15.3 billion during the same period. As shown in Figure 4.7, state-level spending
continued to be higher than federal spending from 2006 to 2008, even though in terms of political
visibility the federal subsidy program has tended to attract greater prominence. This discrepancy
underscores the need to always account for the efforts of state governments in evaluating public
agricultural expenditure and its benefits.


Figure 4.7 Public spending on fertilizer subsidy in Nigeria, 2003-08




Source: Based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.


185.     With regard to the selected states, no state has a full record of fertilizer subsidy spending annually
during the period, implying that the price of fertilizer might not have been subsidized on a regular annual
basis. There was no record of a subsidy in Cross River state in 2006 and 2007, and in Niger state there
was no record from 2003 to 2006. Available data show that the fertilizer price was subsidized in Ondo
state in all years but 2007. Spending on fertilizer subsidy rose from ₦ 4.0 million in 2003 to ₦ 88.7 million
in 2008 in Cross River state and from ₦ 9.7 million to ₦ 32.0 million in Ondo state during the same
period. For the two years for which Niger state provided subsidy, spending declined sharply, from ₦ 493.0
million in 2007 to ₦ 257.0 million in 2008 (Figure 4.8). The decline is not necessarily due to a reduction
in the quantity of fertilizer but due largely to the reduction in the subsidy rate from 47 percent to 26
percent.



                                                                                                            73
Figure 4.8: Fertilizer subsidy spending by selected states in Nigeria, 2003-08




Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

4.3.2. Benefit Incidence of Government Expenditure on Fertilizer Subsidy

186.     In analyzing the benefits of PSFS, we employ a methodology for analyzing benefit incidence that
uses standard tools, Lorenz curves, and benefit concentration curves based on data from the 2009/2010
LSMS-ISA survey in Nigeria. Benefit incidence analysis considers the distribution of public subsidies for
services among different groups in the population, in particular among different income categories. In
determining the benefit of PSFS, farmers are considered in quintile groups ranked from the poorest to the
richest. In assessing the share of each group, we emphasize ascertaining whether PSFS is pro-poor or pro-
rich, progressive or regressive, with a view to gaining an insight into the expenditure performance of the
subsidy program based on targeting and equity considerations.


How Pro-poor Is the PSFS Benefit?

187.     The results of the benefit incidence analysis are presented in the form of computed coefficients
(Gini coefficients and concentration coefficients) and graphics. The concentration coefficient, also called
the Suits index, is the most common summary measure of benefit incidence. It is estimated in like manner
as the Gini coefficient but it is based on a concentration curve instead of a Lorenz curve. While the Gini
coefficient is computed as the ratio of the area between the diagonal (45-degree line) and the Lorenz
curve to the total area below the diagonal, the concentration coefficient is the ratio of the area bounded by
the diagonal and the concentration curve to the total area below the diagonal (Manasan et al. 2008).
Benefits from government spending on a service are considered to be pro-poor if the concentration curve
for the benefits is above the 45-degree line (Davoodi et al. 2003). As shown in Annex IV, Figure 4.1, the
concentration curve is below the diagonal, implying that the benefits are unlikely to be pro-poor in
general.

188.    As expected, such a concentration curve should result in a positive concentration coefficient. As
shown in Table 4.3, our results are consistent with this theoretical expectation, judging by the Suits index
of 0.116. With further disaggregation of the data, there is more variation in the Suits index and in the
shape of the concentration curve. The variation is far more pronounced on the basis of geopolitical zones
than on the basis of gender and rural-urban disparities (Table 4.4).


Table 4.3: Gender and geographical comparison of progressivity of benefits
                                                                                                          74
                                     Gini coefficient       Concentration coefficient
Category                                                    (Suits index)
All farmers                                        0.425                        0.116
-Male                                              0.423                        0.124
-Female                                            0.430                        0.001
-Urban                                             0.405                        0.025
-Rural                                             0.402                        0.136
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

Table 4.4: Zonal comparison of progressivity of benefits
                                           Gini Concentration
                                     coefficient        coefficient
Zone                                                 (Suits index)
Northwest                                 0.381              0.263
Northeast                                 0.410              0.063
North central                             0.387              0.042
Southwest                                 0.381             -0.263
Southeast                                 0.437             -0.007
South-south                               0.428             -0.124
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

189.    With regard to gender, the Suits index is 0.124 for male farmers and 0.001 for females. This
implies that even though targeting of farmers is generally poor, some groups of female farmers may have
benefited more than their male counterparts. This possibility is more clearly revealed in Annex IV, Figure
4.2 where the concentration curves of the male farmers fall below the 45-degree line, whereas certain
portions of the curve for female farmers appear to be convex while others are concave.

190.     As regards targeting in the rural and urban areas, the distribution of benefits is also unlikely to be
pro-poor in line with the general national pattern. The Suits index for urban areas is 0.025 compared with
0.136 for the rural areas. As shown in Annex IV, Figure 4.3 the benefit concentration curves are clearly
below the diagonal for rural farmers and male farmers. Although that of urban farmers seems to be close
to the diagonal, it lies generally below the diagonal, implying that on the whole, the benefits cannot be
said to be pro-poor. Similarly, the larger part of the benefit concentration curve for female farmers lies
either below or on the diagonal line. A disaggregation of the analysis by region (zone) shows that the
incidence of benefit is pro-poor in the southern zones and pro-rich in the northern zones (Annex IV,
Figure 4.4). In sum, the lowest income group has not received a proportionate share of PSFS, implying
that in general, spending has been poorly targeted at the farming population. The analysis of the benefits
on the basis of geopolitical zones, however, indicates that targeting has been better in the southern zones
than in the northern zones.

Progressivity of Benefits

191.    We further assess the benefit of PSFS to determine whether it is progressive (inequality reducing)
or regressive (inequality increasing). By progressivity is meant that lower-income groups get a larger
share of the benefits from government spending than they do of either income or consumption. The share
of benefits from PSFS being analyzed here across quintile groups of farmers is presented in Tables 4.5
and 4.6. Three aspects of the analysis—namely, graphics and the Lorenz and Suits indexes—and

                                                                                                            75
computed benefit shares across the quintile groups are considered in determining the progressivity of
PSFS. At the national (aggregate) level, the results show that (1) the benefit concentration curve is above
the Lorenz curve but (2) below the diagonal and (3) the Suits index is less than the Gini index, implying
that benefits of PSFS are progressive in relative terms. On the other hand, the Suits index is positive and,
as shown in Table 4.5, the share of benefits is lower for the poorest quintile than the richest quintile; these
facts imply that in absolute terms the benefits are regressive.

                 Table 4.5: Quintile share of benefits by gender and geographic location
                 Quintile 1     Quintile 2       Quintile 3      Quintile 4   Quintile 5    All groups
Category         poorest        poor             average         rich         richest
Nigeria                  0.185           0.200           0.204         0.213          0.199         1.000
-Male                    0.188           0.197           0.210         0.206          0.199         1.000
-Female                  0.089           0.119           0.257         0.267          0.267         1.000
By location
-Urban                    0.203           0.193           0.182           0.188           0.234            1.000
-Rural                    0.189           0.192           0.212           0.213           0.193            1.000
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

192.     Disaggregation of the analysis on the basis of gender and geographic location shows that the
benefits of PSFS are regressive in absolute terms for both male and female farmers and for both urban and
rural areas.

193.     On a regional basis, the share of benefits follows an increasing trend from the poorest to the
richest quintile (Table 4.6) in all the six geopolitical zones. The results show that the benefits of PSFS in
the southern zones are progressive in absolute terms whereas in the northern zones the benefits are
regressive in absolute terms.

                             Table 4.6: Quintile share of benefits by region
                  Quintile 1    Quintile 2      Quintile 3      Quintile 4        Quintile 5      All groups
Zone              poorest       poor            average         rich              richest
Northwest         0.182         0.183           0.196           0.207             0.232           1.000
Northeast         0.169         0.167           0.231           0.219             0.214           1.000
North central     0.156         0.209           0.170           0.230             0.234           1.000
Southwest         0.154         0.115           0.308           0.231             0.192           1.000
Southeast         0.126         0.168           0.244           0.256             0.206           1.000
South-south       0.140         0.221           0.209           0.209             0.221           1.000
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

Reach of Benefits of Fertilizer Subsidy Program

194.     From the participation rates obtained from the benefit incidence analysis, we can gain an insight
into the extent to which the government fertilizer subsidy program is reaching the intended beneficiaries
or target population. The participation rate is the proportion of fertilizer users in the total number of
eligible users in a particular quintile group. The results show that on the aggregate, the participation rate
is 43.1 percent in the country. Although the variation between rural and urban areas is more or less
imperceptible, it is slightly higher in rural areas (43.2 percent) than urban areas (42.2 percent). On the
other hand, the gender disparity is remarkable. The participation rate is higher for males (45.6 percent)

                                                                                                            76
than females (24.9 percent). In general, there is a direct relationship between participation rate and
welfare. Put differently, participation rates increase as expenditure per capita increases. Evidently, the
participation rate among the rich (quintile 4) is 45.8 percent, compared with 39.8 percent for the poorest
group (quintile 1). In each quintile group, participation is higher for males than for females. Moreover,
with the exception of the poorest and richest groups, participation rates are higher in rural than in urban
areas. As shown in Figure 4.9, in each of the regions, the participation rate is an increasing function of
welfare, with the rate being higher among the richest than the poorest group of farmers. However, there is
no remarkable difference in the participation rates of the richest and poorest groups in the southwest. In
general, participation rates are higher in the north than in the south. On average, participation is highest in
the northwest (77.3 percent), with the northeast coming in a distant second (47.1 percent), followed by
north central (40.6 percent), southeast (36 percent), and south-south (17.9 percent), while the lowest
participation rate (9.2 percent) is recorded in the southwest.

Figure 4.9: Regional comparison of farmers’ participation in Nigeria’s fertilizer subsidy program,
2009/2010




Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

195.     In light of the above findings, we can safely conclude that the target population of the fertilizer
subsidy program has not benefited as intended. In absolute terms, the benefit is regressive, implying lower
benefits to the poorest compared with the relatively well-to-do groups. The findings tend to substantiate
the rationale for reform of the fertilizer subsidy program that started in 2011 and sought to ensure that the
subsidy is better targeted and, indeed, delivered directly to farmers. It remains to be seen, however,
whether the subsidy transfer is indeed pro-poor and whether the delivery is actually effective judging by
the participation rate of the small-scale farmers who are expected to be the direct beneficiaries. An
application of this type of benefit incidence analysis to the input subsidy program under the current GESS
is therefore instructive in view of the fact that the resources allocated to the program are far larger than
what has been the case during the last couple of years preceding the reform, and given the implications of
the program on the overall budget of the agricultural sector.

  4.4. Comparison of Agricultural Public Expenditure and Agricultural GDP in Nigeria
196.    One way of assessing budget performance, or the effectiveness of a government’s expenditure
decisions, is to analyze the changes in two key indicators during the period under review. These are the
degree of government commitment to financing service delivery in the sector and the intensity of
investing public funds in the sector, in this case the agricultural sector. The latter gives an indication of
the degree of funding the agricultural sector attracts relative to its contribution to the national economy.
Since GDP is involved in the analysis, public expenditure from the three tiers of government is involved
in the assessment. As shown in Table 4.7, the subnational government has been making a substantial
                                                                                                          77
contribution in terms of agricultural spending. Between 2008 and 2012 the proportion of budgetary
allocation to agriculture at the subnational level has been rising steadily above that of the federal level and
on average stood at 62.41 percent over the period. In terms of actual spending, however, the proportion
(47.19 percent) at the subnational level is much lower than that at the federal level. This discrepancy
implies that the intention to finance agriculture is rather pronounced at the subnational level but
translating such intention into reality has been far more challenging at the subnational level than at the
federal level. However, in terms of resource allocation to the totality of sectors, the contribution at the
subnational level has been generally higher for both the budget and actual spending (Table 4.8). Between
2008 and 2012, budgetary allocation at the subnational level averaged 69.80 percent while actual
spending averaged 55.18 percent. This finding is a reflection of both the different priorities of the various
tiers of government in the allocation of resources for development purposes and variations in the
commitment to agricultural development. Indeed, judging by the share of agriculture in total spending at
the federal and subnational levels, the commitment is low, and it has also been on the decline over the
years (Table 4.9). As illustrated in Figure 4.10, agriculture’s share of the total budget at the federal level
followed a declining trend from 2008 to 2011 and moved upward in 2012, but still fell below the 2008
level. The share of agriculture in total spending at the federal level fell from an all-time high of 7.19
percent in 2008 to as low as 2.14 percent in 2012, a performance that is far from being commensurate
with the public pronouncement of agriculture as a sector to which government has accorded a very high
priority. At the subnational level, agriculture’s share of the total budget climbed from 3.12 percent in
2008 to 4.60 percent in 2010, from where it trended downward to 3.91 percent in 2012. The share of
agriculture in actual total spending rose from 3.26 percent in 2008 to a peak of 4.36 percent in 2010 and
plunged to 2.19 percent in 2012. Thus, even though the level of commitment seems to be higher at the
federal level on the average during the period, the downward trend is common to both levels of
government.




                                                                                                            78
Table 4.7: Cross-tier comparison of agricultural public expenditure in Nigeria, 2008-12 (constant 1990 naira, millions)
                       2008                     2009                        2010                      2011                    2012            Average (2008-12)

Division      Budget      Actual      Budget          Actual      Budget          Actual     Budget      Actual      Budget       Actual      Budget       Actual

Federal
government    3,338.95    3,321.13        4,841.24    5,238.98        4,515.57    4,077.19   2,559.06    3,358.91    3,057.38     1,866.85    3,662.44     3,572.61

States        2,500.16    1,880.53        3,239.93    1,750.25        3,765.64    2,428.83   3,168.49    1,738.78    3,730.10        923.90   3,280.86     1,744.46

LGAs          2,008.80    1,609.67        3,092.35    1,402.10        3,135.47    1,848.11   2,472.65    1,466.43    2,972.34        739.51   2,736.32     1,413.16

Total         7,847.90    6,811.33    11,173.51       8,391.33    11,416.68       8,354.13   8,200.20    6,564.12    9,759.81     3,530.26    9,679.62     6,730.24

Share of
subnational
(%)             57.45         51.24         56.67       37.57           60.45       51.20       68.79        48.83        68.67       47.12       62.41      47.19

Source: Authors’ computation based on data from ministries of agriculture of federal government, Cross River, Niger, and Ondo states; departments of
agriculture of Akamkpa and Odigbo local government areas; and SPARC (2014).
Note: LGA = local government area.

Table 4.8: Cross-tier comparison of total public expenditure in Nigeria, 2008-12 (constant 1990 naira, millions)

                                   2008                        2009                    2010                       2011                     2012             Average (2008-12)
Division                 Budget       Actual         Budget       Actual         Budget      Actual     Budget       Actual       Budget      Actual        Budget    Actual
Federal government        46,433          45,954      72,224          84,852      79,453     106,852     82,689          90,655      66,694       87,399     69,499    83,142
States                    98,570          75,044     109,080          76,574      98,042      69,531    101,357          69,661   114,595         60,691    104,329    70,300
LGAs                      45,685          31,857      62,324          42,528      60,272      36,155     56,460          34,698      56,888       14,992     56,326    32,046
Subnational              144,255      106,902        171,403      119,102        158,315     105,686    157,816      104,358      171,483         75,683    160,654   102,346
Total                    190,688      152,855        243,627      203,954        237,768     212,537    240,505      195,014      238,178     163,082       230,153   185,488
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from ministries of finance of federal government, Cross River, Niger, and Ondo states; departments of finance of
Akamkpa and Odigbo local government areas; and SPARC (2014).
Note: LGA = local government area.




                                                                                                                                                                                79
Table 4.9: Cross-tier comparison of share of agriculture in total public spending in Nigeria, 2008-12
(percent)
                                                                                                                                                                       Average (2008-
                                                      2008                      2009                    2010                    2011                     2012               12)
 Division                                       Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget                                                    Actual
 Federal
 government                                          7.19     7.23         6.70           6.17       5.68      3.82         3.09          3.71       4.58       2.14     5.45     4.61
 States                                              2.54     2.51         2.97           2.29       3.84      3.49         3.13          2.50       3.26       1.52     3.15     2.46
 LGAs                                                4.40     5.05         4.96           3.30       5.20      5.11         4.38          4.23       5.22       4.93     4.83     4.52
 Subnational                                         3.13     3.26         3.69           2.65       4.36      4.05         3.57          3.07       3.91       2.20     3.73     3.05
 National                                            4.12     4.46         4.59           4.11       4.80      3.93         3.41          3.37       4.10       2.16     4.20     3.61
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from ministries of agriculture and finance of federal government, Cross
River, Niger, and Ondo states; departments of agriculture and finance of Akamkpa and Odigbo local government
areas; and SPARC (2014).
Note: LGA = local government area.

Figure 4.10: Comparison of share of agriculture in total public spending in Nigeria by level of
government, 2008-12

                                                              Federal government                         Subnational
                                        8
 Ag. expenditure /total expenditure %




                                        7
                                        6
                                        5
                                        4
                                        3
                                        2
                                        1
                                        0
                                                     Actual




                                                                       Actual




                                                                                            Actual




                                                                                                              Actual




                                                                                                                                 Actual




                                                                                                                                                     Actual
                                            Budget




                                                              Budget




                                                                                 Budget




                                                                                                     Budget




                                                                                                                       Budget




                                                                                                                                            Budget




                                               2008              2009               2010                2011              2012              Average
                                                                                                                                           (2008-12)
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from ministries of agriculture and finance of federal government, Cross
River, Niger, and Ondo states; departments of agriculture and finance of Akamkpa and Odigbo local government
areas (2008–2012); and SPARC (2014).

197.     The waning commitment of governments at all levels to invest in the agricultural sector is further
revealed in Figure 4.11, which illustrates the relationship between agricultural GDP and agricultural
public spending in the country. Whereas agricultural GDP followed an increasing trend annually from
2008 to 2012, agricultural public spending was trending downward precipitously. This paradox is an
indication that the agricultural sector was being underfunded during the period. It is little wonder,

                                                                                                                                                                                         80
therefore, that the sector remains a dominant habitat for the poor while at the same time, huge
opportunities and resource endowments remain untapped. Also illustrated in Figure 4.11 is the trend of
agricultural public spending as percentage of agricultural GDP, which explains the intensity of spending
during the period under review. Between 2008 and 2009, when the GDP was growing, intensity of
spending was also moving in the same positive direction. However, whereas GDP maintained an
increasing trend thereafter, spending intensity was moving down the slope, plunging from 2010 to merely
1 percent in 2012.

Figure 4.11: Agricultural public expenditure as percentage of gross domestic product in Nigeria, 2008-12


                                                           GDP
       400,000                                                                                3%


       350,000
                                                                                              3%

       300,000

                                                                                              2%
       250,000


       200,000                                                                                2%


       150,000
                                                                                              1%

       100,000

                                                                                              1%
        50,000


             0                                                                                0%
                      2008            2009          2010           2011            2012


Note: GDP = gross domestic product.

198.      By and large, the revelation of the two indicators, government commitment to agricultural
investment and intensity of spending, is that the agricultural sector has witnessed considerable
underfunding during the period under review. As illustrated in Figure 4.12, both indicators followed a
downward trend, highlighting the enormity of the neglect of the sector over the years. Government
commitment was at a very low level yet still trending downward over the period while at the same time
intensity of spending nosedived dramatically. The vigor that has gone into reviving the sector and
promoting investment from various sources since 2012 is indeed well deserved and well timed. Given the
initial conditions of funding neglect, the commitment of the authorities to transform the sector and to
attract private-sector investment from within and outside the country provides a ray of hope that within
the medium to long term the growth and development of the sector will be accorded priority in the real
sense of providing funding to capitalize, modernize, and industrialize the sector. This will enable it to
fulfill its modern role of economic diversification, wealth creation, and employment generation.
                                                                                                      81
82
Figure 4.12: Comparison of degree of government commitment to investment in agriculture and intensity
of spending in Nigeria, 2008-12

                     5

                    4.5

                     4

                    3.5

                     3
          percent




                    2.5

                     2

                    1.5
                                 Share of Agriculture in Total Public Spending
                     1
                                 Agriculture Public Spending as % of GDP
                    0.5

                     0
                          2008            2009            2010             2011    2012
Note: GDP = gross domestic product.

  4.5. Public Financial Management of Agricultural Expenditure
199.      Building adequate capacity for public financial management (PFM) in FMARD is particularly
critical, and is well underway, to overcome the constraints in mobilizing basic expenditure information
for decisionmaking, as revealed by the initiation of the AgPER. The federal government of Nigeria is
currently implementing three major PFM reform initiatives to strengthen the management of public funds
in Nigeria. As a priority MDA of the current government administration, FMARD is one of the pilot
MDAs selected for the initial phase of the rollout of the PFM reform programs. Through the Office of the
Accountant General of the Federation, FMF is leading the reform program, and the three initiatives under
implementation are GIFMIS, IPPIS, and TSA. The objective of the introduction of these online
computerized systems is to automate government financial transactions with a view to improving
efficiency and effectiveness in the management of public resources by introducing stronger financial
controls, improved cash management processes, monitoring mechanisms, and standard reporting formats.

200.     Rollout of these systems started first with central FMARD departments before turning to the more
logistically difficult task of extending them to the nearly 40 public-sector agencies that are scattered
spatially across the nation. FMARD headquarters has been integrated into the GIFMIS and TSA
platforms since April 2012. The capital and overhead operations of the ministry headquarters are
channeled through TSA, which runs on the GIFMIS platform. At present, the Office of the Accountant
General of the Federation is rolling out GIFMIS and TSA to all parastatals, departments, and agencies
(PDAs) of government by state, and 14 states had been covered as of March 2014, with an additional 8
states to be included by the end of that month. The integration of all 36 states on the GIFMIS and TSA
platform is scheduled for completion by the end of June 2014, according to the implementation calendar
for the rollout, and thus all 40 PDAs of FMARD will be fully integrated into both systems. This is
particularly important for FMARD, whose PDAs account for 75 percent of FMARD payroll and overhead
                                                                                                      83
expenditure. The extension of the rollout of IPPIS to all PDAs of FMARD is largely on schedule. The
ministry headquarters is one of the initial 7 pilot MDAs selected for implementation of the system, which
commenced in 2006. FMARD has made an official request to the IPPIS secretariat requesting that its
PDAs be included under IPPIS. In response, IPPIS has gathered the biometric information of FMARD
staff to be captured in the system, and training workshops have been held to prepare the ministry for the
transition. The target date for completion of the rollout of IPPIS was postponed from July 2013 to early
2014. So far, 23 PDAs have been enrolled on IPPIS with the remaining PDAs at various stages of the
integration process into the system. Thus, the expectation is that FMARD would have completed its
integration into the three PFM initiatives by the end of 2014.


  4.6. Mechanisms for Fiscal Cooperation and Agricultural Expenditure Coordination
201.     Effectiveness of public spending can be enhanced if there is coordination of efforts and
institutions involved in the implementation of agricultural projects. This section examines the various
mechanisms of achieving coordination as well as the nature of agricultural spending in which various tiers
of government are involved.

4.6.1. Policy Coordination through the National Council on Agriculture

202.     To address the problem of synchronizing sectoral policies between the federal and subnational
level, the federal government established and sponsors vertical policy coordination councils in major
sectors of the economy. For the agricultural sector, the coordination council is known as the National
Council on Agriculture (NCA). These national councils are semiformal structures of governance in the
Nigerian Federation, comprising political and technical leadership in each sector at the federal and state
levels. They meet at least once a year to agree to sectoral policies and targets. The expectation is that once
a consensus is reached, these policies and targets should influence sectoral development planning and
programming at all levels of government. The NCA has performed creditably in the promotion of
agricultural policies and development strategies over the years. It has served as a forum for the sharing of
information and coordination of matters of interest to various levels of government as far as all subsectors
of agriculture are concerned. The ATA was approved on March 15, 2012, during one of the NCA’s
meetings. The endorsement of the ATA at this level gave it an aura of a national agenda recognized and
accepted by all levels of government.

4.6.2. Institutional Restructuring for Agricultural Program Implementation

203.    Two major approaches to institutional restructuring are worthy of consideration in view of their
relevance to effective implementation of agricultural projects in recent times. First is the decentralization
of the bureaucracy within FMARD as a major institutional reform to strengthen the implementation of
agricultural activities at state and regional levels. Each of the six geopolitical zones has a zonal office,
while a state office—the Green House—has been established in each state. The offices commenced
operations by May 2012. In each zone, the federal officials are expected to coordinate and monitor the
ATA activities in all the states and provide feedback to the headquarters in Abuja, where urgent decisions
would be made if necessary. Each office is headed by a regional director, who is assisted by subject
matter specialists in key areas such as crops, livestock, fisheries, infrastructure, cooperatives, and land, as
well as a regional accountant. They are to provide explanations to state officials and other stakeholders
about the various policy changes and initiatives under the ATA. The regional offices monitor the
implementation of GESS for on-the-spot resolution of issues, especially in relation to registering farmers.

204.    Evidence from the north central regional office shows that an important avenue for interaction
with stakeholders is the preseason meeting to strategize for agricultural production–related activities,
                                                                                                            84
including access to fertilizers, seeds, agrochemicals, and relevant information and procedures.
Participants included state directors, representatives of ADPs, agrodealers, directors from the ministries of
agriculture in the region, representatives of the state planning commissions, and representatives from the
National Seed Council. Even though the regional offices are not directly involved in project
implementation, they are relevant in strengthening linkages horizontally among states in their respective
regions and vertically between states and the federal government. For instance, as the 2013 dry farming
season approached, the north central regional office identified three states (Kogi, Niger, and Nasarawa)
within the region that were interested in rice cultivation. The office is communicating with the
headquarters and state offices to ensure easy access to the relevant incentives under the ATA.

205.     Each of the state offices is headed by a state director, who is assisted by project support officers
covering key components such as crops, livestock, fisheries, engineering, strategic grain reserve,
accounts, and administration. The establishment of state offices is a major institutional reform that has
helped to reduce wasteful expenditure and harness resources for effective project implementation at the
state level. It is expected to reduce the bureaucratic bottlenecks in communication between each state and
FMARD in Abuja. Prior to the establishment of the state offices, each of the 10 departments of FMARD
in Abuja had a different corresponding office in each of the 36 states of the federation. With this reform,
all the concerned staff are brought together in one (state) office so that their activities can be harmonized
and reporting to headquarters is streamlined, with considerable reduction in cost and time. This form of
coordination therefore not only is cost-effective but also has led to better utilization of time—a feature
that is actually consistent with the needs of farmers due to the time specificity of their production
activities. Specifically, the state office is to (1) facilitate the implementation of federal government
projects in the states, (2) forge partnerships with state governments and create synergy between the two
levels of government concerning all aspects of federal government projects, and (3) ensure accountability
and proper use of funds. For instance, in LGAs where value chain activities are going on (about 10 out of
the 25 LGAs in Niger state, for example), staff are deployed to ensure compliance with stipulated
procedures and rules, and they send reports to the state office for forwarding to FMARD in Abuja for
necessary actions. Other areas of operation since inception of the state office include supervision of GESS
activities, farmers’ registration, working with stakeholders to ensure success of various projects , and
managing the operations of the strategic grain reserve.

206.     The institutional reform has, to a large extent, changed the orientation of staff and their
commitment to effective project monitoring and implementation. The work environment, including office
infrastructure, has improved and thus serves as a motivation for the staff to work hard. There is a sense of
direction among staff as far as government policies are concerned, and farmers can feel the impact of their
presence in terms of their increased access to inputs under GESS in particular.

207.     The second important component of the institutional reform relates to the Agricultural
Transformation Implementation Council that was inaugurated in October 2012 at the federal level. Since
implementation is going on at the subnational level, there is need for a similar framework there. In this
regard, the formation and operationalization of ATA implementation committees at the state and local
government levels according to the ATA design should be pursued since achievement in this respect is
rather limited.

4.6.3. Input Subsidy Financing

208.     A typical example of required cooperation between federal and state governments is financing of
the fertilizer subsidy under the ATA. The two tiers of government share equally in payment of the 50
percent incentive subsidy to small-scale farmers. The amount due to each state is deducted by the federal
government at source, that is, from each state’s share of statutory allocations based on the provisions of
the National Food Reserve Agency.
                                                                                                       85
4.6.4. Joint Financing of Projects

209.     Where donor-assisted projects are involved (for example, FADAMA, IFAD, and the National
Programme for Food Security [NPFS]) and with the participation of many states, the federal government
takes advantage of its exclusive power on borrowing issues to coordinate preparation of the projects and
facilitate negotiation of the loans. The procedure for loan repayment by participating states follows the
same principle of deduction at source at the appropriate time.

4.6.5. Expenditure Coordination by the Millennium Development Goals Office

210.     Following successful negotiation of an exit from the Paris Club in 2005, the country was granted
a substantial debt relief (US$18 billion) from the Paris Club of creditors. With this relief, the amount of
annual debt service payment fell from US$1.8 billion to US$0.8 billion (which represents debt service
payment due to multilateral institutions and the London Club). Therefore a gain of about US$1.0 billion
(about ₦ 126 billion) has accrued from the debt relief. This amount was channeled into poverty reduction
and the attainment of the MDGs. The US$1.0 billion paid annually on debt service to the Paris Club prior
to the granting of debt relief represents 70 percent of the total education budget and 110 percent of the
combined federal and state health budgets in 2004 (see Muhtar 2005). FMF put in place an initiative for
the oversight of public expenditure on NEEDS, or “virtual poverty fund,? to ensure proper allocation,
utilization, and monitoring of the debt relief savings. Under the arrangement, expenditure on the
construction of rural earthen roads within the purview of FMARD is coordinated by the MDGs office.
Another agriculture-related area of interest of the MDGs office is the newly introduced project of funding
148 agricultural cooperatives, one in each of the targeted LGAs across the country (Gbeneol 2013).

4.6.6. Coordination at the Subnational Level

211.     At the subnational government level, there are also several coordination strategies, although they
vary from one state to another. In general all local governments operate a common service account and a
joint allocation account with their state governments to ensure coordination of the fiscal responsibilities of
local governments. Cross River state has agricultural projects that require counterpart funding by both the
state and local governments. The funding arrangement for Fadama III, for example, requires compulsory
financial commitments by the 18 LGAs in Cross River state. Between 2009 and 2010, the state
government was required to contribute a total of ₦ 112.4 million (about ₦ 56.5 million per year) while the
18 LGAs were required to contribute a total of ₦ 72 million (₦ 2 million per LGA per year). The state also
developed mechanisms to monitor the fiscal responsibilities of local governments through the operations
of the state assembly and Ministry of Local Government Affairs. The Department of Project Planning,
Monitoring, and Evaluation under the governor’s office and the Inspectorate Department of the Ministry
of Local Government Affairs carry out monthly monitoring of projects and of the general utilization of
local government council funds to ensure effective budget implementation. It is doubtful, however,
whether such mechanisms have been effective in ensuring adequate project funding under partnership
arrangements involving state and local governments. For instance, in the case of the Fadama III project,
available records show that the state’s last contribution was in 2010, while that of the LGAs was in 2009.

212.     In Niger state, collaboration between the state government and local governments also exists.
Sometimes the state makes deductions at source for joint projects between itself and local governments.
The state government supplies agricultural inputs in collaboration with local governments. As part of the
federal government’s ATA, the state cooperates with local governments to implement GESS. For
example, the funding of farmer enumeration for the implementation of GESS was shared on a 50-50 basis
by the state and local governments. The local governments also have responsibilities to procure tractors
jointly with the state government. The buffer stock program, Fadama III project, and NPFS are examples
of programs that are also jointly funded by the state and local governments. Though LGAs are mainly
                                                                                                           86
concerned with agricultural extension services in Niger state, they have the liberty to formulate and
finance agricultural projects within the limits of available resources. For example, Wushishi LGA has in
the past provided in-kind support to irrigation farmers. Furthermore, the federal government’s One-Stop
Multipurpose Shop for agricultural inputs is an example of a collaborative effort with the state
government, local governments, and the private sector. The land for this project was provided by the state
and LGAs, the federal government built the center, and the private sector manages the center.

213.     In contrast, local governments in Ondo state have little or no input in the formulation of
agricultural policies in the state. These local governments depend fully on the state for agriculture policy
direction and focus, which can sometimes lead to a situation of idle capacities. In Odigbo LGA, for
example, some of the staff of the Department of Agriculture have little or nothing to do because of the
lack of capital funds for development projects and programs. In Ondo state, donor-initiated and -funded
projects such as the Root and Tuber Expansion Programme, NPFS, Fadama, and IFAD/FGN/NDDC
Community-Based Natural Resources Management Programme are major agricultural initiatives that link
federal, state, and local governments. Each government tier has counterpart roles to play in these donor-
funded projects.35 However, while the state has been contributing its counterpart funds when due, LGAs
have not been doing well in this regard. In Odigbo LGA, counterpart funds for the last two years have not
been paid due to scarcity of funds at the local government level. Another area where Ondo state
government has cooperated with Odigbo LGA is in input supply. The Agricultural Input Supply Agency
of the Ministry of Agriculture has a desk office in Odigbo LGA and in the farmer center adjacent to the
LGA secretariat. This is expected to keep Odigbo LGA abreast of activities that relate to fertilizer and
agrochemical delivery to farmers.




35Only nine LGAs are participating in the IFAD/FGN/NDDC Community-Based Natural Resources
Management Programme, one of which is Odigbo LGA.
                                                                                                         87
5. SUMMARY, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSIONS
214.     This study sought to examine the extent to which the level and composition of public spending in
the agricultural sector is consistent with both national and subnational priorities, analyze the efficiency of
budget implementation processes in the allocation of public resources to agriculture in line with stated
priorities at the federal and subnational levels, and provide recommendations on how to improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of public agricultural spending in Nigeria. It is a diagnostic assessment of
trends, composition, and efficiency of public spending with a view to providing a better understanding of
the intensity, adequacy, and implications of efficient allocation of financial resources for the development
of agriculture. This section highlights the key findings and proffers suggestions for improved
performance.

  5.1. Main Findings
5.1.1. Level and Composition of Public Agricultural Expenditure

215.     Federal agricultural spending is low in Nigeria. Between 2008 and 2012, the federal agriculture
budget and actual expenditure shares of total expenditure averaged 5.5 and 4.6 percent, respectively.
Actual expenditure on agriculture rose by 57.7 percent in 2009 from its 2008 level but consistently
declined after that until 2012. This declining trend in spending suggests a waning emphasis on the
agricultural sector. The share of agricultural spending in total spending is lower than the corresponding
shares of most of the sectors at the federal level. For example, compared with an average of 4.6 percent
for agriculture, corresponding shares for economic affairs, public order and safety, general public
services, and defense averaged 24.4 percent, 15.3 percent, 13.3 percent, and 9 percent, respectively,
between 2008 and 2012. Spending shares for similar key sectors such as education and health are
relatively closer in magnitude to that of agriculture, averaging 7.4 percent and 5.4 percent, respectively,
during the same period. However, agriculture was the only sector that saw a decline in spending, falling
on average by 14.8 percent from 2008 to 2012. In contrast, spending on education and health increased on
average by 41.4 percent and 33.8 percent, respectively.

216.     At the subnational level, the trend is no different. In Cross River state, the agricultural sector
budget accounted for 1.2 percent of the total state budget on average between 2008 and 2012. The share
of actual agricultural expenditure in actual total state expenditure was 0.9 percent in the same period.
Both budget and actual shares show a general downward trend, with actual agricultural spending falling to
less than 1 percent from 2009 to 2012. In Ondo state, the budget and actual shares of agricultural
expenditure in total state expenditure (although a little higher at 3.8 percent and 3.6 percent, respectively,
compared with Cross River state) have been more variable, with a highly uneven trend between 2008 and
2012. In Niger state, budget share has been unstable while actual shares trended downward from an all-
time high of 11.9 percent in 2010 to 3.5 percent in 2012. Nonetheless, the average budget and actual
shares (4.6 and 5.6 percent, respectively) are the highest among the three states. Niger state’s average
level of agricultural spending compares favorably with that of states like Anambra, Enugu, Lagos, Jigawa,
Kaduna, and Yobe. The level of agricultural spending in Ondo state is suboptimal, falling below that of
six out of the nine comparator states. Cross River state’s level of agricultural spending is the lowest ,
falling below that of eight of the nine comparator states. These trends provide only a comparison of
magnitude of spending; it is the importance of agriculture in each state that determines performance
across states. The expectation is that higher spending should be observed in states where agriculture is
more important and lower spending in states where agriculture is less important.

217.   In Cross River and Ondo states, the shares of actual agricultural expenditures in total
expenditures are low compared with those of other key sectors such as education, health, and works. In

                                                                                                           88
Cross River state, while the share of actual agricultural spending in actual total spending averaged 0.9
percent from 2008 to 2012, the corresponding shares for education, works, and health averaged 9.7
percent, 5.9 percent, and 2.6 percent, respectively, during the same period. The agricultural sector is also
less favored in Ondo state, with an average of 3.6 percent in actual agricultural spending compared with
shares for education, works, and health averaging 11.6 percent, 10.7 percent, and 5.5 percent,
respectively, between 2000 and 2012. These findings show that among the critical sectors examined, the
majority of Ondo state funds were expended on education and works.

218.     Similar to the state level, agricultural spending as a share of total LGA spending compares
unfavorably with that of other sectors. In Akamkpa LGA, agriculture received the least attention in terms
of actual expenditures (1 percent on average between 2008 and 2012), while most of the funds (29.1
percent on average during the same period) were expended on works. In Odigbo LGA, agriculture is also
clearly not a top priority. Actual spending on agriculture as a share of total LGA spending was 1.1 percent
on average compared with about 21.2 percent and 3.4 percent for health and works, respectively, for the
period 2008-11. It should not be surprising that these local governments are not able to maintain
agricultural programs and projects in their domains or initiate new ones.

219.     Compared with many African countries, the government’s expenditure on agriculture as a share
of total government expenditure and in proportion to agricultural GDP is small in Nigeria. Agriculture’s
share of total spending is only 3.8 percent on average for the period between 2000 and 2010. This figure
is less than both the continental average of 5.4 percent, the West African average of 7.4 percent, and the
10 percent target set by CAADP.


Composition of Agricultural Public Expenditure

220.    At the federal level, capital expenditures account for the largest share of federal agricultural
spending, with budget and actual expenditure shares averaging 79.2 percent and 82.3 percent,
respectively, between 2008 and 2012. Expenditure on fertilizer is classified as part of capital expenditure.
This apparent misclassification accounts for the high share of capital compared with recurrent
expenditure. Moreover, analysis of the structure of FMARD’s overhead spending in 2012 suggests that
overhead expenditures mainly support the bureaucracy rather than operations and service delivery. The
essential role of recurrent expenditure seems not to have been given due recognition. It has to be adequate
and complementary to investment spending within the sector. In terms of functional allocation, average
expenditures on irrigation (40.9 percent), fertilizer subsidy (17.2 percent), and FMARD parastatals (15.7
percent) accounted for the largest shares of capital expenditures from 2008 to 2010.

221.      At the subnational level, the results show that recurrent expenditure shares (63.7 percent on
average) were larger than those of capital expenditures (36.3 percent) from 2008 to 2012 in Cross River
state. In Ondo state, however, capital expenditure remains consistently larger. It stood at an average of
56.3 percent compared with 43.7 percent for recurrent expenditure between 2008 and 2012. A similar
pattern is observed in Niger state, where capital spending averaged 62.5 percent compared with 37.5
percent recurrent expenditure. As regards functional allocation at the subnational level, capital spending is
dominated by the crop sector, with little or no attention to the livestock and fisheries sectors. Within the
crop sector, expenditure on fertilizer got the highest priority, averaging 58.2 percent between 2003 and
2012 in Niger state. With regard to crop development, expenditures on subsidized agricultural inputs such
as fertilizers, seeds, and seedlings constituted the largest share (averaging 35.1 percent between 2000 and
2011) in Ondo state. Actual spending on agricultural engineering services, such as subsidized tractor hire
and tree crops, followed closely, averaging 29.5 and 22 percent, respectively, of total crop development
expenditure during the same period. In contrast, very little funding was actually expended on extension

                                                                                                          89
services (about 0.3 percent on average over 2000-11). Concerning crop development in Cross River state,
fertilizers and seeds accounted for the biggest shares of actual nongroup spending, averaging 22.2 and
14.1 percent, respectively, from 2000 to 2012.


5.1.2. Effectiveness and Efficiency of Spending

222.     The FMARD 2012 budget exhibited many improvements over those of previous years in relation
to prioritizing key challenges in agricultural development and allocating the funds necessary to meet those
challenges. The 2012 FMARD budget supported policy with appropriate allocations more than earlier
budgets did. 36 The capital budget allocated resources to support the agenda programs, including the
following: (1) treating agriculture as a business rather than a development project, (2) utilizing the
transformation of agriculture to create jobs and wealth and ensure food security, (3) concentrating on
value chains where Nigeria has comparative advantage, and (4) placing sharp emphasis on youths and
women. The budget also allocated resources for establishing market corporations for key products. These
objectives have strong links with the Nigeria Vision 20: 2020 program.

223.     Unlike previous budgets, the 2012 budget emphasized the role of core agricultural issues. For
example, rural development, special programs, and public-sector procurement and distribution of
fertilizers dominated capital spending in earlier years, while spending on improved seed and technologies
and on agrochemicals was marginal. In contrast, the fiscal 2012 budget allocated more than 73 percent of
actual capital expenditures to agriculture (trees and crops) 37 and about 79 percent to value chains,
including agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and development of land resources. The 2012 capital
allocations addressed constraints to agricultural productivity.38 Such constraints include the modernization
of agriculture and large-scale production, the commercialization of agriculture, access to improved
seedlings, access to markets, and inefficiency in fertilizer procurement and distribution. Additionally, the
2012 budget allocations gave fresh impetus to agricultural research, although it is not clear to what extent
it secured the adoption of research findings and technologies, FMARD having had no extension services
functioning until 2012.

224.     However, overall analysis of expenditures points to a high level of inefficiency and a dearth of
information necessary to arrive at a complete understanding of agricultural spending. Annual deviations
between actual and budgeted expenditures were generally high, except in 2010. However, in fiscal 2010
the government committed and disbursed more than 55 percent of the budget in the last two weeks of the
fiscal year. The high budget deviations and the hastened disbursement raise questions of fiscal discipline
and quality, especially relating to procurement and cash management practices.39

225.      Allocative efficiency of overhead spending was generally poor (even in 2012) and appears to
have had inadequate links with the functional allocations of the capital budget. Overhead spending
supported bureaucracy more than operations and maintenance, stressing nonoperational travel and office
utilities, materials, and supplies. The FMARD 2012 budget allocations did not track the following four
constraints: (1) poor access to credit,40 (2) the outdated land tenure system, (3) piracy in coastal waters,
and (4) inadequate irrigation and storage. Some of these measures are outside FMARD control, but

36 Detailed 2011 allocations were not available.
37 Trees and crops encompass a wide spectrum of activities, including (1) supply of improved seedlings, (2)
fertilizer, (3) agrochemicals, (4) market development, (5) research and development, (6) food processing, and
(7) establishment of processing zones.
38 Section 2 identified several of the constraints.
39 The audit report should shed light on this issue but was unavailable at the time this report was written.
40 But there are ongoing measures to address it.

                                                                                                          90
budget allocation stressed irrigation in 2008 and 2009, when water resources and agriculture formed one
ministry.41 Variability was high in capital spending between 2008 and 2012. Year-on-year variability was
high in both budgeted and actual expenditures. The high level of variability made spending unpredictable,
potentially affecting planning and commitment.

226.     Agricultural capital spending was an average of about 60 percent of the budget between fiscal
2008 and 2011, much higher than the economywide average of less than 30 percent. However, capital
spending does not always imply investment: a lot of it involves operations spending, subsidy payments,
and expenditures that do not create enduring assets. Information on physical outputs, outcomes, and the
population of target beneficiaries was unavailable, making it impossible to calculate unit costs and
identify trends. There was a high level of subsidies, especially for fertilizer. Input subsidies constituted 78
percent of the capital budget commitment in 2012. In 2012, subsidies were provided for fertilizers and
supply of improved seeds, agrochemicals, and new technologies.

227.    Similar to the findings at the federal level, there is a high level of inefficiency in public
agriculture expenditure at the subnational level. There was wide disparity between approved budgets and
the actual expenditure on agriculture generally. This is, however, not peculiar to the agricultural sector;
across all the sectors in the state and local government, the level of budget execution was low. The
problems of inadequate monitoring facilities in terms of transportation and other logistics requirements,
lack of maintenance of storage infrastructure, and suspension of some extension activities are some of the
indicators of inefficiency in the allocation of resources.



5.1.3. The Budget Process

228.     At the federal level, the key agencies and institutions involved in the budget process are the line
MDAs, FMF, Budget Office of the Federation, Federal Executive Council, and National Assembly. The
budget is prepared by the executive arm of government, scrutinized and approved by the National
Assembly (legislative arm), and assented to by the president before implementation by the MDAs.
Usually there are delays at the budget approval stage, which have negatively affected budget
implementation over the years. Late completion of proposals, untimely legislative review, and late
presidential approval due to disagreements with the legislature are some of the factors responsible for
these delays. These delays affect the implementation of only the capital budget, the recurrent budget
usually being disbursed fully. Delayed implementation of the capital budget complicates the tracking and
reporting of expenditures because financial reports have to compare budget and actual expenditure figures
of different periods.

229.    At the subnational level, the procedure is basically the same. The budget process is policy driven
and priority determined, given the availability of funds. It involves the state executive council, state
planning commission (where available), MDAs, and the state legislature. An MTSS is used to develop the
budget proposal on the basis of the priorities of MDAs. The states adopt a multiyear medium-term budget
framework that encompasses three separate but related frameworks—MTFF, MTBF, and MTEF.
Adoption of the MTEF approach has entrenched the principles of accountability, transparency, and
performance-based budgeting. States provide an expenditure ceiling or envelope for every MDA through
FMF. Once a ministry has finalized its budget, it is submitted to FMF for additional intersectoral
meetings and revisions before the finalized copy is sent to the House of Assembly for approval. The
governor of the state then assents to the appropriation bill, after which the budget is implemented. Each

41The study aims to gather information from FMWR to be able to include irrigation expenditure, consistent
with the COFOG scope of agriculture per CAADP.
                                                                                                            91
MDA has a resident due process team that ensures that projects comply with procurement procedures
before they are financed.

230.    By and large, it was found that the budget approved by the legislature was often higher than what
the executive presented at both the federal and the subnational levels. This is one of the factors
responsible for the variations often observed between the actual expenditure and approved budget. The
executive might have considered the revenue sources and presented only projects that could be financed
by the available revenue. However, the legislature might disagree with the number and scope of projects
in the budget and make adjustments without full consideration of the adequacy of revenue to finance the
mandatory provisions. Delays in budget approval arising from such disagreements are more pronounced
at the federal than the subnational level. Moreover, there is no time frame for budget implementation
because much depends upon the availability of funds in the common pool. The release of funds for budget
implementation is generally irregular and unpredictable because the quantity of resources available can
also be unpredictable at any point in time. As a result, disbursement of funds is done as and when
resources are available. The deleterious effect of this unpredictability on budget execution is greater at the
subnational than at the federal level, especially in view of the high dependence of the state and local
governments on statutory allocations from the federation account, which itself can also fluctuate due to
vagaries in the international oil market.

5.1.4. Information Systems

231.      The information system required for a complete understanding of public agriculture expenditure
is still inadequate. The dearth of information manifests at various stages in the budget cycle. More often
than not, decisions are based on estimates rather than actual data in project planning and budget
preparation. Data on certain components of the budget are not kept in appropriate format or are not even
recorded for analytical and planning purposes. For instance, the recurrent expenditure component of
capital projects is not separated from the capital investments, while some expenditure items (fertilizer,
seeds, chemicals) that should be recorded as recurrent are lumped in with capital expenditure. This
complicates the assessment of effectiveness of expenditure decisions and makes international comparison
of some variables in agriculture expenditure review virtually impossible.

  5.2. Implications of the Findings in the Context of the Agricultural Transformation
  Agenda
232.     Since the inception of the ATA, there seems to be a tigher alignment between agricultural
spending and development strategies over the three years of implementation of key components of the
transformation agenda. Also, in nominal terms, the amount of funds invested in agriculture is trending
upward. An important lesson arising from the findings of this AgPER is that the ongoing spending should
not be underreported; otherwise, the quality of spending may turn out to be underestimated in future
AgPERs. It is gratifying to note that the information system is witnessing some improvement following
the institutionalization of GIFMIS, TSA, and other financial management information systems. There is
need to intensify the spread of these initiatives from federal to subnational levels within the limit of
available resources.

233.    Although capital spending is much more explicitly organized along agricultural commodity value
chains under the ATA than ever before, the reporting of certain expenditure items (public spending on
input subsidies) that constitute a substantial proportion of such spending is tantamount to a
misclassification. Fortunately, while this age-old practice continues unabated, the subsidy delivery system
has changed significantly under the ATA, with the federal government divesting itself from direct
procurement and distribution of fertilizer and other inputs.

                                                                                                           92
234.    The practice of carrying the input subsidy bill on the capital budget will always affect agriculture
expenditure performance in terms of beclouding the true picture of allocative efficiency. Viewed in the
context of the ongoing ATA, the implication is that the share of capital spending in total agricultural
spending may appear to have increased since 2012; however, the situation may not be so glaring if public
expenditure on inputs is classified as a recurrent expenditure in the real sense of it, as theory and best
practice demand.

235.     The reform in the input subsidy program that is entrenched in GESS (a major component of the
ATA) has resulted in a revamping of the delivery mechanism of subsidies in Nigerian agriculture, and
makes use of an ICT-based approach to input provision, even though the size of subsidy spending may be
difficult to sustain. As GESS is gradually moving into its second phase, modification in the composition
of public spending is imperative in terms of shifting emphasis from subsidizing private goods to
providing financial support for agricultural projects with public good characteristics, as compared with
the inputs currently being subsidized. This is apt to improve not only the quality of public spending but
also the prospects for private investment in Nigerian agriculture.


236.     Another important aspect of the study from which useful lessons can be drawn for improving the
performance of public agriculture spending under ATA relates to the budget process. In view of the
multiplicity of agencies involved in the process, effective collaboration is required horizontally among
relevant ministries (FMARD, FMWR, FMEnv) and vertically across tiers of government as well as
between FMF and the line ministries. This is all the more important in view of the fact that other
stakeholders such as development partners that are also supporting agricultural financing, especially those
providing budget support, often base their decisions on the effectiveness of the budget process for
allocating, implementing, and accounting for agricultural public spending. Other participating agencies in
the budget process need to recognize the time specificity associated with carrying out many agricultural
production activities and do whatever is necessary under the law to expedite action on the preparation,
screening, and approval of the budget and in releasing the approved funds on a timely fashion. An
implication of this is that an effective budget process is required if technical efficiency of spending is to
improve. Indeed, if the practice of releasing funds in the last quarter of the financial year persists, even
ministries with satisfactory absorption capacity may not necessarily be able to utilize all allocated funds
in the shortened time frame. Thus, before funds are allocated to capacity building among budget and
procurement officers, government should ascertain whether the observed technical inefficiency
(especially divergence between approved and released funds) depends on delays in fund release or on
weak absorption capacity in the MDAs. If the former is the root cause, for example, committing funds to
capacity building (when capacity is actually reasonably adequate) may worsen the efficiency of spending.

237.     Finally, the size of budget available for analysis is crucial in appreciating the results of a PER and
in taking steps to strengthen budget performance. To arrive at a conclusive result concerning the adequacy
of spending, all expenditures must be captured in the analysis. In situations in which off-budget
expenditures are not included in the analysis it is difficult to have a complete picture of the level and
efficiency of spending. This underscores the need under the ATA to adopt an information system and
documentation approach that captures off-budget expenditures. This is a crucial factor in ensuring that
future AgPERs in Nigeria will continue to be effectively deployed to offer proper guidance in directing or
redirecting public financial resources to promote investments in the agricultural sector.




                                                                                                            93
 5.3. Policy Recommendations
5.3.1. Improve the Level and Composition of Public Spending

       All tiers of government, federal, state, and local, should increase spending to develop the
        agricultural sector. This can be achieved by strengthening weak absorptive capacity by upgrading
        the skill of budget officers through training. This will free more funds that can be effectively
        deployed in critical areas of need and also create an enabling environment for more budgetary
        allocation and actual spending.

       State governments should establish revenue stabilization mechanisms to address volatility in
        statutory transfers and IGR flows. Specifically, state governments can establish a revenue
        stabilization fund. The state house of assembly needs to pass necessary legislation to provide
        legal backing for its operations.

       State and local governments should step up efforts to increase IGR so as to reduce
        overdependence on allocations from the federation account. This can be done by strengthening
        the tax base and intensifying revenue collection drives. The mass media can be used to sensitize
        potential taxpayers to their civic responsibility of paying their taxes at the appropriate time to
        government coffers.

5.3.2. Enhance the Effectiveness and Efficiency of Public Spending

       All tiers of government should establish effective monitoring frameworks for budget
        implementation. Funds should be provided in the budget for the monitoring of projects. Reports
        of monitoring exercises should be used to refine and strengthen expenditure decisions for better
        results.

       Procurement and cash management processes should be strengthened to enhance value and avoid
        rushed commitments. Specifically, FMARD, FMF, and the Office of the Head of Civil Service
        need to work together to identify bottlenecks created by the procurement process in the
        implementation of projects, identify skill gaps of procurement officers, and finance training of
        the officers who are found to be deficient.

       FMARD and FMF at the federal level and similar agencies at the subnational levels should
        embark on strengthening absorptive capacity in the MDAs by working together to determine skill
        gaps and finance the training of relevant budget officers. Through their oversight mechanisms,
        the Office of the Head of Civil Service and the legislative arm of government will also have a role
        to play in this regard. The complexity of this process notwithstanding, it should be noted that
        unless urgent and decisive steps are taken to strengthen the absorptive capacity in the public
        sector, insofar as public spending is concerned, it may not be possible to work toward having a
        significant increase in the efficiency of agricultural public spending in Nigeria.

       Public-private partnership is highly recommended for financing new dam and irrigation projects.
        The federal government should articulate partnerships with state governments and the private
        sector in this regard.

       Government should refrain from unrealistic or overambitious budgeting. In preparing budgets,
        government must avoid biting off more than it can chew. More often than not, budget estimates

                                                                                                        94
       are by far too ambitious vis-à-vis the actual funding expended. Allocative efficiency can be
       improved by making budgetary allocations to agriculture more realistic, adopting the philosophy
       of cutting one’s coat according to the cloth rather than according to one’s size.

5.3.3. Improve the Budget Process

      The three tiers of government should henceforth adopt a system of collaboration in agricultural
       development agenda setting and joint financing of projects to minimize waste of financial
       resources.

      At the budget preparation stage, there is need for policy linkage and interagency collaboration
       among FMWR, FMARD, FMTI, and FMEnv. These ministries need to streamline and reconcile
       their budgets to allow joint financing and proper coordination to achieve the desired objectives.

      Government at all levels should eliminate delays in the budget process. This can be achieved by
       stipulating specific time frames to accomplish the tasks at different stages of the budget cycle.

      A budget process act should be enacted by the National Assembly for the federal government and
       by each state house of assembly for the state governments to give legal backing to the stipulated
       time frames relating to budget preparation, approval, and implementation.

5.3.4. Strengthen the Information System for Agriculture Public Expenditure Management

238.   Since the dearth of information is likely to undermine the effectiveness of the budget as an
economic management tool, government at all levels should come to grips with this challenge. In order to
improve the flow of information and availability of necessary data for improved expenditure
management, the following actions are recommended:

      The federal government should establish and mainstream functional financial management
       information systems (GIFMIS, IPPIS, and TSA) for improved record keeping and information
       retrieval. Meaningful economic planning hinges on accurate and up-to-date data. Governments at
       both state and local government levels should set up an institution responsible for keeping
       financial and other relevant records for the state and local government authorities. Budget
       records, along with other government records, should be stored in electronic form and managed
       by an ICT manager. This will ease the difficulties MDAs have in accessing public financial
       records.

      The federal and state governments should adopt proper classification of expenditure items and
       embark on regular documentation of spending. At the federal and state levels, government should
       provide funds for upgrading the capacity of budget officers in MDAs and projects through regular
       training to improve their understanding of proper classification of expenditure items and
       documentation of budgetary transactions.

      FMARD should establish an agriculture expenditure database, which should be supervised and
       updated regularly by the Department of Finance and Accounts. All parastatals of FMARD as well
       as regional and state offices should be provided with templates to capture spending on various
       aspects of their operations, and they should submit data to FMARD headquarters quarterly.

 5.4. Conclusions

                                                                                                     95
239.     Despite the importance of the agricultural sector in the Nigerian economy and the priority often
accorded it in development strategies, the sector remains grossly underfunded. Fortunately, it has been
growing steadily in recent times. The impact of growth of the sector would have been more pronounced if
the level of investment had been commensurate with the huge potentials in various agroecological zones
of the country. Public investment has been stifled by the lopsided manner in which national revenue is
being allocated among the three tiers of government that have responsibility for the development of the
sector. Invariably allocation of budgetary resources remains inefficient at various levels of government.

240.    The subnational governments rely largely on statutory allocations from the federation account to
finance their budgets. Delays in concluding the transfer arrangements, along with periodic oil revenue
shocks, often account for delays or outright nonrelease of funds for budget implementation. Therefore,
technical inefficiency in public spending has been more prevalent at the subnational level than at the
federal level. Overall, there is a high level of inefficiency in agricultural expenditure and a dearth of
information necessary to arrive at a complete understanding of the high level of unpredictability of public
spending.

241.     In relative terms, the problem of technical inefficiency is far more acute than that of allocative
efficiency. Whereas the 2012 capital budget performance shows some improvement in this regard,
allocative efficiency of recurrent expenditure (especially overhead) is still a big challenge. The problem is
exacerbated by the difficulty of identifying specific overhead items to be associated directly with the
capital budget. This is not unique to the agricultural sector. It is a general problem with the public
expenditure reporting format in the country that must be corrected so that the country can improve its
rating in public spending performance based on international best practices and expenditure tracking
system requirements of the African Union.

242.     More often than not, information about the share and magnitude of public expenditure on
agriculture in Nigeria is often based solely on public spending by the federal government. This approach
is not tenable anymore. Even though the federal government’s share of the federation account is almost
double that of the states, spending on agriculture does not follow the same pattern of lopsidedness.
Substantial public investment has also been flowing from the subnational governments, contributing to
the production expansion and growth being witnessed in the sector over the last past decade. Therefore it
is advisable for the states to commit to proper documentation of expenditure activities for effective
monitoring and better performance of the agricultural budget.

Finally, it is important to stress that despite its constitutional mandate to develop agriculture, the local
government has no capacity to formulate policies; neither does it have the financial independence to
meaningfully execute an agricultural budget. This conundrum has to be resolved by the ongoing
constitutional review and the National Conference in order to achieve the goals of the sector and
maximize the gains of intergovernmental interactions for agricultural transformation in the country.


REFERENCES
Akande, S. O., A. S. Olomola, and A. O. Olokesusi, eds. 2013. Effective Budget Implementation in
Nigeria: Opportunities and Constraints. Ibadan: Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research.

Akramov, K. 2010. Decentralization, Agricultural Services, and Determinants of Input Use in Nigeria.
Nigeria Strategy Support Program Brief 16. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research
Institute.


                                                                                                          96
AU (African Union) and NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development). 2005. Guidance Note for
Agriculture Expenditure Tracking System in African Countries. Midrand, South Africa.

Benin, S., and B. Yu. 2013. Complying with the Maputo Declaration Target: Trends in Public
Agricultural Expenditures and Implications for Pursuit of Optimal Allocation of Public Agricultural
Spending. Regional Strategic Analysis and Knowledge Support System Annual Trends and Outlook
Report 2012. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

CBN (Central Bank of Nigeria). 2014. Central Bank of Nigeria Statistics database. Accessed on July 16.
http://statistics.cbn.gov.ng/cbn-onlinestats/Default.aspx.

Fan, C. S., C. Lin, and D. Treisman. 2009. Political Decentralization and Corruption: Evidence From
Around the World. Journal of Public Economics 93(1-2): 14-34.

FAO (Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations). 2012. The State of Food and
Agriculture. Rome.

———. 2014. FAOSTAT database. Accessed on June 4. http://faostat.fao.org.

IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2014. SPEED (Statistics of Public Expenditure for
Economic Development) database. Accessed on June 5. www.ifpri.org/book-
39/ourwork/programs/priorities-public-investment/speed-database.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2014. Government Finance Statistics Manual. Washington, DC.

Liverpool-Tasie, L., O. Kuku, and A. Ajibola. 2011. A Review of Literature on Agricultural Productivity,
Social Capital and Food Security in Nigeria. Nigeria Strategy Support Program Working Paper 21.
Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

Mogues, T., M. Morris, L. Freinkman, A. Adubi, and S. Ehui. 2012. “Agricultural Public Spending in
Nigeria.? In Public Expenditures for Agricultural and Rural Development in Africa, edited by T. Mogues
and S. Benin, 68–108. New York: Routledge.

Mogues, T., B. Yu, S. Fan, and L. McBride. 2012. The Impacts of Public Investment in and for
Agriculture: Synthesis of the Existing Evidence. Development Strategy and Governance Division
Discussion Paper 1217. Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

National Technical Working Group on Agriculture and Food Security. 2009. Report of the Vision 2020
National Technical Working Group on Agriculture & Food Security. Abuja.

NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development) and AU (African Union). 2003. Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme. Midrand, South Africa.

Nigeria, BOF (Budget Office of the Federation). 2014. Citizens’ Guide to the Federal Budget 2014.
Abuja: BOF, Federal Ministry of Finance.

Nigeria, FMARD (Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development). 2010. National Agricultural
Investment Plan 2011–2014. Abuja.

———. 2011a. Agricultural Transformation Agenda: We Will Grow Nigeria’s Agricultural Sector.
                                                                                                      97
Abuja.

———. 2011b. “Syndicate Group Discussion Paper on the Decentralization of the Federal Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development towards Implementation of the Agricultural Transformation Agenda
at the Ministerial Retreat Held in Minna on 19th–20th December, 2011.? Unpublished, Abuja.

Nigeria, FMAWR (Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources). 2009. Nigeria ECOWAP
(Economic Community Of West African States Agricultural Policy) / CAADP (Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme) Compact. Abuja.

Nigeria, NBS (National Bureau of Statistics). 2010. NBS/CADP (Commercial Agriculture Development
Project) Baseline Report. Abuja.

Nigeria, NBS (National Bureau of Statistics) and FMARD (Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development). 2012. Collaborative Survey on National Agriculture Sample Survey (NASS), 2010/2011
Draft Report. Abuja.

Nigeria, NPC (National Planning Commission). 2010. Nigeria Vision 20: 2020, Abridged Version, 1st
NV20:2020 Medium-Term Implementation Plan (2010–2013). Abuja. www.npc.gov.ng.

Olomola, A. 1999. “Restructuring Nigeria’s Fiscal system: Rationale, Strategies and Policies.?
In Fiscal Federalism and Nigeria’s Economic Development. Proceedings of the 1999 Nigerian Economic
Society Annual Conference, Ibadan.

———. 2012. “State Budgetary Allocations: An Appraisal of Budget Implementation and Effects in
Nigeria.? Paper presented at Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research seminar series, Ibadan,
September 11.

Ondo state ADP (Agricultural Development Project). 2012. “Report of the Year 2012 and Proposal for
Year 2013 Extension Activities.? Paper presented at the Annual National Extension Review and
Planning Meeting, Zaria, November 19-23.

(OPM) Oxford Policy Management. 2000. Medium-Term Expenditure Frameworks - Panacea
or Dangerous Distraction? Oxford Policy Management Review 2: 1-4.

SPARC (State Partnership for Accountability, Responsiveness and Capability). 2014. Public Financial
Management database. Accessed on June 4. http://www.sparc-nigeria.com/PFM/.

World Bank. 1998. Public Expenditure Management Handbook. Washington, DC.

———. 2007. World Development Report 2008. Washington, DC.

———. 2011. Practitioners’ Toolkit for Public Agriculture Expenditure Analysis. Washington, DC.

———. 2012. Federal Government of Nigeria: 2012 Public Financial Management Performance
Reports. Vol. 2. Public Investment Management (PIM) Efficiency Review. Washington, DC.

———. 2014. World Development Indicators 2014. Washington, DC. http://data.worldbank.org/data-
catalog/world-development-indicators.

                                                                                                      98
———. Forthcoming. Public Finance Management on Water Resources Governance: Nigeria Irrigation
and Water Resources Management Project. Washington, DC.




                                                                                           99
ANNEX I.

Table 1.1: Area of production of different crop categories in Nigeria (in hectares), 2002 and 2012

Crop                                 2002               2012
Cereals                        17,027,000         17,440,000
Roots and tubers                7,957,000          8,627,000
Oil crops                       7,247,000          7,729,000
Pulses                          3,846,282          3,330,000
Fruits and nuts                 2,226,804          2,226,700
Vegetables                      1,496,387          1,896,000
Fiber crops                       612,000            301,000
Source: Authors’ data compilation using FAO (2014).




                                                                                                     100
ANNEX II.

Table 2.1: Cross River state revenue profile, 2008-12 (million naira)

 Item                          2008       2009         2010         2011      2012
 Total state revenue         74,881     46,100        47,205    79,187     86,504
 Federal statutory           66,887     36,456        38,740    61,791     59,174
 Federation account          45,684     24,188        27,601    49,575     45,232
 VAT account                  4,108       4,677        5,631     6,464      7,180
 Excess crude account        14,598       7,155        5,368     5,474      4,466
  Miscellaneous               2,498        435          141          278    2,297
 Internally generated
 revenue                      6,625       7,106        7,686     9,160     12,735
 Taxes                        2,589       4,142        4,632     5,900      8,589
 Fines                          723        582          610          864    1,546
 Miscellaneous                3,313       2,383        2,444     2,396      2,599
 Loans                        1,368       2,539         778      8,237     14,596
 Foreign                      1,331       2,213         469           0         0
 Domestic                           0           4           0    7,458     13,382
 Donor                           37       322       309       779           1,214
Source: Based on data from Cross River state Ministry of Finance.
Note: VAT = value-added tax.

Table 2.2: Niger state revenue profile, 2008-12 (million naira)
 Item                           2008         2009      2010         2011                2012
 Total state revenue          41,015       50,157 54,418          66,709             141,423
 Federal statutory            38,420       39,361 44,664          61,371              54,789
  Federation account          31,763       28,218 32,724          47,246              44,052
  VAT account                  4,442        5,201     6,540        7,236               7,901
  Excess crude account         2,214        5,943     5,401        6,889               2,836
 Internally generated
 revenue                       2,595        2,887     3,168        3,618               3,783
  Taxes                        2,407        2,725     2,843        3,154               2,955
  Fines and fees                  80           62         59         100                 294
  Miscellaneous                  108           99        266         364                 533
 Grants                            0            0          0           0                   0
 Loans (donor)                     0        7,910     6,586        1,719              82,852
Source: Based on data from Cross River state Ministry of Finance.
Note: VAT = value-added tax.

Table 2.3: Ondo state revenue profile, 2008-12 (million naira)
 Item                        2008        2009        2010    2011     2012*
 Total state revenue        2,681       2,165       2,051   2,103     2,395
 Federal statutory          2,507       1,793       1,846   1,664       877
  Federation account          728         479         647     703       352
  VAT account                 135         139         183     159        86
  Excess crude account        888         764         468     369       189
                                                                                               101
 Item                         2008     2009 2010 2011 2012*
  Mineral derivation           756       411    548     426       225
  Miscellaneous                   0        0      0       7        25
 Internally generated
 revenue                       134       125    143     168       103
  Taxes                         87        58    103     134        77
  Levies                          2        2      2       2         1
  Fines and fees                12        11     13      11         6
  Miscellaneous                 33        54     25      21        19
 Loans                          40        71     51     271     1,404
  Foreign                         0        0      0       0       132
  Domestic                        0        0      0     223       373
  Donor                         40        71     51      48       307
  Miscellaneous                   0        0      0       0       592
 Miscellaneous                    0      176     11       0        11
Source: Based on data from the Office of Accountant General of Ondo state.
Notes: Data for 2012 are for January–June. VAT = value-added tax.

Table 2.4: Akamkpa LGA revenue profile, 2008-10 (million naira)
 Item                         2008    2009      2010
 Total LGA revenue         1,983.3 2,086.4 2,008.9
 Federal statutory         1,940.4 2,059.0 2,001.2
  Federation account       1,079.4 1,473.2     884.1
  VAT account                140.6   173.8     193.8
  Excess crude account       720.4   412.0     923.3
 State statutory               42.9    27.4       7.7
 Internally generated
 Revenue                        0.0     0.0       0.0
 Loans                          0.0     0.0       0.0
Source: Based on data from Department of Finance, Akamkpa local government area.
Note: LGA = local government area; VAT = value-added tax.

Table 2.5: Wushishi LGA revenue profile, 2008-11 (million naira)
 Item                                    2008           2009          2010       2011
 Total LGA revenue                    1,269.9          379.4          41.9    3,260.2
 Federal statutory                    1,264.5          379.4           0.0    3,255.6
 Federation account                   1,264.5          379.4           0.0    3,255.6
 State statutory                          5.4            0.0          39.2        0.0
 Internally generated revenue             0.0            0.0           2.7        4.6
 Taxes                                    0.0            0.0           0.0        0.0
 Fines and fees                           0.0            0.0           1.8        1.9
 Other                                    0.0            0.0           1.0        2.7
Note: LGA = local government area.

Table 2.6: Odigbo LGA revenue profile, 2008-11 (million naira)
 Item                                           2008           2009          2010       2011
 Total LGA revenue                              15.4           15.3          23.9       19.9
 Federal statutory                              15.4           14.9          23.8       19.9
 Federation account                             15.4           14.9          23.8       19.9
                                                                                               102
 Item                                         2008          2009         2010          2011
 VAT account                                    0.0          0.0           0.0           0.0
 Excess crude account                           0.0          0.0           0.0           0.0
 Other                                          0.0          0.0           0.0           0.0
 State statutory                                0.0          0.3           0.0           0.0
 Internally generated revenue                   0.0          0.1           0.1           0.0
 Taxes                                          0.0          0.0           0.0           0.0
 Levies                                         0.0          0.0           0.0           0.0
 Fines and fees                                 0.0          0.1           0.1           0.0
 Other                                           0.0          0.0           0.0          0.0
Source: Based on data from annual financial statements of Odigbo local government area, Ondo state, from 2001 to
2011.
Note: LGA = local government area; VAT = value-added tax.



Programs, Strategies, and Action Plans for Agriculture in Cross River State

1.       Cocoa development program: Average cocoa yield in the state is estimated to be less than 250
kg/ha mainly due to aged cocoa farms and lack of access to modern inputs. To reverse the low and
declining yield trend and to ensure production of about 150,000 tons in eight years, the focus of the
program is to replant all old farms with new varieties; expand and intensify extension services to ensure
good farming, agronomic, and postharvest practices; and make pesticides easily available to farmers.
Strategies and action plans for this program have been streamlined into seven activities and corresponding
benchmarks to measure success. One of the activities is providing assistance to farmers to replace old
cocoa varieties in a total of about 20,000 ha of farmland. Establishment of cocoa seed gardens on 5 ha of
land and planting new farms on 5,000 ha of land under the Cross River Agriculture and Rural
Empowerment Scheme (CARES) are also activities of this program. Some the action plans for
implementation include increasing yields in old farms by 25 to 50 percent and raising hybrid seedlings for
distribution to farmers.

2.       Oil palm development program: Increasing yields of existing farms to optimal levels, achieving
good-quality processed oil, and expanding oil palm farms through private initiatives are three cardinal
objectives of this program. To meet the objectives, activities and strategies of the program include
assisting about 14,200 farmers in the development of new oil palm plantations in the south and central
senatorial districts and raising 2 million improved oil palm seedlings for sale to farmers at subsidized
prices. Other activities include rehabilitation of government oil palm estates by planting about 5,454
seedlings and expansion of existing oil palm estates under CARES by planting about 10,150 ha of land.
To ensure good-quality oil processing, small oil mills are to be replaced with more efficient mills.

3.       Citrus and mango project: This project is restricted to the northern senatorial district and is a
homestead-based project developed to plant more than 1 million trees of both citrus and mango. Under
this project, revitalized extension will support farmers in planting between 20 and 50 trees in their
compounds and farms. The main activity is to raise 500,000 budded seedlings of both citrus and mango
and distribute them to farmers at subsidized prices.

4.       Farm mechanization: The objective is to achieve a 25 percent level of mechanization of farm
operations by the year 2014 with an emphasis on the mechanization of pineapple farms in the south and
parts of the central senatorial districts, and mechanization of cassava farms in the central and northern
                                                                                                            103
senatorial districts. The central activity involves collaboration with the private sector to rehabilitate Cross
River farm mechanization services through the purchase of new tractors of various specifications for
distribution to the three senatorial districts in such a way that north senatorial district gets 60 percent,
central gets 30 percent, and south gets 10 percent of the equipment purchased.

5.       Cassava development program: This program is aimed at strengthening production and
expanding market opportunities through seed multiplication, mechanization, input supply, credit
provision, and adaptive extension services. In particular, the action plans include cultivation of about 560
ha of land (10 ha in 14 local government areas [LGAs] per year) with improved cassava varieties and
assistance to individual farmers or cooperatives for the procurement of cassava processing mills.

6.       Rice development program: The thrust of this program is to dramatically increase rice production
and improve processing and packaging by strengthening the skills, capacities, and productivity of
smallholder farmers through providing regular training, credit, and flood management. The general goal
of the program is to increase yields from as low as 1–1.5 tons/ha to about 5–6 tons/ha. To achieve this
goal, about 10,000 tons of high-yielding, disease-resistant rice seed from National Seed Centre is to be
procured and sold to rice farmers at subsidized prices. Also, 1 ha demonstration farms in all rice-
producing communities across the state are to be established and assistance will be given to individual
farmers or cooperatives to procure and install rice processing mills.

7.       Aquaculture development program: The objective of this program is to take advantage of the
enormous potential of freshwater and marine resources of the state as the second largest fish and shrimp
producer. The development strategies include completion of fish hatcheries at Ugboro and Ibonda for fish
seed multiplication to stock privately-owned fish farms, and expansion of extension services to fish
farmers so as to build their capacities. Specific action plans include producing and distributing 8 million
fingerlings and supporting the establishment of 1,000 new fish farms.

8.      Pineapple project: Commercial cultivation of pineapple was popularized in the state in 1999 and
since then the government has continued to promote increased production through public-private
partnerships. To further develop pineapple as a foreign exchange–earning crop, its production, processing,
and marketing are taken as key development issues. Specific action plans under this project include
mechanization of 1,500 ha of land for pineapple cultivation, mobilization of 500 youths and women to
engage in pineapple cultivation, establishment of a 150 ha nursery for sucker multiplication, and export of
about 1 million whole fruits.

9.       Banana and plantain project: This project is aimed at developing new enhanced varieties through
culture tissue to meet the increasing demand for banana and plantain suckers. In this regard, specific
action plans include establishment of fully mechanized 5,000 ha integrated banana and plantain farms
through public-private partnership initiatives and the development of a 1,000 ha plantation under CARES.

10.     Livestock production project: The focus of this project is homestead poultry production, swine
production, and apiculture. Both poultry and swine are popular among farmers in the state and their
production can easily respond to incentives. With the establishment of a honey factory at Obudu Cattle
Ranch, apiculture has become acceptable to farmers. The strategies involve reactivation of the Ikot
Effanga hatchery farm to produce 25,000 day-old chicks weekly, development and upgrade of veterinary
and ambulatory clinics in all LGAs, production of 48,000 weaner pigs for distribution to pig farmers, and
support to rural farmers for the acquisition of 5,000 hives for expanded honey production.

11.     Cross River Farm Credit Scheme: This program assists farmers and investors across the
agricultural value chain to increase their output by providing single-digit loans. These include soft loans
to small- and medium-scale commercial farmers and agrobusiness owners. The specific objectives of the
                                                                                                           104
program include (1) to fast track the development of the agricultural sector in the state by providing credit
facilities to commercial agricultural enterprises; (2) to enhance national food security by increasing food
supply, thereby reducing the prices of agricultural produce in the state and country; (3) to increase access
to affordable credit in agricultural production so farmers can exploit the full potentials of the sector; (4) to
increase productivity of farmers, thereby improving the living standards of rural dwellers; and (5) to
ensure a sustainable supply of farm inputs for processing plants and agro-allied industries in the state. The
action plans include mobilization of state funds as a trust fund model of credit for farmers to the tune of
₦ 250 million and also mobilization of about ₦ 1 billion (in the current fiscal year) under the Central Bank
of Nigeria’s Commercial Agricultural Credit Scheme for more than 600 farmers and food processors. The
program has secured another ₦ 2 billion, for which disbursement should begin soon.

12.      Cross River Agriculture and Rural Empowerment Scheme (CARES): CARES was established to
assist the government in securing financing and partnerships in the agricultural sector. The main objective
is to improve the investment climate for agricultural businesses through developing inclusive public-
private partnerships and smallholder linkages targeted at increasing on-farm productivity and adding
value to the crops for which the state has comparative advantages. Specific objectives of the program are
(1) to promote the adoption of commercial agriculture, (2) to identify suitable farmland that can be
allocated to small rural farmers and other investors, (3) to provide technical support to rural farmers
through training in modern agricultural practices, (4) to partner with the state in ensuring increased
accountability in the execution of agricultural projects, (5) to partner with financial institutions and
development partners in facilitating rural farmers’ access to finance, and (6) to create employment
opportunities in rural communities through participation in farming. The program focuses on large
commercial farmers operating in the state and farmer cooperatives in 18 LGAs by organizing them into
outgrowers’ and smallholders’ programs. These farmers get the requisite inputs for their farms and are
paid commensurate market rates for their produce.

13.      Songhai Cross River Initiative (SCRI): SCRI is a partnership with the Songhai Regional Centre in
Porto Novo, Republic of Benin, to build an integrated world-class center for agribusiness and
entrepreneurship in the state. The center, which is still under construction in the Abi LGA, will be for
training, production, research, demonstration, and development of sustainable agricultural practices. The
specific objectives of the initiative are (1) to develop human, technical, infrastructural, and organizational
capacities in order to improve and scale up production; (2) to provide services and training to young
agroentrepreneurs in the state on a sustainable basis; (3) to develop well-defined processes and tools to
support the establishment of Songhai farms in other LGAs; (4) to improve advocacy and knowledge
sharing on small-scale agribusiness and related small and medium enterprises; (5) to support the
government in promoting access of youths and women to needed skills required for their effective
participation in wealth creation and commercially viable agribusiness investments in rural communities;
and (6) to strengthen the administrative and technical capacities of all state agricultural centers to serve as
the basis for development of a statewide network of agricultural youth enterprises, support centers, and
linkages to rural development. The initiative is expected to assist the state in efforts at transforming
agriculture and reducing poverty through job creation for the youths and provision of requisite skills
needed by farmers. Recently, the government sent 100 youths to Songhai farms in Port Novo for training
on modern farming practices.

14.      Cross River Agriculture Development Project (CRADP): CRADP was established in 1997
through Edict No. 4 of 1997. The project is the principal means with which the Cross River state Ministry
of Agriculture provides extension services to all categories of farmers in urban and rural areas. The
specific objectives of this project are (1) to provide and maintain an integrated agricultural extension
service; (2) to initiate and develop agricultural projects in line with the national policy on agriculture; (3)
to enhance the development of agriculture through improving farming methods, research, and farm
                                                                                                           105
management techniques; (4) to initiate and manage projects that will raise the living standards of the rural
population; and (5) to implement projects that will support increased agricultural production.

15.     Project Awake: This project was developed to assist Cross River state in meeting MDG 3, given
the key role that women play in agriculture and the fact that they have been neglected in most programs
on agriculture. The objective of the project is to provide soft loans to women in agribusiness. The
government intends to use the project to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment.




                                                                                                        106
Institutional Arrangements for the Budget Process and Expenditure Planning

Table 2.1: Summary of institutional arrangements for budgeting and budget implementation in Cross River state

Actor/institution     Responsibility
Governor               Approves government policies on economic development and fiscal regimes, budget call
                        circulars, MDAs’ budget proposals, and revised budgets
                       Approves warrants, guidelines for usage of margins and capital services, budget manual,
                        and new SPI
                       Presents budget proposals and amendments to House of Assembly
                       Gives assent to the appropriation bill
State Executive        Deliberates on government policies, budget call circulars, and MDAs’ budget and revised
Council                 budget proposals
                       Deliberates on guidelines for usage of margins and capital services; deliberates on budget
                        manual, new SPIs, and other amendments; and performs other fiscal oversight functions
Budget,                Mainstreams budget process
Monitoring, and        Drafts for approval budget call circulars and issues approved call circulars
Evaluation             Organizes public forums that impact on its functions, for example, stakeholders’ forum
Department             Ensures that MDAs’ budgets and local government councils have adequate capacity in
                        developing MTSS and multiyear budget
                       Reviews reports of MDAs’ budget committees as input into its activities
                       Collates MDAs’ medium-term framework documents and produces state reports
                       Collates budget submissions of MDAs, summarizes, and presents budget to Executive
                        Council
                       Advises Executive Council on budget matters
                       Issues queries to MDAs relating to violation of the Appropriation Act
                       Keeps the Appropriation Act
                       Collaborates with Office of the Auditor General on issues relating to the Appropriation Act
                       Issues warrants
                       Ensures approved requests for release of funds complying with budgetary provisions
                       Leads budget performance review exercises; produces quarterly budget performance review
                        reports
                       Serves as secretariat of state’s Fiscal Strategy Committee
                       Provides breakdown/analysis of annual budget to the public
Ministry of            Formulates policies and strategies for all revenue and accounting matters; raises all funds
Finance                 from capital markets
                       Countersigns warrant issued by Budget Department; ensures prudent and transparent
                        management of financial assets of MDAs
Office of the State    Manages state’s accounts codes and charts of accounts
Accountant             Receives and reports on revenues from all sources; receives clearance from Budget
General                 Department for release of funds to MDAs
                       Receives general and provisional warrants issued by Budget Department and Ministry of
                        Finance; issues recurrent and special impress warrants
                       Responds to budget queries, for example, payment above budgetary provisions; collates
                        MDAs’ returns on usage of funds
Internal Revenue       Collects and reports on all taxes
Service                Receives revenue returns of MDAs; manages tax collection machinery
                       Projects and sets revenue targets for MDAs; makes necessary inputs into state budget
Department of          Manages state internal and external debts; categorizes and classifies state debts
Debt Management        Projects future financing of the budget through debt
                       Advises the government on settlement of outstanding debt commitments

                                                                                                                107
Office of Auditor-    Receives and audits approved requests for release of funds from Budget Department; audits
General                MDAs’ returns on usage of funds
                      Collaborates with Budget Department on issues relating to Appropriation Act; issues audit
                       queries to MDAs as they relate to budget
State Planning        Develops action plans for all MDAs
Commission            Coordinates MDAs’ SEEDS initiatives; produces state’s SEEDS documents
                      Makes necessary inputs into budget
Department of         Handles external donor component of budget
International         Identifies and categorizes various development support programs
Donor Support         Liaises with all development partners on their projects and programs in the state and makes
                       such information available to Budget Department
MDAs                  Implement budgets
                      Prepare and submit MTSS and other medium-term documents in the specified formats to
                       Budget Department
                      Prepare action plans, sets out milestones, and submit same to Budget Department
                      Prepare and submit budget implementation returns in specified formats to Budget
                       Department
                      Prepare and submit requests for release of funds to Budget Department and respond to
                       queries
                      Maintain vote books on all capital and recurrent expenditures
                      Defend budget proposals before Budget Department and House of Assembly’s Finance and
                       Appropriation Committee
                      Respond to queries from Budget Department
                      Form MDAs’ Budget Committees
MDAs’ budget          Comprise senior technocrats of respective MDAs, including commissioner; permanent
committees             secretary; all directors and deputies; heads of accounts and planning, research, and statistics
                       units; one member each of reputable civil society organization and organized private sector
                      Review government policy regarding medium-term frameworks in relation to budget call
                       circulars; review reports of MDAs
                      Cost, prioritize, and recommend programs of each MDA to chief executive (commissioner)
                       responsible for the MDA
Fiscal Strategy       Comprises commissioner of finance (chairman), special adviser to the governor on budget
Subcommittee           (vice chairman), economic adviser to the governor, accountant general, and chairman of
                       Internal Revenue Service
                      Advises governor on all fiscal strategy matters
                      Reviews socioeconomic situation in the country and state
                      Assesses effect of fiscal strategy of federal government on state government; reviews and
                       publishes implementation of current state’s fiscal strategy and effects on the state’s
                       economy
                      Develops state’s medium-term fiscal strategy framework
State Budget and      Comprises all members of Fiscal Strategy Subcommittee and other special advisers and
Performance            technocrats in relevant MDAs at both state and local government levels
Review                Conducts quarterly and year-end budget implementation and performance reviews
Committee             Deliberates on amendments to budget manual and budget call circulars
                      Conducts hearing sessions for better articulation of MDAs’ budget proposals
State House of       Provides legislative backing to budget process
Assembly             Receives governor’s budget proposal and medium-term expenditure framework
                     Deliberates on governor’s budget proposals and invites MDAs for budget defense
                     Screens governor’s budget proposals and amendments
                     Passes appropriation bill for governor’s assent
                     Deliberates on budget and budget implementation issues that may arise
Source: Authors’ compilation based on personal communication with several institutions.
                                                                                                                   108
Notes: MDAs = ministries, departments, and agencies; MTSS = medium-term sector strategy; SEEDS = State
Economic Empowerment and Development Strategy; SPI = standard practice instruction.

Table 2.2: Summary of institutional arrangements for budgeting and budget implementation in Ondo state
Actor/institution             Responsibility
Governor                       Submits proposed state budget to House of Assembly
                               Approves appropriation bill
State Executive Council        Deliberates on government policies, budget call circulars, and MDAs’ budget and
                                revised budget proposals
                               Deliberates on guidelines for usage of margins and capital services; deliberates on
                                budget manual, new SPIs, and other amendments on it; performs other fiscal
                                oversight functions
Ministry of Economic           Comprises Planning Department; Budget Department; Finance and Administration;
Planning and Budget             and Plans, Budget Performance, Monitoring and Evaluation

Planning Department            Initiates and coordinates state’s development plans in line with state’s policy
                                orientation
                               Coordinates state’s medium-term plan (for example Ondo State Economic
Budget Department               Empowerment and Development Strategy) and long-term plan (for example Ondo
Plans, Budget Performance,      State Vision 20: 2020)
Monitoring and Evaluation      Liaises with federal government commission, MDAs, and donor agencies
                               Advises local government councils on preparation of LGA budgets, medium- and
                                long-term plans
                               Prepares state budget
                               Collates revenue and expenditure data for budget preparation and economic
                                planning
                               Monitors budget performance through rendition of revenue and expenditure returns
                                by MDAs
                               Publishes state budget on the Internet for public access
                               Appraises viability and relevance of capital projects and establishes basis for
                                accountability
                               Evaluates and analyzes level of implementation of capital projects in relation to
                                budget estimates
House of Assembly              Screens budgets of MDAs
Committee on Finance and       Passes appropriation bill for governor’s approval
Appropriation

Ministry of Finance           Disburses funds to MDAs quarterly as specified in appropriation law (guided by
                               Fiscal and Responsibility Act, and Public Procurement Act of 2009)
                              Provides custody to state funds and liaises with federal agencies on fund allocations
                               and disbursement
                              Generates revenue through Board of Internal Revenue
Source: Authors’ compilation based on personal communication with several institutions.
Notes: LGA = local government area; MDAs = ministries, departments, and agencies; SPI = standard practice
instruction.




                                                                                                               109
ANNEX III.

Table 3.1: Federal agricultural spending as share of total spending, 2008-12 (%)
                                 Total spending           Agricultural spending               Agricultural
                              (constant 1990 naira,        (constant 1990 naira,                spending
                                    millions)                    millions)                     (% of total)
  Year                           Budget        Actual         Budget       Actual             Budget      Actual
 2008                             464.3         459.5            33.4       33.2                  7.2        7.2
 2009                             722.2         848.5            48.4       52.4                  6.7        6.2
 2010                             794.5       1,068.5            45.2       40.8                  5.7        3.8
 2011                             826.9         906.6            25.6       33.6                  3.1        3.7
 2012                             666.9         874.0            30.6       18.7                  4.6        2.1
 Average                          695.0         831.4            36.6       35.7                  5.5        4.6
Source: Based on data from ministries of agriculture and finance of the federal government.

Table 3.2: State agricultural spending as share of total spending, 2008-12 (%)

                 Cross River                   Niger                     Ondo*
  Year          Budget    Actual           Budget    Actual           Budget   Actual
 2008              1.6       1.8              3.8       4.1              2.9      2.7
 2009              0.7       0.9              3.0       3.5              3.2      2.7
 2010              0.8       0.7              6.6     11.9               5.1      4.6
 2011              1.8       0.7              3.4       6.2              4.1      2.6
 2012              0.9       0.4              6.1       3.5              3.9      5.4
 Average           1.2       0.9              4.6       5.6              3.8      3.6
Source: Based on data from ministries of agriculture and finance of Cross River and Niger states, and Office of
Accountant General of Ondo state.
Note: *Data for Ondo state in 2012 are for January–June.




                                                                                                                  110
Table 3.3: Agricultural spending as share of total spending in Akamkpa and Odigbo LGAs, 2008-12 (%)

              Akamkpa LGA             Odigbo LGA
  Year        Budget Actual           Budget Actual
 2008            0.0    9.8              0.0    0.0
 2009            0.0    0.0              1.0    2.0
 2010            0.0    0.0              0.0    0.9
 2011            2.4    0.0              2.8    1.6
 2012            8.0    0.2              0.0    0.0
 Average         2.1      2              0.8    0.9
Source: Based on data from departments of finance of Akamkpa and Odigbo local government areas.
Note: LGA = local government area.

Table 3.4: Share of federal agricultural spending relative to that of other key sectors, 2008-12 (%)
                                                 2008                  2009                2010            2011                 2012              Average
  Sector                                  Budget      Actual Budget         Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual
 Agriculture                                  7.19       7.23      6.70        6.17     5.68    3.82    3.09      3.71       4.58     2.14       5.45     4.61
 Defense                                     10.11      11.45      7.95        8.94     8.15    6.37    8.23      8.56     11.22      9.16       9.13     8.90
 Economic affairs                            21.17      29.85     23.52      27.32     23.92 22.24     19.78 19.75         20.71 22.84          21.82    24.40
 Education                                    4.07       3.93      6.71        7.28     7.07    6.69    7.99      8.83       5.16 10.28          6.20     7.40
 Environmental protection                     0.04       0.40      1.89        2.27     2.63    3.84    2.31      1.92       1.94     2.77       1.76     2.24
 General public services                     15.78      17.50     10.25      10.27     13.74 13.51     16.19 12.85         16.65 12.16          14.52    13.26
 Health                                       2.70       3.60      4.61        5.28     4.89    4.47    5.97      6.41       3.84     7.15       4.40     5.38
 Housing and community amenities              0.30       0.09      0.00        0.00     0.00    0.00    0.90      0.83       1.01     1.21       0.44     0.42
 Public order and safety                     16.99      19.75     13.71      13.63     13.83 11.51     15.32 15.27         17.77 16.14          15.52    15.26
 Recreation, culture, and religion            0.64       1.29      1.06        1.06     0.88    0.84    1.02      0.92       0.56     0.80       0.83     0.98
 Social protection                            0.50       0.68      1.91        1.77     1.48    4.47    1.37      1.30       0.87     2.08       1.23     2.06
 Other*                                      27.71      11.47     18.56      20.81     19.59 23.57     13.85 14.72         13.61 14.25          18.66    16.97
Source: Based on data from ministries of agriculture and finance of the federal government.
Note: * These expenditures are not identified elsewhere—servicewide vote payments that the review could not track to the various ministries, departments, and
agencies that utilized them. Examples of these expenditures include pensions and gratuities.




                                                                                                                                                          111
    Table 3.5: Sectoral allocation of federal agricultural spending, 2008-12 (constant 1990 naira, millions)
                                        2008                2009                   2010                2011              2012               Average              Actual
                                                                                                                                                               average
 Sector                            Budget    Actual    Budget    Actual   Budget       Actual   Budget    Actual    Budget   Actual       Budget   Actual   growth (%)
 Defense                            46.92     52.60     57.43     75.86    64.72        68.04    68.05     77.58     74.84    80.09        62.39    70.84          9.02
 Public order & safety              78.89     90.74     98.99    115.69   109.88       122.94   126.71    138.42    118.54   141.07       106.60   121.77         11.20
 Economic affairs                   98.31    137.18    169.89    231.85   190.04       237.64   163.55    179.06    138.11   199.64       151.98   197.07          5.04
 Education                          18.90     18.08     48.45     61.81    56.19        71.47    66.10     80.06     34.43    89.81        44.82    64.25         41.40
 Environmental protection            0.18      1.84     13.66     19.26    20.90        40.99    19.06     17.44     12.96    24.20        13.35    20.75         65.72
 General public services            73.27     80.41     74.05     87.14   109.19       144.40   133.84    116.53    111.06   106.32       100.28   106.96          8.86
 Health                             12.53     16.56     33.30     44.83    38.87        47.81    49.33     58.12     25.62    62.48        31.93    45.96         33.85
 Housing & comm. amenities           1.39      0.42      0.00      0.00     0.03         0.00     7.41      7.48      6.74    10.55         3.11     3.69             -
 Recreation, culture, & religion     2.96      5.91      7.66      9.02     7.00         8.95     8.44      8.33      3.74     6.95         5.96     7.83          2.49
 Social protection                   2.34      3.11     13.78     15.06    11.77        47.81    11.36     11.75      5.82    18.20         9.01    19.19         38.86
 Other*                            128.68     52.72    134.05    176.61   155.68       251.87   114.49    133.46     90.76   124.54       124.73   147.84         15.48
 Total                             464.33    459.54    722.24    848.52   794.53     1,068.52   826.89    906.55    666.94   873.99       694.99   831.42         14.47
 Agriculture                        33.39     33.21     48.41     52.39    45.16        40.77    25.59     33.59     30.57    18.67        36.62    35.73       - 14.76
Source: Based on data from the Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Note: * These expenditures are not identified elsewhere—servicewide vote payments that the review could not track to the various ministries, departments, and
agencies that utilized them. Examples of these expenditures include pensions and gratuities.

Table 3.6: Sectoral allocation of economic affairs spending, 2008-12 (constant 1990 naira, millions)
                                2008                2009              2010                2011              2012            Average        Actual average
 Sector                    Budget Actual       Budget Actual     Budget Actual       Budget Actual     Budget Actual     Budget Actual     growth (%)
 Agriculture                 33.4     33.2       48.4     52.4     45.2     40.8       25.6     33.6     30.6     18.7     36.6    35.7           -14.8
 Communications               1.7      1.7        4.1      5.2      4.8      6.2        1.5      6.8      1.6      4.3      2.7     4.8            24.1
 Mines                        1.5      1.7        2.2      2.9      2.3      1.8        2.9      3.2      1.8      3.6      2.1     2.7            17.2
 Petroleum                    8.0      8.5        9.2     15.5     11.8     14.2       11.9     10.6     10.2     13.0     10.2    12.3              4.9
 Power                        8.1     31.3       28.6     29.4     22.3     40.1       20.4     20.3     24.4     17.2     20.8    27.7           -14.5
 Trade and investment         1.7      2.4        3.2      4.6      4.5      5.1        2.3      3.1      1.5      2.7      2.6     3.6             -1.2
 Transport and aviation       5.0     12.6       10.5     23.1     33.7     53.5       16.1     21.4     16.9     30.0     16.4    28.1            18.0
 Water resources              0.0      0.0        0.0      0.0     15.3     35.8       18.6     15.7     10.1     18.5      8.8    14.0                -
 Works                       27.8     37.2       42.3     69.3     39.1     19.3       45.9     42.0     37.4     62.4     38.5    46.0              5.4
 Other                       11.2      8.6       21.4     29.4     11.0     20.9       18.5     22.4      3.6     29.3     13.1    22.1            24.4
 Total                       98.3    137.2      169.9    231.9    190.0    237.6      163.5    179.1    138.1    199.6    152.0   197.1              5.0
Source:Based on data from the Federal Ministry of Finance.

                                                                                                                                                                     112
    Table 3.7: Share of agricultural spending relative to that of other key sectors in Cross River state, 2008-12 (%)

                Agriculture                Education                   Health             Information           Water                Works              Women
 Year         Budget      Actual         Budget       Actual       Budget      Actual    Budget   Actual    Budget    Actual      Budget   Actual     Budget Actual
 2008           1.60        1.80          16.98        11.77          8.94       2.93      1.01     0.10      0.00     0.00        19.10     0.66       0.17  0.02
 2009            0.70       0.90          12.07        15.15          3.76       4.72      1.38     1.74      0.00     5.12        11.88     0.94       0.00  1.02
 2010           0.80        0.70          14.91        12.32          6.62       3.55      0.23     1.12      7.69     0.52        14.66     5.10       0.64  0.12
 2011            1.80       0.70            3.59        8.36         65.76       1.49      1.52     0.65      1.67     1.73        12.60    14.68       0.23  0.04
 2012            0.90       0.40          15.84         0.65          4.82       0.44      0.99     0.15      5.66     0.00        17.78     7.98       0.28  0.03
 Average         1.20       0.90          12.68         9.65         17.98       2.63      1.03     0.75      3.00     1.47        15.20     5.87       0.26  0.25
Source: Based on data from ministries of agriculture and finance of Cross River State.

    Table 3.8: Agricultural spending relative to that of other key sectors in Akamkpa LGA, 2008-12 (%)
              Agriculture         Education              Health         Information         Water              Works            Women
 Year        Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual                         Budget Actual    Budget  Actual
 2008            0.0       9.8     0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00
 2009            0.0       0.0     0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00
 2010            0.0       0.0     0.00     0.00       0.00     0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00      0.00     0.00    0.00     0.00    0.00
 2011            2.4       0.0     8.60     0.01       0.15     0.01     3.40    1.40     2.70      0.00    71.00 94.00       0.50    0.57
 2012            8.0       0.2     3.40     1.70       7.70     2.00     2.10    0.04     1.40      0.00    74.40 96.00       0.54    0.60
 Average        2.08      2.00     2.40     0.34       1.57     0.40     1.10    0.29     0.82      0.00    29.08 38.00       0.21    0.23
Source: Based on data from departments of agriculture and finance of Akamkpa local government area.
Note: LGA = local government area.




                                                                                                                                                    113
Table 3.9: Agricultural spending relative to other key sectors in Ondo state, 2000-12 (%)
                 Agriculture          Education                  Health                Works             Industry
     Year     Budget    Actual     Budget         Actual     Budget   Actual     Budget   Actual      Budget    Actual
 2008            2.90       2.75    23.49          22.28       4.78       6.06     7.95    11.84        1.32      3.61
 2009            3.19       2.66    19.14          19.84       6.58       6.97     6.03    13.68        3.17      3.30
 2010            5.09       4.61    16.96          11.25       5.51       6.92    10.79    10.55        3.84      3.72
 2011            4.05       2.63    16.35           4.84      19.82       7.73     8.13    17.40        8.47      0.47
 2012            3.93       5.43    14.88           0.00       8.48       0.00     7.25        0.00     0.00      0.00
 Average       3.83      3.62       18.16          11.64      9.03     5.54      8.03 10.69        3.36     2.22
Sources: Based on data from the Ondo state Ministry of Agriculture and Office of Accountant General of Ondo state.
Note: Data for 2012 are for January–June.

Table 3.10: Agricultural spending relative to other key sectors in Odigbo LGA, 2008-11 (%)
                 Agriculture          Education                 Health               Works
     Year       Budget Actual       Budget     Actual        Budget Actual        Budget Actual
 2008            0.0      0.0          0.0          0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0
 2009            1.0      2.0          0.0          0.0        0.0      46.3      0.0       9.6
 2010            0.0      0.9          0.0          0.0        0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0
 2011            2.8      1.6          0.0          0.0        0.0      38.4      0.0       3.9
 Average         1.0      1.1          0.0          0.0        0.0      21.2      0.0       3.4
Source: Based on data from departments of agriculture and finance of Odigbo LGA, Ondo state (2008-11).
Note: LGA = local government area.

Table 3.11: Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development overhead spending, million naira42
                                                               2008                                    2009                            2010
 Category                                          Budget       Actual     Deviation      Budget       Actual    Deviation    Budget   Actual   Deviation
 FMARD headquarters
 College of Land Resources                           49.80       34.42       (15.38)       48.09        33.53       (14.56)    48.11    43.97      (4.14)
 College of Vet. & Med. Lab                          98.87       98.83        (0.04)       88.87        88.84        (0.03)    97.88    98.48        0.60
 Nat. Animal Production Research Inst.,              80.26       54.18       (26.07)       70.27        51.08       (19.19)   169.40   169.40           -


42   Table to be revised.
                                                                                                                                                            114
                                                         2008                                2009                              2010
Category                                       Budget     Actual    Deviation     Budget     Actual    Deviation    Budget     Actual    Deviation
Zaria
Nat. Cereals Research Institute                210.00      68.70     (141.30)          -      43.82       43.82     136.80      85.54      (51.26)
Nat. Agricultural Seeds Council                     -          -            -      18.18      18.12       (0.06)     90.18      90.15       (0.03)
Nat. Vet. Research Institute, Vom              330.00     220.00     (110.00)     480.00     480.00            -    550.00     510.00      (40.00)
Institute for Agricultural Research             72.85      72.85            -      62.85      56.78       (6.07)    106.55      72.12      (34.43)
Federal College of Produce Inspection &
Stored Products Technology, Kano                35.00      36.81          1.81     45.50      78.44       32.94      41.14      95.70       54.55
NAERLS, Zaria                                  140.83     113.46      (27.37)     112.98     105.23       (7.75)    131.65     130.71       (0.94)
ARMTI, Ilorin                                       -     144.43       144.43     107.01     107.06         0.05    137.03     137.02       (0.01)
NCAM, Ilorin                                    81.35      75.94        (5.41)     76.83      73.26       (3.57)    126.47     120.68       (5.79)
Freshwater Fisheries Tech Coll., Baga           55.37      52.73        (2.64)     63.00      53.77       (9.22)     78.62      74.87       (3.74)
Veterinary Council of Nigeria                  115.11     124.98          9.88     59.79     124.03       64.24      65.77     111.89       46.12
Animal Health & Production                      65.58      55.73        (9.85)     99.92     102.10         2.18     87.22      89.43         2.21
NIHORT, Ibadan                                      -      72.72        72.72          -      63.10       63.10          -     125.29      125.29
Cocoa Research Inst. of Nigeria, Ibadan        109.06     109.06             -     72.22      72.22            -    240.57     240.57            -
Nigerian Stored Product Research               193.50     193.50             -     52.19      45.19       (7.00)         -      81.82       81.82
Freshwater Fisheries Tech Coll., New Bussa      46.53      45.32        (1.21)     46.53      44.64       (1.89)     60.18      54.10       (6.08)
Nigeria Inst. for Oceanography & Marine
Res, Lagos                                     333.50      66.33     (267.18)     130.60     187.87       57.27     366.81     350.00      (16.81)
Federal Coll. of Horticulture, Dadinkowa,
Gombe                                            61.45      40.00     (21.45)       40.59      40.59           -      45.50      45.50            -
National Inst. for Oil Palm Research, Benin     160.50     153.19      (7.31)      162.22     161.37      (0.85)     172.22     160.60     (11.62)
Federal Coll. of Cooperative Studies, Akure      51.63      54.28        2.64       55.48      52.68      (2.80)     130.46     121.60       (8.86)
FERCOLART, Owerri                                13.39      13.39      (0.00)       30.08      30.08      (0.00)      63.27      63.27       (0.00)
Federal Coll. of Coop Studies, Oji River          9.71       9.71           -       13.33      13.33           -      14.67      14.67            -
Federal Coll. of Coop Studies, Kaduna            14.87      14.87           -       14.87      14.87           -      16.36      16.36            -
NIFFR, New Bussa                                125.72     125.72      (0.00)      100.72     100.71      (0.00)     124.46     124.46       (0.00)
Fed. Coll. of Animal Health, Ibadan              79.59      79.59           -       52.04      52.04           -      90.26      90.26            -
Fed. Coll. of Agriculture, Akure                 48.48      48.95        0.46       51.19      48.60      (2.59)     110.49     102.31       (8.17)
Nat. Root Crops Research Inst., Umudike         120.00     120.00           -      199.17     199.17           -     203.21     203.21            -
Fed Coll. of Agriculture, Ishiagu                52.29      52.29           -       42.29      42.29           -      60.51      55.46       (5.05)
Nat. Inst. for Animal Science                        -          -           -           -      76.68      76.68           -      93.05       93.05
Nigeria Agricultural Insurance                   22.00      22.00           -       20.00      20.00           -      22.00      19.80       (2.20)
Total                                         2,777.22   2,373.95    (403.27)    2,416.80   2,681.49     264.69    3,587.76   3,792.28      204.52
                                                                                                                                                      115
Table 3.11: Continued
                                                           2011                          2012                   Average (2008 - 2012)
Category                                          Budget   Actual   Deviation   Budget   Actual   Deviation   Budget    Actual Deviation
FMARD headquarters                                                              208.64   205.36      (3.28)   208.64   205.36       (3.28)
College of Land Resources                          49.91    49.28      (0.63)    50.01    35.01     (15.00)    49.18     39.24      (9.94)
College of Vet & Med Lab                           90.07    90.07      (0.00)    72.75    57.31     (15.43)    89.69     86.71      (2.98)
Nat. Animal Production Research Inst., Zaria       96.21    92.61      (3.60)    77.70    44.40     (33.30)    98.77     82.33     (16.43)
Nat. Cereals Research Institute                   147.28    70.98     (76.30)   104.08    66.48     (37.60)   119.63     67.10     (52.53)
Nat. Agricultural Seeds Council                   103.09   103.07      (0.02)    83.26    72.75     (10.50)    58.94     56.82      (2.12)
Nat. Vet Research Institute, Vom                  330.99   330.99           -   234.62   234.62           -   385.12   355.12      (30.00)
Institute for Agricultural Research                77.64    77.64           -    54.87    54.87           -    74.95     66.85      (8.10)
Federal College of Produce Inspection & Stored
Products Technology, Kano                          41.03    56.16       15.13    29.00    52.74       23.75    38.34     63.97       25.64
NAERLS, Zaria                                     126.44   126.44           -    89.35    93.19        3.84   120.25    113.81      (6.44)
ARMTI, Ilorin                                     163.91   140.81     (23.10)    99.51    99.51      (0.00)   101.49    125.77       24.27
NCAM, Ilorin                                      112.00    85.21     (26.79)    65.02    54.08     (10.94)    92.33     81.83     (10.50)
Freshwater Fisheries Tech Coll., Baga              59.31    59.28      (0.03)    53.12    50.29      (2.83)    61.88     58.19      (3.69)
Veterinary Council of Nigeria                      63.24    82.93       19.69    77.03        -     (77.03)    76.19     88.77       12.58
Animal Health & Production                         93.90    67.08     (26.82)    66.36    66.33      (0.03)    82.59     76.13      (6.46)
NIHORT, Ibadan                                         -    66.27       66.27        -    50.52       50.52        -     75.58       75.58
Cocoa Research Inst. of Nigeria, Ibadan           117.35   117.35           -    78.02    78.02           -   123.44    123.44           -
Nigerian Stored Product Research                  473.62   474.15        0.53    55.01    48.12      (6.88)   154.87    168.56       13.69
Freshwater Fisheries Tech Coll., New Bussa         64.79    57.85      (6.94)    62.29    45.01     (17.28)    56.07     49.39      (6.68)
Nigeria Institute for Oceanography & Marine
Res, Lagos                                        338.03   200.38    (137.65)   152.85   154.89        2.05   264.36    191.89     (72.46)
Federal College of Horticulture, Dadinkowa,
Gombe                                              72.04    72.04           -    66.18    57.91      (8.27)    57.15     51.21      (5.94)
National Institute for Oil Palm Research, Benin   178.50   178.50        0.00   126.14   125.47      (0.67)   159.91    155.83      (4.09)
Federal College of Cooperative Studies, Akure     110.96    96.47     (14.49)    97.13    66.50     (30.64)    89.13     78.30     (10.83)
FERCOLART, Owerri                                  81.10    81.10      (0.01)    57.27    57.27      (0.00)    49.02     49.02      (0.00)
Federal Coll. of Coop. Studies, Oji River          29.50    29.50           -    25.00    25.00           -    18.44     18.44           -
Federal Coll. of Coop. Studies, Kaduna             27.55    27.55           -    25.00    25.00           -    19.73     19.73           -
NIFFR, New Bussa                                  122.99   121.99      (1.00)   126.14   126.13      (0.00)   120.00    119.80      (0.20)
Fed. Coll. of Animal Health, Ibadan               117.03   117.03           -    83.04    83.04           -    84.39     84.39           -
                                                                                                                                        116
                                                                   2011                                 2012                        Average (2008 - 2012)
 Category                                               Budget     Actual Deviation        Budget       Actual Deviation        Budget        Actual Deviation
  Fed. Coll. of Agriculture, Akure                        89.46     79.88        (9.57)      76.78       57.70      (19.08)       75.28        67.49       (7.79)
  Nat. Root Crops Research Inst., Umudike                194.57    194.57             -     137.29      137.29             -    170.85        170.85            -
  Fed. Coll. of Agriculture, Ishiagu                      58.64     55.64        (3.00)      41.44       40.44        (1.00)      51.03        49.22       (1.81)
  Nat. Inst. for Animal Science                               -     84.83         84.83           -     117.38       117.38            -       74.39       74.39
  Nigeria Agricultural Insurance                          21.32     21.32             -      17.22       17.22             -      20.51        20.07       (0.44)
  Total                                               3,652.47 3,508.97        (143.50) 2,592.10 2,499.87           (92.24) 3,172.18 3,135.60            (36.58)
Source: Based on submissions from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development and its parastatals.
Notes: Discrepancies in the totals result from inherent disharmony in the figures provided by the parastatals —the sum of the parts did not always equal the totals.
ARMTI = Agricultural and Rural Management Training Institute, FERCOLART = Federal College of Land Resources Technology, FMARD = Federal Ministry
of Agriculture and Rural Development, NAERLS = National Agricultural Extension and Research Liaison Services, NCAM = National Centre for Agricultural
Mechanization, NIFFR = National Institute for Freshwater Fisheries Research, and NIHORT = National Horticultural Research Institute.




                                                                                                                                                               117
Table 3.12: Decomposition of 2012 Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development headquarters overhead spending, million naira43
                                                                                          %       %
  Category                                   Budget   Actual   Deviation   % Perf.   Budget   Actual
 1. Travels & transport                       34.37    34.37      (0.00)   100.0%      16%    16.7%
  Training (local)                             5.61     5.61           -    100.0%    16.3%   16.3%
  Others (local)                               9.28     9.28           -    100.0%    27.0%   27.0%
  Training (international)                     7.24     7.24           -    100.0%    21.1%   21.1%
  Others (international)                      12.24    12.24      (0.00)    100.0%    35.6%   35.6%
 2. Utilities                                 38.51    38.41      (0.10)     99.7%   18.5%    18.7%
  Electricity charges                         30.75    30.65      (0.10)     99.7%    79.8%   79.8%
  Telephone charges                            4.99     4.99      (0.00)    100.0%    13.0%   13.0%
  Satellite broadcasting access charges           -        -           -   #DIV/0!     0.0%    0.0%
  Water rate                                   2.08     2.08      (0.00)    100.0%     5.4%    5.4%
  Sewage charges                               0.69     0.69      (0.00)    100.0%     1.8%    1.8%
 3. Materials & supplies—general              32.40    31.60      (0.80)     97.5%   15.5%    15.4%
  Office stationeries/computer consumables    15.77    15.77           -    100.0%    48.7%   49.9%
  Books                                        5.72     5.72           -    100.0%    17.7%   18.1%
  Printing of nonsecure documents              1.47     1.47           -    100.0%     4.5%    4.6%
  Printing of security documents               9.44     8.64      (0.80)     91.5%    29.1%   27.3%
 4. Maintenance—general                       22.40    22.40      (0.00)   100.0%    10.7%    10.9%
  Maintenance of MVs / transport equipment     8.13     8.13      (0.00)    100.0%    25.1%   25.7%
  Maintenance of office furniture              3.94     3.94           -    100.0%    12.2%   12.5%
  Maintenance of official building / res.
 quarters                                      5.28     5.28      (0.00)   100.0%    16.3%    16.7%
  Other maintenance services                   5.06     5.06           -   100.0%    15.6%    16.0%
 5. Training—general                          14.69    14.69      (0.00)   100.0%     7.0%     7.2%
  Local training                               8.47     8.47      (0.00)   100.0%    57.7%    57.7%
  International training                       6.21     6.21      (0.00)   100.0%    42.3%    42.3%
 6. Other services—general                    42.93    42.52      (0.40)    99.1%    20.6%    20.7%
  Security services                           12.46    12.46           -   100.0%    29.0%    29.3%
  Office rent                                 19.29    18.89      (0.40)    97.9%    44.9%    44.4%
  Security vote (including operation)         11.18    11.18           -   100.0%    26.0%    26.3%
 7. Consulting & professional services         7.34     7.34        0.00   100.0%     3.5%     3.6%
  Financial consulting                         0.16     0.16        0.00   100.0%     2.1%     2.1%

43   Table to be revised.
                                                                                                                                          118
  Information technology consulting                 3.87    3.87        -   100.0%    52.8%    52.8%
  Legal services                                    3.31    3.31        -   100.0%    45.1%    45.1%
 8. Fuel & lubricant—general                       16.00   14.03   (1.98)    87.6%     7.7%     6.8%
  Motor vehicle fuel costs                         13.81   12.02   (1.79)    87.0%    86.3%    85.7%
  Other transport fuel costs                        0.12    0.09   (0.03)    73.5%     0.8%     0.7%
  Plant/generator fuel                              2.07    1.91   (0.15)    92.7%    12.9%    13.7%
 Total overhead                                   208.64 205.36    (3.28)    98.4%   100.0%   100.0%
Source: Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
Note: MV = motor vehicle.




                                                                                                       119
Table 3.13: Economic composition of state agricultural expenditures, 2008-12, million naira

 State/category         2008                2009                 2010               2011             2012                      Average
 Cross River       Budget Actual       Budget Actual        Budget Actual      Budget    Actual Budget Actual               Budget     Actual
 Recurrent (R)       9.53 12.26          9.34 12.84          10.61    10.25     10.45 10.38      12.42    9.99               10.47      11.14
 Capital (C)        28.31 28.18         13.85    9.57         9.84     2.06     31.10     5.96   18.42    1.89               20.30       9.53
 Total              37.84 40.44         23.19 22.41          20.45    12.31     41.55 16.34      30.84 11.88                 30.77      20.68
 R share (%)         25.2    30.3        40.3    57.3         51.9     83.3      25.2     63.5    40.3    84.1               36.58       63.7
 C share (%)         74.8    69.7        59.7    42.7         48.1     16.7      74.8     36.5    59.7    15.9               63.42       36.3

 Niger
 Recurrent (R)           -     1.27          -      0.42         -    0.11          -      0.67          -      0.19            0.00        0.53
 Capital (C)             -    38.70          -     62.00         -   38.22          -      9.68          -     16.04            0.00       32.93
 Total                   -    39.97          -     62.43         -   38.32          -     10.35          -     16.23            0.00       33.46
 R share (%)             -      3.2          -       0.7         -     0.3          -       6.4          -       1.2             0.0         2.4
 C share (%)             -     96.8          -      99.3         -    99.7          -      93.6          -      98.8             0.0        97.6

 Ondo
 Recurrent (R)       26.23 22.80        26.42 22.97         22.30    20.60     22.76 26.84       38.54         35.54         27.25         25.75
 Capital (C)         39.82 36.58        42.82 19.74 108.95           77.32 106.89 23.14          95.75         33.11         78.85         37.98
 Total               66.05 59.38        69.24 42.71 131.25           97.92 129.65 49.98 134.29                 68.65        106.10         63.73
 R share (%)          39.7     38.4       38.1     53.8      17.0     21.0       17.6    53.7     28.7          51.8         28.22          43.7
 C share (%)          60.3     61.6       61.8     46.2      83.0     79.0       82.4    46.3     71.3          48.2         71.76          56.3
Source: Based on data from offices of accountant general of Cross River, Niger, and Ondo states.



Table 3.14: Economic composition of agricultural expenditures in Odigbo local government area, 2008-12, million naira

                             2008                    2009                 2010                    2011                     2012                Average
 Category              Budget       Actual       Budget     Actual   Budget      Actual     Budget       Actual        Budget     Actual   Budget        Actual
 Recurrent (R)            0.00        0.00         0.52       0.25      0.00       0.00       0.23           0.31        0.00       0.00     0.20         0.10
 Capital (C)              0.00        0.00         0.27       0.02      0.00       0.00       0.39           0.02        0.00       0.00     0.10          0.00


                                                                                                                                                              120
 Total                    0.00          0.00          0.79          0.27       0.00       0.00       0.62       0.33           0.00          0.00        0.3          0.1
 R share (%)              0.00          0.00         65.82      92.59          0.00       0.00      37.10      93.94           0.00          0.00       20.6         37.3
 C share (%)              0.00       0.00       34.18      7.41        0.00     0.00      62.90        6.06       0.00                       0.00       19.4          2.7
Source: Based on data from annual financial statements of Odigbo local government area, Ondo state, from 2008 to 2011.


Table 3.15: Decomposition of recurrent agricultural expenditures in Cross River and Ondo states, 2008-12, million naira

 State/category                  2008                        2009                2010                 2011                2012                         Average
 Cross River             Budget         Actual       Budget     Actual      Budget    Actual     Budget     Actual   Budget      Actual             Budget       Actual
 Personnel                  9.02         11.82         8.86         12.39    10.38      10.05     10.12      10.18     12.07          9.79           10.09        10.85
 Overhead                   0.51          0.43         0.48          0.45     0.24       0.21      0.34       0.20      0.35          0.20           0.384         0.30
 Total                      9.53         12.25         9.34         12.84    10.62      10.26     10.46      10.38     12.42          9.99           10.47       11.14
 Personnel share (%)        94.6          96.5         94.9          96.5     97.7       98.0      96.7       98.1      97.2          98.0            96.2         97.4
 Overhead share (%)          5.4               3.5      5.1           3.5      2.3        2.0       3.3        1.9       2.8           2.0             3.8          2.6


 Ondo
 Personnel                 20.50         18.54        21.37         19.54    16.40      16.17     16.65      22.05     33.87      31.75              21.76       21.61
 Overhead                   5.73          4.26         5.04          3.42     5.89       4.43      6.11       4.79      4.67          3.79            5.49         4.14
 Total                     26.23         22.80        26.41         22.96    22.29      20.60     22.76      26.84     38.54      35.54              27.25       25.75
 Personnel share (%)        78.2          81.3         80.9          85.1     73.6       78.5      73.2       82.2      87.9          89.3            78.8         83.3
 Overhead share (%)         21.8         18.7      19.1      14.9     26.4      21.5               26.8       17.8      12.1          10.7            21.2         16.7
Source: Based on data from offices of accountant general of Cross River and Ondo states.

Table 3.16: Decomposition of recurrent agricultural expenditures in Odigbo local government area, 2008-12, million naira

                               2008               2009               2010             2011                        Average
 Category                 Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual Budget Actual                              Budget Actual
 Personnel                      -    0.00          -    0.22         -    0.00         -      0.19                  -    0.10
 Overhead                       -    0.00          -    0.03         -    0.00         -      0.12                  -    0.04
 Total                          -    0.00          -    0.25         -    0.00         -      0.31                  -    0.14
 Personnel share (%)            -     0.0          -    88.0         -     0.0         -      61.3                  -    37.3
 Overhead share (%)             -     0.0          -    12.0         -     0.0         -      38.7                  -    12.7
Source: Based on data from department of finance of Odigbo local government area, Ondo state.


                                                                                                                                                                          121
Table 3.17: Summary of releases and disbursements for federal capital expenditures, 1999-10
                                 Act
         Appropriation Release Utilization Release Utilization
 Year                (naira, billions)                        (%)
 1999               1.39        1.39          1.39 100.0%          100.0%
 2000               3.25        3.35          3.35 103.1%          100.0%
 2001               0.84        0.84          0.84 100.0%          100.0%
 2002               2.78        2.78          2.78 100.0%          100.0%
 2003               6.27        6.27          6.27 100.0%          100.0%
 2004               9.10        9.10          9.10 100.0%          100.0%
 2005               4.17        4.17          4.17 100.0%          100.0%
 2006              12.56      11.14         10.15     88.7%         91.1%
 2007              17.63        4.59          4.02    26.0%         87.6%
 2008              97.03      51.22         16.74     52.8%         32.7%
 2009              81.71      81.08         65.81     99.2%         81.2%
 2010              39.02      39.02         39.02 100.0%           100.0%
Source: Based on data from documents provided by Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
(FMARD).
Note: Fiscal 2008 and 2009 data relate to the Federal Ministry of Agriculture & Water Resources, not FMARD .


Table 3.18: 2012 Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development capital expenditures
                                                                                           %
                                                Budget         Actual      Deviation                % Actual
 Category                                                                                Budget
Rice                                                 1.32          0.80         (0.51)    12.0%         14.9%
Cotton                                               0.23          0.14         (0.09)     2.1%          2.6%
Cocoa                                                1.10          0.54         (0.56)    10.0%          9.9%
Cassava                                              0.84          0.42         (0.42)     7.7%          7.8%
Sorghum                                              0.43          0.37         (0.06)     3.9%          6.9%
Soybeans                                             0.29          0.17         (0.11)     2.6%          3.2%
Maize                                                0.42          0.31         (0.11)     3.8%          5.8%
Horticulture—tomato development                      0.04          0.02         (0.02)     0.4%          0.4%
Horticulture—citrus development program              0.04          0.03         (0.02)     0.4%          0.5%
Crop processing zones                                1.04          0.40         (0.64)     9.4%          7.4%
Agriculture (trees & crops)                          5.74          3.21         (2.54)    52.3%         59.4%
Other critical value chains                          0.02          0.01         (0.01)     0.1%          0.1%
Livestock                                            0.34          0.17         (0.17)     3.1%          3.1%
Fisheries                                            0.11          0.04         (0.08)     1.0%          0.7%
Agric. land res                                      0.06          0.02         (0.04)     0.6%          0.3%
Total for agric. chain values                        6.27          3.44         (2.84)    57.1%         63.6%
Administration                                       0.09          0.06         (0.03)     0.8%          1.1%
Construction of agricultural facilities              0.15          0.06         (0.09)     1.3%          1.0%
Special programs                                     0.13          0.03         (0.10)     1.2%          0.5%
Youth & women in agribusiness investment
program                                              0.43          0.11         (0.32)     3.9%          2.0%
Rural development                                    0.79          0.43         (0.37)     7.2%          7.9%
Irrigation                                           0.15          0.07         (0.08)     1.3%          1.2%
Cooperatives                                         0.02          0.01         (0.01)     0.2%          0.2%
Research & development                               0.49          0.08         (0.41)     4.5%          1.6%
Monitoring & evaluation                              0.20          0.10         (0.10)     1.8%          1.8%
Parastatals—colleges & research institutes           2.26          1.02         (1.24)    20.6%         18.9%
Total                                               10.98          5.40         (5.58)   100.0%        100.0%

                                                                                                               122
Source: Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.




                                                                 123
ANNEX IV.

List of Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development’s Parastatals

Colleges of Agricultural Education
   1. Federal College of Produce Inspection and Stored Products Technology, Kano
   2. Federal College of Animal Health & Production Technology, Plateau
   3. Federal College of Agriculture, Ondo
   4. Federal College of Agriculture, Ishiagu, Ebonyi
   5. Federal College of Freshwater Fisheries Technology, Niger
   6. Federal College of Animal Health & Production Technology, Vom
   7. Federal College of Freshwater Fisheries Technology, Baga, Borno
   8. Federal College of Fisheries & Marine Technology, Lagos
   9. Federal College of Horticulture Dadin-Kowa, Gombe
   10. Federal College of Agriculture, Moore Plantation, Oyo
   11. Federal College of Veterinary & Medical Laboratory Technology, Vom
   12. Federal College of Land Resources Technology, Owerri, Imo
   13. Federal College of Land Resources Technology, Kuru Jos, Plateau
   14. Federal Cooperative College, Ibadan, Oyo
   15. Federal Cooperative College, Kaduna, Kaduna
   16. Federal Cooperative College, Oji River, Enugu
   17. College of Agriculture and Animal Science, Division of Agriculture, ABU, Kaduna
   18. Stored Product Research, Kogi
   19. Division of Agricultural College ABU, Kaduna
   20. University of Agriculture Abeokuta, Ogun

Agricultural Research Institutes
   1. Agriculture Research & Rural Management Institute, Ilorin, Kwara
   2. National Cereals Research Institute, Badeggi, Niger
   3. National Veterinary Research Institute, Vom, Plateau
   4. National Root Crops Research Institute, Umudike, Abia
   5. National Institute for Oil Palm Research, Benin, Edo
   6. Institute for Agricultural Research, Zaria, Kaduna
   7. Lake Chad Research Institute, Maiduguri, Sokoto
   8. National Institute of Oceanography & Marine Research, Lagos
   9. Cocoa Research Institute, Ibadan, Oyo
   10. National Institute for Fresh Water Fisheries Research, Niger
   11. Nigeria Stored Product Research, Ilorin, Kwara
   12. National Horticultural Research Institute, Ibadan, Oyo
   13. Rubber Research Institute of Nigeria, Benin, Edo
   14. National Agric Extension & Research Liaison Services, Zaria, Kaduna
   15. Institute of Agricultural Research & Training, Ibadan, Oyo
   16. National Animal Production Research Institute, Zaria, Kaduna
   17. Nigeria Institute of Animal Sciences, Abuja, FCT

Agencies

                                                                                         124
1. National Quarantine Services, FCT
2. National Centre for Agriculture Mechanization, Ilorin, Kwara
3. Office of the Permanent Representative to Food and Agriculture Organization of the
    United Nations
4. Veterinary Council of Nigeria
5. Nigeria Agricultural Insurance Corporation, FCT
6. Agricultural Research Council of Nigeria, FCT
7. National Agricultural Seed Council, FCT
8. Nigeria Agricultural Cooperative and Rural Development Bank, Kaduna
9. Federal Agricultural Coordinating Unit, FCT
10. Strategy Grain Reserve, FCT
11. Rural Access Mobility Project, FCT
12. Commercial Agriculture, FCT
13. National Agricultural Seeds Agency, FCT
14. Fresh Water Station—Brackish Water Station, Rivers
15. National Programme on Agriculture and Food Security, FCT




                                                                                        125
Table 4.1: Expenditures and budget execution in total agricultural and state spending, 2008-12 (%)

 Cross River                Agriculture                          Total
                  Budget    Actual         A/B       Budget            Actual     A/B
 Year                  (mil. naira)        (%)                    (mil. naira)    (%)
 2008                37.8        40.4     106.9      2,305.5          2,305.5    100.0
 2009                23.2        22.4      96.6      3,103.0          2,471.0     79.6
 2010                20.5        12.3      60.2      2,714.2          1,782.4     65.7
 2011                41.6        16.3      39.3      2,266.9          2,266.9    100.0
 2012                30.8        11.9      38.5      3,247.9          3,138.3     96.6
Average              30.8        20.7      68.3       2727.5           2392.8    88.38

 Niger             Agriculture                             Total
                Budget       Actual          A/B     Budget       Actual         A/B
 Year                   (mil. naira)         (%)             (mil. naira)        (%)
 2008           1,688.6        40.0           2.4     55,457     1,534.5          2.8
 2009           1,849.7        62.4           3.4     69,090     2,003.2          2.9
 2010           1,209.9        38.3           3.2     11,594       264.8          2.3
 2011           3,956.4        10.3           0.3     12,961       288.9          2.2
 2012           5,323.0        16.2           0.3     95,440     2,092.5          2.2
 Average        2,805.5        33.4           1.9   48,908.4     1,236.8          2.5


 Ondo                    Agriculture                            Total
                Budget     Actual         A/B       Budget          Actual       A/B
 Year                 (mil. naira)        (%)                  (mil. naira)      (%)
 2008             66.1         59.4       89.9      2,278.2         2,163        94.9
 2009             69.2         42.7       61.7      2,173.8         1,608        74.0
 2010            131.3         97.9       74.6      2,576.2         2,124        82.4
 2011            129.7         50.0       38.5      3,198.8         1,902        59.5
 2012            134.3        68.7        51.1        3,420.3        1,264         37.0
 Average         106.1        63.7        63.2        2,729.5      1,812.2         69.6
Source: Based on data ministries of agriculture and finance of Cross River, Niger, and Ondo states and Office of Accountant General of Ondo state.
Note: *2012 data are for January–June.
Table 4.2: Expenditures and budget execution in agricultural and state spending for Akamkpa and Odigbo local government areas, 2008-12 (%)
 Akamkpa                Agriculture                                     Total
                 Budget      Actual
                                                 A/B      Budget         Actual          A/B
                    (B)         (A)
 Year                   (mil. naira)             (%)               (mil. naira)          (%)
 2008              1.61            1.61        100.0            0.0           16.4        0.0
 2009              0.00            0.00          0.0           64.7           43.8       67.6
 2010              0.00            0.00          0.0           33.6           41.2      122.6
 2011              0.64            0.01          1.6           27.3           31.7      116.2
 2012              2.10            0.03          1.4           26.4           15.4       58.3
 Average            0.9             0.3         20.6           30.4           29.7       72.9


 Odigbo            Agriculture                                  Total
            Budget Actual
                                          A/B      Budget       Actual          A/B
               (B) (A)
 Year             (mil. naira)            (%)              (mil. naira)         (%)
 2008            0.00           0.00      0.00          0.00          0.00       0.0
 2009            0.79           0.27      34.2         76.37      13.65         17.9
 2010            0.00           0.20      0.00         50.98      22.76         44.6
 2011          0.63       0.33            52.4
                                            22.73    20.29     89.3
 Average        0.4        0.2    21.7       37.5      14.2    38.0
Source: Based on data from department of finance of Odigbo local government area, Ondo state.

Table 4.3: Budget execution in agricultural spending by recurrent and capital expenditures for Cross River and Ondo states, 2008-12 (%)

                        2008           2009            2010           2011           2012       Average
State/Category           A/B            A/B            A/B             A/B             A/B
Cross River
Recurrent               128.5          137.5           96.6            99.3          80.4         108.5
Capital                  99.5           69.1           20.9            19.2          10.3          43.8
Ondo


                                                                                                                                          127
Recurrent             86.9       86.9        92.4       117.9        92.3       95.3
Capital              91.9        46.1        71.0        21.6        34.6       53.0
Source: Based on data from offices of accountant general of Cross River and Ondo states.
Note: A/B = actual/budget.

Table 4.4: Budget execution in recurrent spending by personnel and overhead expenditures for Cross River and Ondo states, 2008-12 (%)

                      2008       2009        2010        2011        2012    Average
State/Category        A/B         A/B         A/B         A/B        A/B
Cross River
Personnel              131       139.8        96.8      100.6        81.1       109.9
Overhead              84.3        93.8        87.5        58.8       57.1        76.3
Ondo
Personnel             90.4        91.4        98.6      132.4        93.7       101.3
Overhead              74.3        67.9        75.1        78.4        81.2      75.4
Source: Based on data from offices of accountant general of Cross River and Ondo states.
Note: A/B = actual/budget.




                                                                                                                                        128
Figure 4.1: Comparison of Lorenz and concentration curves for public spending on fertilizer subsidy in
Nigeria




Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.




                                                                                                         129
Figure 4.2: Gender comparison of fertilizer subsidy expenditure benefit concentration curves




Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.




                                                                                                         130
Figure 4.3: Rural-urban comparison of fertilizer subsidy expenditure benefit concentration curves




Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.

Figure 4.5: Zonal comparison of fertilizer subsidy expenditure benefit concentration curves




                                                                                                         131
Source: Authors’ computation based on data from Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.




                                                                                                         132
