                                            97829




PPP Pilot Design Report




Strengthening the Role of PPPs in Local
Government Revenue Collection

The World Bank Group




                                    April 20, 2015
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




Table of Contents
Acronyms/Abbreviations ................................................................................................................ iii
1 Context ........................................................................................................................................ 1
  1.1        Background to Project ................................................................................................................ 1
  1.2        Purpose of this Report................................................................................................................ 2
2 Scope of the activity ..................................................................................................................... 3
  2.1        Activities and sub activities ........................................................................................................ 3
  2.2        Project Deliverables Schedule .................................................................................................... 4
     2.2.1         Project Schedule ................................................................................................................. 4
  2.3        Project Audience ........................................................................................................................ 4
     2.3.1         Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD) ..................................... 5
     2.3.2         Fiscal Decentralization Unit, Ministry of Finance (FDU) ..................................................... 5
     2.3.3         Public Investment Division, Ministry of Finance (PID) ........................................................ 5
     2.3.4         Local Government ............................................................................................................... 6
3 Objectives / Result Indicators ....................................................................................................... 6
  3.1        Overall Strategic Objectives ....................................................................................................... 6
  3.2        Operational Objectives............................................................................................................... 7
4 Assessment of results and outcomes ............................................................................................ 7
  4.1        General results ........................................................................................................................... 7
  4.2        Achieved objectives.................................................................................................................... 8
     4.2.1         Assessment activity ............................................................................................................. 8
     4.2.2         Guidance Manual .............................................................................................................. 10
     4.2.3         The Pilot ............................................................................................................................ 10
     4.2.4         Summary ........................................................................................................................... 11
  4.3        Summary of activities and their strategic value ....................................................................... 12
5 Summary and lessons learned .................................................................................................... 14
  5.1        Summary .................................................................................................................................. 14
     5.1.1         Regional and Global Perspectives ..................................................................................... 14
  5.2        Lessons learned and recommendations going forward ........................................................... 15
  5.3        Dissemination and Next Steps.................................................................................................. 16
Appendix A: List of stakeholders.................................................................................................... 18
Appendix B: List of Activities completed ........................................................................................ 20




                                                                                                                                               |i
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




                            Acknowledgements

                            The World Bank would like to acknowledge the kind assistance
                            granted to them by the staff of the Public Investment Division and
                            the Fiscal Decentralization Unit at the Ministry of Finance and the
                            Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development.

                            We would also like to acknowledge Ga East Municipal Assembly
                            for its participation as the selected district of the Pilot activity
                            carried out as part of the project, as well as providing data for the
                            assessment activity.

                            We must also thank staff at Accra Metropolitan Assembly and
                            Tema Metropolitan Assembly for its participation and provision of
                            data related to the assessment activity in this project.

                            Any errors of fact or interpretation are ours.


                            The World Bank




                                                                                                    |ii
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




   Acronyms/Abbreviations
          Assemblies             Metropolitan, Municipal, District Assemblies
          FDU                    Fiscal Decentralization Unit
          GoG                    Government of Ghana
          IGF                    Internally-Generated Fund
          LG                     Local Government
          LGCSP                  Local Government Capacity Support Program
          MMDA                   Metropolitan, Municipal, and District Assemblies
          MDA                    Ministries, Departments and Agencies
          MLGRD                  Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
          MoF                    Ministry of Finance
          PAU                    PPP Advisory Unit
          PFA                    Project and Financial Analysis Unit
          PID                    Public Investment Division
          PPP                    Public Private Partnership
          RTAT                   Regional Technical Advisory Team
          SSNIT                  Social Security and National Insurance Trust
          TMA                    Tema Metropolitan Assembly
          WB                     World Bank




                                                                                      |iii
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




1Context
1.1 Background to Project
Since the 1990s, the Government of Ghana (GoG) has increasingly transferred more powers and
resources to its local governments through an elaborate decentralization process. Yet many local
governments remain dependent on resource transfers from the center despite the substantial
increase in local revenue potential, especially for urban areas, resulting from Ghana’s impressive
economic growth over the past five years. A considerable number of the Metropolitan, Municipal
and District Assemblies (MMDAs) are unable to collect the needed revenue and therefore have
resorted to experimenting with Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements. In support, Ghana
has adopted a comprehensive PPP policy that provides an institutional framework and processes
for undertaking the establishment, management and oversight of PPPs for infrastructure
development and services. A PPP Bill currently being prepared is under revision and expected to be
presented to the Cabinet by July 2015.

There is an increasing trend among MMDAs of engaging private operators for the provision of public
services such as property identification and property information management, property valuation,
billing printing and dissemination, revenue collection, enforcement, appeals, and taxpayer service.
Typical examples are found in Kumasi and Cape Coast Metropolitan Assemblies, where private
operators have been involved in revenue collection, resulting in some gains in the overall revenues
collected. However, there have also been situations where PPP arrangements have not been
successful. Some Assemblies have been unable to adequately manage the poor performance due
to the absence of appropriate guidelines for managing PPP collection of local revenues. Thus, the
approach to managing PPP contractual challenges in local revenue mobilization in Ghana has been
reactive rather than proactive.

With the on-going fiscal reforms, the Ministry of Finance (MoF) is eager to ensure that local
governments realize the full potential of their local revenue mobilization operations. The MoF has
sought World Bank support to develop appropriate operational modalities to regularize and deepen
PPP arrangements for local revenue collection operations. In response, the Bank has established a
Technical Assistance project through the Public Private Partnership Infrastructure Advisory Facility
(PPIAF). The assistance fits into the larger reforms on local government public financial
management that the Government is currently undertaking, led by the Fiscal Decentralization Unit
(FDU) in the Ministry of Finance.

This study was designed to complement other revenue outsourcing work by reviewing and
identifying best and worst practices in current MMDAs’ PPP arrangements, and developing a draft
framework for local revenue mobilization and collection in line with Ghana’s National Policy on
PPPs. The diagnostic work of existing practices is complementary to reviews of PPPs in revenue
collection undertaken by USAID in the Western region.

The project is directly connected to Component 1 of Ghana’s Local Government Capacity Support
Project (LGCSP) supported by the World Bank, which focuses on strengthening fiscal




                                                                                            |1
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


decentralization. The component includes support to the Government to undertake work in five key
areas of public financial management reform: (i) budgeting; (ii) reporting and auditing; (iii) revenue
collection and management; (iv) asset management; and (v) social accountability. Establishing best
practices in revenue mobilization would provide an important input into the development of reform
strategies and new policies on PPPs for local revenue mobilization in Ghana. This would also be in
support of the recently approved LGCSP, under which performance grants will be used to reward
cities that are able to increase local revenue mobilization. The performance grants provide a strong
incentive for cities to adopt such models as they would be able to leverage larger grants based on
their revenue collection performance.

The project is also linked to Component 2b of the LGCSP, i.e., capacity strengthening of urban Local
Governments (LGs). In particular, the framework will benefit from the Regional Technical Advisory
Teams (RTATs) that are responsible for supporting the urban LGs in strengthening their performance
in the five focus areas of the project as listed above.



1.2 Purpose of this Report
The purpose of this Report is to summarize the activities carried out as part of this project, capture
the overall strategic objectives and operational objectives of the project, and indicate how they
have been achieved. In addition, the Report summarizes the results, both intended and unintended,
and related outcomes for each as a way to record the overall benefit and effect of the project.




                                                                                              |2
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




2Scope of the activity
2.1 Activities and Sub-Activities
The project included the following three core activities: (i) Assessment; (ii) Development of a
Guidance Manual; and (iii) Implementation of a Pilot PPP.

Activity I: Assessment of Existing PPP Practices and Outsourcing Arrangements
(a) Assess existing practices of PPP arrangements in selected Assemblies to establish the general
    operating characteristics. The assessment was based on a combination of desk review and field
    assessment, taking into consideration available studies completed on the topic including the
    studies financed by the German Agency for International Cooperation (GiZ) and USAID in the
    Western and Central Africa regions, as well as existing data on revenue collection. The work
    included data collection in Accra Metropolitan Assembly (AMA), Tema Metropolitan Assembly
    (TMA), and the Ga East Municipal Assembly. The project team was also able to obtain a random
    selection of contracts between LGs and private sector companies from various MMDAs to assist
    with the analytical assessment of contractual practices.

(b) Establish current operating limitations and best practices in light of the existing policy, legal and
    regulatory framework (including the PPP policy). The analysis sought to identify the context and
    conditions under which these arrangements were established, procurement and contracting
    arrangements, and performance conditions and outcomes, based on governing contract
    arrangements and the lessons learned. Specifically, the analysis considered institutional
    models, contract management of PPPs, and revenue mobilization practices. The review also took
    into consideration the legal framework, including the new PPP policy.

(c) Conduct a national stakeholder workshop with presentation of the assessment findings. The
    workshop verified the findings of the assessment study and identified improved models,
    including lessons learned from international and regional practice on revenue collection by
    PPPs. Based on the findings and discussions at the workshop, appropriate policy, legal and
    regulatory reforms were identified for effective operation of long-term PPP arrangements.

Activity II: Development of a Guidance Manual for PPPs and Outsourcing
(d) Develop an appropriate guidance manual that integrates national and international best
    practices and the policy, legal and regulatory framework requirements of Ghana. The manual
    includes specific and practical steps on design, contracting and management of PPP models and
    is specifically targeted for MMDAs.

(e) Design and execute a national stakeholder session to validate and finalize the Guidance Manual.
    The stakeholder session involved national policy makers, private consulting companies, and
    central government staff.




                                                                                                |3
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


Activity III: Pilot PPP
(f) In close collaboration with MMDA staff and the MoF key advisory group, the project team
    designed and supported the initial implementation of a pilot PPP arrangement for enhanced
    revenue collection as per the Guidance Manual in Ga East Municipal Assembly. The pilot
    provided an opportunity to give support to the Assembly to develop an implementation plan for
    a PPP project it had already begun to pursue.



2.2 Project Deliverables Schedule
2.2.1 Project Schedule
A kick-off meeting was held on May 14, 2014 with the Bank and representatives from the Ministry
of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD), the Public Investment Division (PID) and the
Fiscal Decentralization Unit (FDU) of the Ministry of Finance.

The inception report was delivered in draft on May 28, 2014 and in final form on June 25, 2014,
after which the activities were implemented, according to the following schedule:

 Key Activity                    Deliverable/output                   Date delivered
                                 Submitted Draft Assessment Report    July 24, 2014
 Activity I: Assessment          Stakeholder Workshop                 July 30, 2014
                                 Submitted Final Assessment Report    September 26, 2014
                                 Submitted Draft Guidance Manual      October 29, 2014
 Activity II: Develop Guidance
                                 Validation Workshop                  December 4, 2014
 Manual
                                 Submitted Final Guidance Manual      January 14, 2015
 Activity III: Pilot             PPP Design Report                    January 22, 2015
                                 Start-up Implementation Support      February 4 – March 27, 2015




2.3 Project Audience
The audience of the project comprised three key stakeholder groups representing the Government
of Ghana, and LG staff from the 216 MMDAs within Ghana. The three stakeholder groups
representing the GoG were the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development, the Fiscal
Decentralization Unit, and the Public Investment Division from the Ministry of Finance.

This broad engagement model enabled the project to benefit from multiple perspectives, taking
into consideration various interests in the project. This ultimately resulted in a more objective final
deliverable, with wider stakeholder ownership.

However, operationally, having multiple stakeholders means coordination of multiple interests and
schedules for the project presentations, etc. For this reason, and the necessary additional effort,
projects involving multiple stakeholders should consider larger budgets for project implementation.

Each of the stakeholders is discussed below.




                                                                                              |4
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


2.3.1 Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD)
MLGRD carries the portfolio responsibility for Local Government and is responsible for coordinating
among and representing all MMDAs at the central government level. In the future, its role is
expected to center more on local governments’ broader policy issues and legislation. At present,
MLGRD seeks to support MMDAs throughout the development phase of the PPP process as a liaison
and providing coordination among MMDAs and Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs).

2.3.2 Fiscal Decentralization Unit, Ministry of Finance (FDU)
The Fiscal Decentralization Unit is mainly tasked with supporting MMDAs to become fiscally
decentralized from – and therefore less reliant on – the central government.

2.3.3 Public Investment Division, Ministry of Finance (PID)
The Public Investment Division is the Government’s central facilitating PPP institution and supports
the PPP process through two of its units: the PPP Advisory Unit (PAU) and the Project and Financial
Analysis Unit (PFA). Every proposed PPP conceived, including those by MMDAs, is required to be
registered with the PID.

(i)     The PFA: The role of the PFA is gatekeeper, performing the financial assessments that
        determine the suitability of a project to a PPP model. These activities include:

           Screening PPP projects to ensure consistency with the National Infrastructure Plan and
            government policy;
           Verifying that the use of the PPP option is preferable and beneficial relative to direct
            public investment;
           Ensuring the financial viability and economic soundness of a project though Value for
            Money analysis;
           Examining the robustness of PPP contracts over the long term before contract signature;
           Ensuring compliance with good PPP procurement processes; and
           Overseeing the management and compliance of PPP Agreements/Concessions.
(i)     The PAU: The role of the PAU is more advisory than the PFA, aimed at supporting the
        agencies responsible for PPP delivery to develop structure and implement PPPs. In addition,
        the PAU provides capacity building for enabling PPP delivery. In particular, the role of the
        PAU involves:

           Providing value-added advice and support to Ministries, Departments and Agencies) and
            other Contracting Authorities in the public sector to identify, prepare feasibility analysis,
            structure, procure PPP projects and negotiate PPP contracts;
           Promoting awareness of Ghana’s PPP programme;
           Acting as a Centre of Excellence for PPPs in Ghana;
           Providing assistance and support services to MDAs and other Contracting Authorities that
            seek to develop and implement PPPs in their respective sectors, i.e. transportation,
            energy, water, social infrastructure, etc.
           Developing model agreements for each sector; and
           Assisting MDAs and other Contracting Authorities in understanding approval
            requirements for PPPs, and developing necessary documents for review.




                                                                                                |5
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


2.3.4 Local Government
In Ghana, there are three levels of sub-national government involved in local government activities:
Regional Coordinating Councils (RCC), MMDAs, and Urban, Town, Zonal or Area Councils, or Unit
Committees (ILGS, 2010).

Within the structure of local governments, MMDAs carry the main responsibility for developing
their own districts, while RCCs act as liaison and coordinator among MMDAs. In this respect, MMDAs
are the main institutional bodies that contract with the private sector and manage all revenue
collection within their districts.




3Objectives / Result Indicators
3.1 Overall Strategic Objectives
The overall strategic objective of the project was accomplished with development of the Guidance
Manual to help local governments engage with the private sector for delivery of public services.

This study was designed to complement other revenue outsourcing work. It reviewed and identified
best and worst practices in current MMDAs’ PPP arrangements, and developed the draft framework
for local revenue mobilization and collection in line with the National Policy on PPPs. The diagnostic
work of existing practices will be complementary to USAID reviews of PPPs in revenue collection in
the Western region.

The project is directly connected to the LGCSP Component 1, which focuses on strengthening fiscal
decentralization. The Component includes support to the Government to undertake work in five
key areas of public financial management reform, with a focus on revenue collection and
management (Sub-component 3). The five focal areas are:

    1.      Budgeting
    2.      Reporting and auditing
    3.      Revenue collection and management
    4.      Asset management
    5.      Social accountability

This project involved establishing a set of procedures for LGs to engage the private sector in an
effort to improve local revenue mobilization and provide valuable input into the development of
reform strategies and new PPP policies in Ghana. It supports the objectives of the LGCSP under
which performance grants will be used to reward cities that are able to increase local revenue
mobilization. Performance grants provide a strong incentive for cities to adopt such models as they
are able to leverage larger grants based on their revenue collection performance.

The activity is also linked to Component 2b of LGCSP support for capacity strengthening of urban
local governments, by creating a LG Guidance Manual for PPP projects.




                                                                                              |6
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


At the local government level, PPP projects are more community-oriented, presenting a clear
beneficial impact on the lives of community members, as their outputs are generally related to
increasing the welfare of the community through increased waste management systems, access to
water, and safe places to carry out business transactions, such as public markets.

The manual aims to distill the core of the National Policy on PPP, making it relevant and practical at
the scale of local government activities. In this respect, the manual translates complex technical
definitions, such as value for money and viability, into objective criteria that can be understood and
assimilated by local government authorities who frequently face capacity challenges. The manual
streamlines the PPP policy and process to enable its application in relatively simple administrative
and commercial contexts.



3.2 Operational Objectives
With the on-going fiscal reforms, the Ministry of Finance has been keen to ensure that local
governments realize the full potential of their local revenue mobilization operations. The MoF
sought World Bank support to develop the appropriate operational modalities to regularize and
deepen PPP arrangements for local revenue mobilizations operations.

In response, the Bank established a Technical Assistance project through the PPP Infrastructure
Advisory Facility. The assistance fits into the larger reforms on local government public financial
management that the Government is currently undertaking, led by the Fiscal Decentralization Unit
in the Ministry of Finance.




4Assessment of results and outcomes
4.1 General results
In general, this project resulted in a capacity building tool for LGs to use as a way to mobilize
revenues and increase service delivery. It has provided an operational procedure for LGs to
regularize and strengthen their engagement with the private sector for public service delivery,
whether via outsourcing or PPP.

There is a general interest among MMDAs in developing and implementing these types of projects,
as evidenced by their participation on the workshops and cooperation during data collection
exercises. The challenges facing LGs are critical, and there is a definite interest in receiving external
support to help with those challenges.

While the project has delivered an evidence-based tool for use by local governments, the Guidance
Manual will need to be published, disseminated, and delivered within a capacity training program
to fully realize its objective of strengthening the use of PPPs and other modes of engaging with the
private sector. Only after the capacity training program has been delivered, can the strategic and
operational objectives be fully realized: (i) strengthening public financial management; and (ii)




                                                                                                |7
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


introducing another operational mode to increase revenue collection and delivery of public service
by LGs.



4.2 Achieved objectives
The critical general issue addressed by this project was identifying alternative options for local
government financing of public services while increasing internally-generated funds (IGFs). The
project team analysed the option of increasing private sector participation in public service delivery
at the local government level. The team considered short-term, one-to-two year outsourcing
contracts and longer-term PPP arrangements. This was to identify and assess the practice and use
of PPPs in Ghana by LGs, to benchmark LGs’ capacity for implementing PPPs, and to produce a
manual to help MMDAs develop and deliver effective and realistic PPPs.

4.2.1 Assessment activity
The first of the three main activities was to assess the current practice of private sector engagement
to deliver public services and increase IGFs. This activity successfully uncovered the current
practices of local governments in their engagement with private sector.

The assessment included the following key findings:

   MMDAs are outsourcing revenue collection, mainly property rates from commercial payers as
    opposed to individuals.
   There was no clear link between outsourcing and increased revenue performance for the MMDAs
    covered by this study.
   Some of the challenges that MMDAs are facing with respect to outsourcing are being addressed
    by a variety of solutions. One of the more effective solutions is to assign payment collections to
    commercial banks which then receive payments from rate payers, circumventing the need for
    private outsource collectors. This method of bill payment is widely used for the payment of
    utilities bills in other jurisdictions.
   MMDAs need to follow clear and competitive procurement procedures when engaging and
    contracting with the private sector to collect MMDAs revenues. Only in this way will there be
    competitive pressure from the private sector to provide the most cost-efficient services.
   A standard contract template must be developed whereby certain key standard clauses are
    incorporated, covering such areas as force majeure, performance standards or key performance
    indices, post contract monitoring requirement, penalties for failure to adhere to contract terms
    and conditions, i.e. breach of contract.
   MMDA staff need capacity building in outsourcing, including training in the procurement
    procedures, contract negotiations and post-contract monitoring and auditing.
   MMDAs need to formally adopt the procedures laid out in the National PPP Policy for the
    development of PPPs.
   PPP should not be seen solely as a means of augmenting revenues of MMDAs but also as a means
    of providing improved services to citizens of the individual MMDA.




                                                                                              |8
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


In addition, the assessment report established the following key trends:

   96% of MMDAs surveyed were outsourcing collections related to Property Rates and basic rates.

   85% of MMDAs surveyed were outsourcing collections related to Business Operating Permits.

   LGs are collecting IGFs of approximately 5-10 Cedis per capita per year (US$1.50-3.00).

   There is no direct relationship between outsourcing and increased revenue generation mainly
    because contracts and engagements with the private sector have not been based on best
    practices.

The team was able to obtain a selection of contracts that local government had entered into with
private sector firms and assessed each with a view to identify issues. This exercise emphasized the
need for LGs to have access to contract templates that incorporate best practices. In this respect
the team worked with LGs to provide them with best practice examples of contracts.

The assessment activity also revealed that LGs were generally not transferring any risk to the private
sector, whether in contract arrangements they labelled as outsourcing or those considered to be
under a PPP arrangement. In this respect, LGs did not understand how to engage with and organize
their collaboration with the private sector. The private sector partner was often seen as dictating
the terms of the contract, sometimes resulting in sub-standard terms of contract for the local
government and resulting in contract disputes. For example, in one case, the private sector partner
was collecting property data on behalf of the local government as part of the contract, but as a
result of a contract dispute, the private sector partner would not release the database to the public
sector. Based on this discovery, the Manual includes an emphasis on the need for Transaction
Advisors to assist the public sector when entering into contracts with the private sector, and to
ensure that the public sector has the mechanisms in place to manage the contract on equal terms
with the private sector, rather than as the weak partner.




                                                                                              |9
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


4.2.2 Guidance Manual
The second activity was to develop a Guidance Manual for LGs with step-by-step instructions to
engage the private sector for delivery of public services. The manual was delivered on time, and
was further enhanced and updated through the consultative workshop with key stakeholders from
the national and local government level. The manual was endorsed at the validation workshop and
the changes proposed at the workshop were incorporated in the final version.
      Figure 1: Process schedule from the Guidance Manual




4.2.3 The Pilot
The third activity was to test the manual within one LG                   Guidance Manual
district to help determine whether it would be effective
for all LGs. The assessment report completed as Phase 1
of this project helped identify and recommend an MMA
in which to pilot the manual, based on the level of
advancement of a project within the district. The main
reason for this selection criteria was to test the manual
against a project that was already considered advanced
and identify ways the manual may guide the project to
completion or may identify reasons for the project
meeting barriers in its development. The stakeholder
group and the Bank approved the recommendation and
the Consultant carried out its pilot test of the manual.

A key challenge was the lengthy process of obtaining
approval of the pilot by the selected district due to the
number of stakeholders and number of LG districts that
could have been chosen. This process cut into the time
to carry out the pilot and therefore the Consultant
shortened the time for the pilot by one month.




                                                                                            |10
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


The pilot activity was nevertheless considered a success. It accomplished its goal of determining
whether the manual could effectively guide the LG through its private sector partnership. In
particular, by using the manual, the district identified the reasons for the challenges it faced in
implementing the project under a PPP arrangement. The main challenge for the project was to
negotiate a rate with the Electricity Company of Ghana (ECG) for buying back energy it produced in
its waste-to-energy and recycling project. The LG was relying on the feasibility and pre-feasibility
conducted by the private sector company and did not conduct its own feasibility study which it could
then use to enter negotiations with ECG. The manual clearly states the importance of the LG/public
sector entity to carry out its own feasibility studies. This way the LG and other public entities
involved in the project (in this case ECG) can be certain of the value for money from the project.

4.2.4 Summary
Each of the activities achieved their intended objectives, and with only one month delay in the
project completion.

The project has documented the need to improve public sector capacity in order to engage the
private sector for delivery of public services.

This need could be met by the building a capacity training program around the manual developed
in this project, and its subsequent publication and dissemination. There are six Metropolitan
Assemblies, 56 Municipal Assemblies, and 154 District Assemblies. Focusing first on the
Metropolitan and Municipal Assemblies, capacity training sessions would need to be held
throughout the ten regions of Ghana.




                                                                                           |11
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




4.3 Summary of activities and their strategic value
 Activity                                 Country       Strategic Value               Summary of key contribution and added value
 1. Review of legal framework being       Ghana         Input to Guidance             Review and analysis of the legal, institutional framework for
     used to implement PPPs                             Manual on PPPs for LG         implementation of PPPs and outsourcing contracts, taking into
                                                                                      consideration the new PPP policy; Assessment of PPP approval
                                                                                      process to distill and make in accessible format for LG; Capacity
                                                                                      support at national and LG level to manage and deliver on tools
                                                                                      and methodologies to strengthen internally-generated funds.
 2. Review legal contracts entered into   Ghana         Input to Guidance             Review and analysis of the legal contracts entered into by the LGs
    by LGs with private sector for                      Manual on PPPs for LG         with private sector firms whether in arrangements labelled as
    delivery of public services                                                       outsourcing or PPPs by LGs; Identify gaps in contracts and
                                                                                      misallocation of risks; Identify areas of non-conformity with
                                                                                      contract best practices; Identify capacity support at national and
                                                                                      LG level to manage and deliver on tools and methodologies to
                                                                                      strengthen contract development and management.
 3. Review and assessment of existing     Ghana         Input to Guidance             Detailed analysis at LG level of the use and effectiveness of PPPs
    PPP and outsourcing practices in                    Manual on PPPs for LG         and outsourcing practices to increase IGFs; Summary of gaps and
    LGs                                                                               recommendations for improving and strengthening the use of
                                                                                      both forms of public service delivery for future projects.
 4. Design stakeholder workshop to        Ghana         Input to Guidance             Identify list of key actors for verification of findings; Conduct
    present and verify assessment                       Manual on PPPs for LG         workshop that delivers the key points of the findings and receive
    findings of the assessment study                                                  comments from participants in an open format; Incorporate
                                                                                      comments from participants into the final assessment report.
 5. Develop an appropriate guidance      Ghana          Implementation        to      Creation of a capacity building tool to strengthen public finance
    manual which integrates national                    contribute to goals of        management by providing direction on an alternative form of
    and international best practices and                Component 1 of the            increasing revenue; Strengthen and regularize modes of
    the policy, legal and regulatory                    LGCSP, which focuses          engagement with private sector to deliver public services;
    framework requirements of Ghana                     on       strengthening        Increase protection for LGs from stronger contract development
                                                        fiscal decentralization.      and contract management.



                                                                                                                                                   |12
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


 6. Design and execute the national       Ghana         Validation          of        Obtain validation of manual for use by LG to meet intended
    stakeholder session to validate and                 contribution to LGCSP         objectives; Ascertain best way to follow through to publish,
    finalize the Guidance Manual.                                                     disseminate and build capacity training program around manual.
 7. Design and support the initial        Ghana         Pilot contribution to         Apply the Guidance Manual in one district to one project that the
    implementation of a PPP                             LGCSP                         district is attempting to deliver as a PPP; Identify the extent of the
    arrangement for enhanced revenue                                                  project’s implementation in the PPP manual in order to map out
    collection as per the Guidance                                                    an implementation plan for the remainder of the project based
    Manual in one Metropolitan and                                                    on the manual; Validate the value of the manual for LG audience
    Municipal Assembly through the                                                    and for use in PPP implementation support.
    development of core activities, and
    an implementation plan.




                                                                                                                                                      |13
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




5 Summary and lessons learned
5.1 Summary
In summary, each activity of the project has provided greater insight into the existing practices of
LGs as they engage the private sector in delivering much-needed public services. At present, the
Guidance Manual provides a reasonable start to a nationwide process of familiarizing LGs with
Public Private Partnerships and other modes of private sector engagement, such as outsourcing.

5.1.1 Regional and Global Perspectives
Ghana has demonstrated a commitment and dedication to developing the institutional, legal and
political framework to successfully deliver PPP projects. This effort surpasses that of other countries
throughout the region (e.g. Cote d’Ivoire, Togo, Burkina Faso), although lessons can be learned from
the examples in Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda.1

The Uganda case highlighted the need for improved data collection on local government property
rates and other revenue bases in order to effectively monitor private agents’ performance and
negotiate rates with outsourcing agents. It also illustrates that the problems with outsourcing in
Ghana are not new and the recommendations in the Guidance Manual can provide effective
solutions.

The main lesson learned from the experience of outsourcing in Tanzania is the need for accurate
revenue assessments in advance of the procurement process. Poor assessments of potential
revenue led to overly ambitious bids by private agents, and given the local governments’ lack of
capacity to monitor private agents’ performance, the LGs suffered revenue losses. Additionally, it
was found that outsourcing contracts longer than one year provided no real benefit for the LGs, as
the private agent did not assume any additional risk in exchange for the security of the longer term
contract.

In Nigeria, the passage of a law providing the legal framework for pursuing PPP projects led to the
implementation of significant PPP projects and provided tangible benefits to residents of Lagos.

Although the population of Accra is much smaller than Lagos, the metropolitan and municipal
assemblies in the Greater Accra area could learn from Lagos how to improve its own PPP Unit, in
particular, by increasing its staff and contracting external consultants to help develop the Unit’s P PP
project pipeline. This will enable the PPP Unit to achieve a realistic project pipeline for subsequent
selective implementation.



   1 In 2008, the most densely populated state in Nigeria, Lagos, set up the Lagos State Public Private Partnership Office (LSPPP)
   within its executive council. In 2011 the state enacted its own PPP law called the Lagos State Public Partnership Bill that established
   the LSPPP into law. The LSPPP was professionally staffed comprising specialists in accounting and finance, procurement,
   engineering, construction, law, and project management and was headed by a professionally qualified Director-General. External
   consultants were hired to set up the office and help the LSPPP identify a PPP project pipeline. The PPP models used by the LSPPP
   cover the whole spectrum of PPP models.




                                                                                                                                             |14
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


Experience shows that outsourcing revenue collection is not the key to growing IGFs for Ghana. The
success or failure of outsourcing (measured in terms of revenue growth) largely depends on a local
governments’ access to data, ability to make accurate assessments of its revenue base, and capacity
to monitor the private agent to ensure they are meeting the target.

With respect to PPPs, there are significant possible financial benefits for local governments which
could no doubt be reproduced in Ghana if the right conditions were in place. The size of the projects
MMDAs may consider pursuing are small so bundling them might be the best way to make them
bankable, as suggested in the Canadian experience. The success of this structure however would
depend on the ability to obtain a long-term agreement between MMDAs. To implement such
projects, MMDAs would require the assistance of external consultants to develop a robust PPP
project pipeline, as was done in Nigeria.

Outside of the region, the trend of engaging the private sector to deliver on public sector services
has not slowed. As the trend continues, it is increasingly critical to use best practices to implement
these types of projects. The key challenge, however, is that project development costs – related to
properly structuring a project in advance of implementation – have also not slowed. These costs are
burdensome for emerging LGs and tend to be the reason projects are not implementable. While
there is a renewed focus on supplying this demand through the Ghana Infrastructure Investment
Fund (GIIF), more could be done to focus on this financing gap in the short term.

This section summarizes a few lessons learned during the process of completing the activities that
comprise this project.



5.2 Lessons learned and recommendations going forward
The project gave way to lessons learned which are provided here:

The workshop format
A key contributing factor for the success of the workshop was its format. The workshop
commenced with a brief introduction to the manual (30 mins), followed by a group plenary session.
The participants were split into four small groups. Each group had its own room to gather, review
the manual, and formulate answers to discussion questions. The groups were given an hour to
complete their answers after which they regrouped together to present their answers and
comments on the manual.

This format was extremely effective, providing participants who are very busy with day-to-day
responsibilities of their jobs, the opportunity to focus on the material and provide thoughtful
comments.

       Workshop participants should be given at least an hour to review new material and provide
        feedback. Preliminary questions should be provided to initiate and guide discussion. Small
        group exercises are best for validating results.

Communicating and defining technical terms
Without a robust familiarity with PPPs, some technical terms used within the discourse of PPPs
require detailed definition and elaboration in order to be communicated clearly. For example, one
key benefit of properly structured PPPs – transferring construction risk from the public to the private



                                                                                                          |15
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


sector – has not been clearly understood, and some LGs believe the project sponsor (public entity)
is still responsible for costs of construction overruns.

What needs to be emphasized in PPPs is that the private sector pays for unforeseen construction
costs (“construction risks”). Moreover, private sector bids will not inflate costs to cover unforeseen
construction costs if there is a sufficient amount of bidder competition (a bidder will not overbid if
they want to win the contract).

       Connecting abstract terms such as                          Examples of Ways to Communicate
        “construction risk” to concrete descriptions of            Technical Terms / Concepts in PPP
        the way they are affected in PPPs is key to
        increasing capacity in PPPs, and moreover             When structured well, in PPPs the public
                                                              sector does not pay for increases in
        increasing their acceptance.                          construction costs. The private investor pays
                                                              for any and all construction cost overruns
Bundling small scale PPPs                                     (“Construction risks are transferred to the
Larger PPPs offer more value for money. Therefore,            private sector”)
while each LG district is responsible for its own                  *                  *                  *
development, many share common goals and needs,
creating a good reason to justify partnering to deliver       When properly advertised, there will be
public services through PPPs.                                 enough competition in bids to ensure that
                                                              private investors do not inflate the costs in
       Provide PPP pipeline development advisory             their bids.
        services to support local governments early
        on, helping them identify the best projects and where they can bundle projects to move
        forward. In one district, an opportunity to bundle projects was missed because the local
        government was unaware of the possibility of bundling such projects. More focus needs to
        be placed on PPP pipeline development for projects.

Simplify PPP model
Since local governments in developing countries face similar challenges and usually require
greenfield infrastructure projects to increase service delivery, a PPP model that will suit this type of
project is “Design-Build-Operate-Maintain-Transfer”. Focusing on how this model works could
simplify the complexity of PPPs. In Philippines, they have a Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) law, “An
Act Authorizing the Financing, Construction, Operation and Maintenance of Infrastructure Projects
by the Private Sector and for Other Purposes”, as Amended by Republic Act No. 7718.

       Provide clear messaging on BOT projects because these are the types of PPP projects that
        will generally be delivered by local governments. Moving away from the generic and
        abstract term “PPP” to focus on “BOT” projects gives the projects a more concrete form that
        might be more understandable at the local level.



5.3 Dissemination and Next Steps
The Guidance Manual is planned to be formally endorsed and disseminated by the Local
Government Service Secretariat (LGSS) which is responsible for all training at the MMDA level. LGSS
will also be expected to make provisions for roll-out of training in the manual to all 216 MMDAs,
including the development of relevant training modules. The Local Government Capacity Support




                                                                                                              |16
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


Project, under Component 2b, can provide financing for the training roll-out, expected in 2015-16.
As part of the ongoing dialogue with the Government under LGCSP, the Bank will ensure that this
training takes place. Furthermore, through the LGCSP, the 46 metropolitan and municipal local
governments that are targeted by the project will be in a position to benefit from technical
assistance to develop their own PPP and outsourcing initiatives for implementation. This provides
an excellent opportunity to further test and apply the Guidance Manual, improve the existing PPPs
and extend the use of PPPs to new Metropolitan and Municipal Assemblies and new areas of service.




                                                                                                     |17
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




Appendix A: List of stakeholders
World Bank Team
Mr. Jonas Parby, World Bank, Washington, DC

Mr. Smile Kwawukume, World Bank, Ghana



Stakeholders
Ministry of Finance

Mrs. Magdalene Apenteng, Director, Public Investment Division (PID), MoF

Mr. Ekow Coleman, PPP Advisory Unit, PID, MoF

Mr. Frederick Darty, Project and Financial Analysis Unit, PID, MoF

Mr. Joseph Antwi, Head of Fiscal Decentralization Unit (FDU), Ministry of Finance (MoF)

Mrs. Akua A. Asamoah, FDU, MoF

Mrs. Evelyn Arthur, FDU, MoF



Ministry of Local Government

Mr. Samuel Seth Passah, Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD)

Mr. Yama Tampuri, Chief Local Government Inspector, Inspectorate Division, MLGRD

Mr. Inusah Shirazu, Senior Development Planning Officer, MLGRD

Ms. Agnes Lamptey, Chief Local Government Inspector, MLGRD



Local Government Services Secretariat

Gregory Addah, Head, PPBM, LGSS



Local Government representatives, including:

    -   Mr. Aryee, Director of Finance, AMA

    -   Lydia Addy, Head of Budget, AMA

    -   Richard Fiadomor, Special Assistant to MCE, TMA




                                                                                          |18
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection


    -   Metro Finance Officer, TMA

    -   Hon. John Kwao Sackey, Municipal Chief Executive, Ga East

    -   Alex Amoah, Assistant Development Planning Officer, Ga East

    -   J.A. Asihene, Coordinating Director, Ashiaman

    -   K. Mensah, Municipal Development Planning Officer, Ashiaman




                                                                                      |19
Project Completion Report | Strengthening the Role of PPPs in LG Revenue Collection




Appendix B: List of Activities completed
 Activity                         Deliverable/output                   Date delivered
 Kick-Off Meeting                 VC                                   May 14, 2014
                                  Draft Inception Report               May 28, 2014
 Inception mission
                                  Final Inception Report               June 25, 2014
                                  Field work, Data collection          June – July, 2014
                                  Submitted Draft Assessment Report    July 24, 2014
 Activity I: Assessment
                                  Stakeholder Workshop                 July 30, 2014
                                  Submitted Final Assessment Report    September 26, 2014
                                  Submitted Draft Guidance Manual      October 29, 2014
 Activity II: Develop Guidance
                                  National Validation Workshop         December 4, 2014
 Manual
                                  Submitted Final Guidance Manual      January 14, 2015
 Activity III: Pilot              PPP Design Report                    January 22, 2015
                                  Start-up Implementation Support      February 4 – March 27, 2015




                                                                                                     |20
