                                                                                                     97838




    The Imperative of Skills Development for the Structural Transformation of Sub-Saharan
                Africa: Potential for China-World Bank-Africa Collaboration

                                               Sajitha Bashir1
                                                 May 2015

                                                  Summary

China’s growing investments in Africa’s infrastructure, energy, and, increasingly, light
manufacturing and services, sectors have the potential of contributing substantially to the structural
transformation of the continent. The increasing trade with China and the possibility of China-
Africa global and regional value chains in different sectors also signal new forms of cooperation.
Apart from the traditional sectors of investment, the Chinese government has pledged its support
to other areas of development such as urbanization, the modernization of agriculture, and green,
skills development and low carbon technologies. All of this means that China can play a central
role in helping African countries diversify their productive sectors and expand economic
opportunities.

Experience from East Asia suggests that the impacts of investments by Chinese firms and greater
trade with China in manufacturing, agriculture and services on better quality, more productive jobs
could be very large. For this to happen, however, medium- and large-sized domestic firms that can
compete in export markets need to emerge. China’s market and the transfer of manufacturing tasks
from China to African countries could lead to the creation of better quality jobs in the non-
agricultural sectors.

Government policy and the business environment are critical ingredients for successful transition.
China’s own development experience, as well as lessons from other East Asian countries, shows
that investment in education and training—good quality basic education with targeted investments
in vocational training, higher education and science and technology—to create the skilled labor
force and professionals were absolutely essential to support the transformation of their economies.

At present, foreign companies, including Chinese firms, engaged in Sub-Saharan African countries
encounter serious skills constraints. In the short term, and especially in order to deliver large scale
infrastructure projects on time, Chinese firms have often resorted to importing skilled labor in

1
 Sajitha Bashir is Practice Manager in the Education Global Practice, World Bank. The author wishes to thank
China Development Bank, Shuilin Wang (World Bank), Aileen Marshall (World Bank) and Peter Materu (World
Bank) for comments provided on earlier drafts. (STANDARD DISCLAIMER REQUIRED)
addition to qualified professionals (engineers, architects). This reliance on Chinese skilled
workers is a distinctive feature of Chinese investment in Africa. Chinese firms have sometimes
also taken African workers to China for training, but this is not a viable long term strategy, because
of the associated high labor costs.

The Government of China has responded to requests from African governments, via the African
Union and in particular, the triennial Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC), for
investments in Technical Vocational Centres and universities, additional scholarships for study in
China, and joint research. These efforts are much appreciated by African countries and there are
some remarkable examples of success. African countries have also indicated a great desire to learn
from China’s experience in developing a skilled labor force. There is scope for considerable
expansion of these efforts. To date, the investments in training, while important, are not yet
commensurate with the enormous investments in infrastructure, energy and other sectors.
Moreover, they are carried out with several different Government Ministries and agencies, which
makes it difficult to assess the total quantum of assistance being provided for skills development.
In addition, as the skills development programs in many African countries tend to be of low quality
and labor market relevance, for a variety of reasons, there is a great need to focus on improving
the quality and content of programs and on the system-level mechanisms required for private
sector-oriented skills development. More systematic information about the investment by Chinese
firms in training of African workers and the impact of on-going programs to support
technical/vocational training , scholarships and the collaboration between Chinese and African
universities under the 20-20 program would greatly help to target future support.

Under the Partnership for Skills in Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (PASET),
launched by several African countries and the World Bank to build partnerships with new Partners,
Chinese academic institutions have participated in analytical work and in sharing the experiences
of China in the development of capacity in vocational training and science and technology. The
PASET is a regional initiative to build the skilled labor force in Africa (from technical vocational
to higher education and research) for priority sectors, with clear objectives and targets, and
provides a platform to align the investments and efforts of different partners. The most recent
regional PASET forum, held in Dakar in June 2014, issued a Call to Action, with very specific
objectives and targets for building skills for priority sectors. China’s participati on in PASET is
much appreciated by both participating African countries and the World Bank.

This paper proposes three ways in which China and the World Bank could collaborate in the area
of skills development in Africa, building on the experience of both and recent efforts at
collaboration. First, under the PASET initiative, China and the World Bank could undertake joint
analytical work to assess the skills needs for different sectors in individual countries, continue
the benchmarking of African universities piloted with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, share the
development experience of China through targeted learning visits, and share experiences in skills
development through regional forums. The participation of Chinese institutions and firms in such
events would enable them to learn about the perspectives and concerns of African counterparts.
The Partnership Facility Trust Fund that China proposed to set in the World Bank Group could
help with financing such activities. While China has traditionally worked with the African Union,
the possibility of also collaborating with the World Bank through the PASET combines strong
ownership of the agenda by Sub-Saharan African countries with high level impact and visibility.
Second, China could support the regional initiatives of the PASET such as the establishment of
the Regional Scholarship Fund for postgraduate studies in applied sciences, engineering and
technology; the proposed regional TVET centres of excellence; and co-financing of the regional
Africa Centres of Excellence project, currently financed by the World Bank. This would
supplement China’s on-going investments, which could also benefit from the experience of well-
designed programs with strong monitoring and evaluation.

Third, China could co-finance country-level projects which are being prepared with World Bank
assistance, focusing on technical/vocational and higher education. This will enable Chinese
Ministries and institutions to learn from the experience of the World Bank and contribute to the
development of the education and training system in Sub-Saharan African countries, while also
contributing China’s experience in a concrete fashion. This may greatly enhance the impact of
China’s bilateral investments in this area. For the Sub-Saharan African countries, this would be
beneficial because there will be alignment of different partners. For the World Bank, there is the
opportunity to learn from and adapt China’s experience to other countries in the region and across
the world.
1. Introduction

The scale of China’s investments in Sub-Saharan Africa is impressive but these figures will be
small if future projections of Chinese investments materialize. Premier Li Keqiang in his recent
visit to Africa2 predicted that trade volume with Africa would double by 2020 to US $400 billion.
Further, Chinese foreign direct investment (FDI) will increase to US$ 100 billion in the same time
period. Not only are the levels of investment rising but the sectors where Chinese firms are
investing are becoming more diversified. In the past, investments focused primarily on
infrastructure and energy, but in the future, Premier Li Keqiang emphasized that China-Africa
collaboration would be in areas such as industrialization, urbanization, modernization of
agriculture, and green and low carbon technologies, among others.3

A central factor in ensuring that these investments deliver on economic and social returns for both
China and Africa depends on the quantity and quality of skills in African countries. These include
the competencies (literacy, numeracy, non-cognitive skills such as punctuality, discipline etc) of
unskilled workers, which is imparted by basic education, as well as the mid-level skills of
technicians and higher level skills of professionals such as engineers, scientists, accountants, and
others.

Moreover, for Sub Saharan African countries to embark on the process of sustained structural
transformation and attain middle income status, emulating the experience of China and other East
Asian countries, including the emergence of ‘export capable’ domestic firms, is essential (Yusuf,
2014). In the initial stages, the emergence of such domestic firms has been strongly driven by
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). However, many policy ingredients are required for a broad-
based transformation, including the creation of the appropriate business environment and
investment in infrastructure. Among these policy ingredients, the creation of a skilled labor force,
particularly amongst the young, was an important factor in the success of all East Asian countries.
FDI itself often contributes to raising the skill level of the labor force, as foreign firms tend to
invest more in training of their own workers and of their suppliers, and skilled workers employed
in foreign firms migrate to domestic firms. Government policy can often help to reinforce these
trends through, for instance, including provisions for employment and training of local workers as
well as encouraging foreign firms to invest in broader training efforts that benefit the sector as a
whole.

China’s investment in infrastructure, energy and in manufacturing and services in Sub Saharan
Africa countries can play an even more important role in the process of structural transformation
of the region if there is a concerted effort to raise the skill level of the labor force. Both the
Government of China and Chinese firms can contribute to this effort.

China has responded positively to requests from African countries for support in
vocational/technical training, higher education and science and technology. This assistance could

2
  Premier Li Keqiang toured Sub-Saharan Africa in May 2014 vising Ethiopia, Nigeria, Angola and Kenya to discuss
developing relationships between China and the region.
3
  http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1505388/trade-africa-will-double-2020-li-keqiang-tells-ethiopia-
conference
have a much greater significant impact on developing skills in the countries if it were closely
aligned to their economic potential and priority sectors. In the short run, this assistance could also
support the efforts of Chinese firms to invest in Africa by increasing the quality and quality of
labor. Indeed, some Chinese firms have reacted to the shortage of skills in Africa by importing
even semi-skilled labor to complete projects on time, and almost exclusive reliance on Chinese
technical and professional workers. While this strategy may bring a solution in short-term returns,
it is not viable in the long run as the cost of Chinese labor rises and it does not contribute to the
structural transformation of African economies.

Enhancing both how skills are delivered and the range and quality of skills will be a critical pillar
for the economic transformation of African countries and whether many of them achieve their goal
of reaching middle income countries (MIC) status. Separately, both the Chinese Government and
the World Bank have directly or indirectly financed initiatives and projects focused on improving
the quality of skills in the region. With China being the largest investor in Africa – US$ 21 billion
in 2010 – (Wagle and Paudel, 2014), and the World Bank being one of the larger investors in skills
development on the continent, there is a strong case for greater collaboration and synergy of
projects and initiatives for the purpose of delivering greater impact and building the basis for long-
term prosperity.

Section 2 of this paper discusses the broader trends in Chinese investments and types of Chinese
firms investing in Sub Saharan Africa and their implications for skills requirements. Section 3
examines and summarizes the results of a study of Chinese firms in Ethiopia and how they meet
their skills needs, comparing them with domestic firms and examining the broader implications of
their actions. Section 4 lays out the current skill levels in Sub Saharan Africa and the priorities for
skills development. Section 5 presents China’s support for skills development in Sub Saharan
African countries, based on an analysis of different data sources from China, and suggests ways
for increasing the impact of existing modalities of cooperation as well as new modalities. Section
6 proposes some concrete methods for collaboration between China and the World Bank for
enhancing skill development in Sub Saharan Africa aligned to the goal of structural transformation.

2. Chinese FDI and Firms in Sub-Saharan Africa

Sub-Saharan Africa has seen a substantial increase in FDI. In the past decade, FDI flows in the
region increased from US$6.3 billion in 2000 to US$35 billion in 2012 (Wagle and Paudel, 2014).
FDI flows to Sub-Saharan Africa only equals 2.5 percent of total global FDI flows but this is
greater than capital flows that are generated through remittances and official development aid to
the continent. There is a potential for this FDI to contribute to the structural transformation of
Africa, if the policy ingredients mentioned above are present, including a skilled labor force which
is available to work in growth sectors of the economy.

The largest inflows to Sub Saharan Africa come from Southern investors and China is the largest
among this group. Chinese FDI to 15 Sub Saharan African countries (SSA-154, which account for
four-fifths of all FDI in the region in 2012) increased by six times between 2004 -2010, from
US$242 million to US $ 13.88 billion (see Table 1). This compares with an increase in Chinese

4
 Among the SSA-15, Nigeria and Mozambique are the largest recipients, followed by South Africa, Ghana, DRC,
Congo and Sudan.
FDI to Africa as a whole from 317 million in 2004 to US$21.12 billion in 2010. Detailed figures
for each country destination are not available for the latest year but aggregate figures suggest that
global flows from China expanded to US$84 billion in 2012, and based on past trends, the region
would have continued to have benefited significantly from these flows. In addition, there may be
additional investment from China as offshore investment via Hong Kong and other economies.
Although increasing in volume, in 2010, Chinese FDI flows to Africa only accounted for about 2
percent of total Chinese global FDI.

Table 1: FDI Outflows from China (US$ million)




Source: Wagle, 2014

Chinese FDI flows into Sub Saharan African countries are channeled through four main types of
firms (Kaplinsky and Morris, 2009). The differences between these firms, which is a distinctive
feature of Chinese FDI, also has implications for what the Chinese government can do to encourage
Chinese firms to invest in skills development. The four broad categories are (i) Central
government State Owned Enterprises (SOEs); (ii) Provincial government SOEs; (iii) private
owned enterprises, incorporated in China and Sub Saharan African countries; and (iv) small firms,
incorporated in Sub Saharan African countries, often started by Chinese individuals living in the
countries. Investment by the latter is probably not captured at all in official FDI statistics.
This proliferation of investor types also accounts for the broad sectoral distribution and
segmentation of Chinese FDI and its distinctive impact on local economies. The large SOEs invest
primarily in natural resources, infrastructure and construction, receiving financing from China
Development Bank, China’s EXIM Bank and other Chinese banks, and often supported by
government to government agreements. The private owned enterprises are largely self-financed
and invest in manufacturing and services (such as telecommunications). The fourth category
consists of very small Chinese investors who operate in small scale manufacturing and retail trade,
and are themselves the offshoot of the employment policies of large Chinese SOEs.

The total number of Chinese firms operating in Sub Saharan African countries is not accurately
known but is estimated to be about 2000.5 These firms operate in a range of sectors, as mentioned
above. Figure 1 provides an estimate.

Figure 1: China’s FDI stock in Africa by end of 2011




Source: http://www.wri.org/blog/2014/05/where-are-chinese-investments-africa-headed.

3. How Chinese Firms in Sub Saharan Africa Meet Labor and Skill Needs

Very little is known about the employment profile of Chinese firms operating in Sub Saharan
African countries. One estimate indicates that in 2013, approximately 215,000 Chinese workers
came to Africa to work, which was 18 percent higher than 2011.6 The number of Chinese living
in Africa is estimated to range between 1 million to 2 million; and it is possible that many of these
are former employees of Chinese SOEs who have decided to remain. An early study on the China’s
role in infrastructure development in Africa, which drew on field work with construction
companies in Angola, Sierra Leone, Tanzania, Zambia and China, noted that “Labour has been an
extremely contentious issue in all the countries surveyed” (Corkin et al, 2008). The study found that
the general perception that Chinese firms bring in their own labor instead of using local labor is not
necessarily true; however, local workers tended to be “predominantly employed as unskilled, casual


5
    In 2006, UNCTAD estimated that 700 Chinese enterprises were operating in Africa (Kaplinksy and Morris, 2009)
6
    http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304788404579519631654112594
workers” (Ibid). Overall, due to lack of data, it is difficult to gauge the local employment effects of
the massive investments in infrastructure and energy by Chinese enterprises.

A recent World Bank study of labor and skills issues in Chinese firms in Ethiopia sheds some light
on these issues. 7 The study draws on a survey of the universe of Chinese firms known to the
Chinese Embassy to be operating operation in Ethiopia in 2012 and compares this to a sub-sample
of domestic firms in the World Bank Enterprise survey for 2011 to highlight differences between
Chinese and domestic firms. 8 Despite the fact that Chinese FDI has changed in its volume and
composition, this study gives some important insights related to the issues of types of firms and
labor practices.

The Chinese firms in the sample were overwhelmingly privately owned (the third category of the
four categories described earlier) with only 14 percent being government-owned. In line with the
broad classification given earlier, government owned firms operated in construction and
transportation sectors. The privately owned firms were in manufacturing as well as services. There
are relatively few joint ventures with Ethiopians.

This relatively small number of Chinese firms are significant employers in Ethiopia. Chinese firms
accounted for 18,368 full-time (FT) jobs equivalent to 6.5 percent of the total FT permanent jobs
(282,306) in the formal non-agricultural sector in Ethiopia. Of these full-time jobs, 86 percent are
held by Ethiopians as are 99 percent of the temporary jobs created in these firms. Median wages
in Chinese firms US$2296) are higher than in domestic firms (US$1380).

Despite this significant creation of better quality jobs, relatively few of the skilled and professional
positions are held by Ethiopians. Table 3 presents the occupational and skill profile of Chinese
firms (with the caveat that data is missing on the occupation profiles of half the firms). 93 percent
of all professional positions and 67 percent of skilled production workers in these firms are
Chinese. Among all Chinese employees, 46 percent are professional workers while 20 percent are
skilled production workers.




7
  Trang Tran.2014. “Labor issues in Chinese FDI firms in Ethiopia.” Mimeo. All of the discussion in this section draws
on this paper.
8
   In total 86 firms were sent questionnaires, of which 69 firms remained in the final sample. Most of these firms
were in manufacturing sector (45 percent) with the rest equally distributed in construction and transportation and
services. Size-wise, most of these firms were large or medium sized.
Table 3: Occupation and Skill Profile in Chinese Firms.

  Variable                                     Obs        Mean        Sd          Min         Max
  Percentage professional employees            30         44.0        26.7        4.3         100
  Percentage skilled production workers        31         23.1        27.1        0.0         100

  Percentage of professionals among 59                    46.2        28.8        0.0         100
  Chinese employees
  Percentage of skilled production workers 58             19.7        27.2        0.0         100
  among Chinese employees

  Percentage professionals staffed by 30                  92.9        17.4        40.0        100
  Chinese employees
  Percentage skilled production workers 18                66.9        48.2        0.0         100
  staffed by Chinese employees

This may indicate the preference of Chinese firms for home workers, but another explanation is
that there is an insufficient supply of skilled Ethiopian workers for the types of jobs that are
required. More than 50 percent of Chinese firms indicated that an inadequately educated
workforce is a major or severe constraint to their operations, compared to just 4 percent of domestic
firms. This perception is stronger for manufacturing and construction sectors. This may indicate
the fact that Chinese firms operate in different markets and operate on a large scale, and hence
demand a different type and quality of skills. What is equally interesting that even those firms that
have operated in Ethiopia for a long time—and for whom, hence information about securing better
quality workers is presumably not a problem—indicate that the quality of skills is a constraint.

A significantly greater proportion of Chinese firms (75 percent) invest in training of workers
compared to domestic firms (27 percent) (see Figure 2). Furthermore, a greater percentage of
Ethiopian workers (69 percent) benefit from training, compared to Chinese workers (40 percent).
Larger firms tend to offer more training, and training is also positively correlated with several
measures of education—both findings are consistent with findings from the broader literature,
suggesting that Chinese firms operate according to similar parameters.
Figure 2: Incidence of training in Chinese FDI firms, by worker national and firm sector and
size


                                      By sector                                                      By size
    .8




                                                                           .8
    .6




                                                                           .6
    .4




                                                                           .4
    .2




                                                                           .2
     0




                                                                            0

           Construction              Manufacturing              Services        Small                 Medium                Large
                          Chinese workers            Ethiopian workers                  Chinese workers        Ethiopian workers




It is difficult to generalize from this study, not only because of the small size of the sample, but
also because Ethiopia is different from many other SSA countries in several respects. Even by
Sub Saharan African standards, the average education level of its workforce is low, since the
country has only started to invest in education during the last twenty five years. Nevertheless,
Ethiopia has made considerable efforts to invest in technical/vocational education and to channel
tertiary education students into science streams. It has attracted relatively little FDI and also has
a small domestic manufacturing sector. Hence, the supply of “skilled” workers in terms of
numbers may not be a constraint. What is more likely to be constrained is the quality of the
technicians and tertiary education graduates.

Nevertheless, the study’s findings throw some light on commonly held perceptions about the
operations of Chinese firms. In Ethiopia, there has been a high level of dependence on skilled
Chinese labor, whether due to preference or lack of local supply. This can limit the “spillover”
benefits from Chinese FDI. On the other hand, the significant employment creation effects as well
as firm level investment in training contradict general perceptions.9 While firm-based training is
useful for firm-specific skills, it is likely that Chinese firms are also investing in training of local
workers in generic skills or broader occupational skills. Transferring the training in such skills to
local institutions could both lower the costs of training to firms and help firms expand production.
At the same, it would help to create a skilled labor force that could benefit a broader group of firms
in the sector, both foreign and domestic, and help improve productivity.



9
  It is possible that the employment effect is high in Ethiopia because of the small size of its non-agricultural
sector, especially manufacturing.
4. The Magnitude of Skill Shortage in Africa: Current Status and Priorities

Sub-Saharan Africa lags behind other regions in the average skill level of its population. Although
this has been increasing in recent years, the pace of growth is relatively slow, and certainly does
not match the rapid increase in investment in physical infrastructure in recent years.

One measure of the stock of human capital is the average years of education of the population,
aged 25 years and more (that is, when most people have completed their education). Using a
world-wide dataset Figure 2 shows the growth in this stock in Sub Saharan Africa compared to
other regions of the world. 10

The average years of education is about 3 years, which is similar to the level for South Asia about
25 years ago. It is interesting to note that several regions were at similar levels as Sub Saharan
Africa about forty years ago, but have since made significant advances.

This low average education attainment is largely due to the fact that, even as now, a large
proportion of young Africans do not complete even basic education. Therefore, the proportion of
the population with less than basic education continues to exceed that with higher levels of
education. Over the last 20 years, African countries and development partners are investing
heavily in universalising access to primary and basic education. With rapid increase in access,
quality has deteriorated and poor learning outcomes compromise the gains of expanding coverage,
while also limiting the students who can access post-basic education and tertiary education.




10
     Some countries in the SSA region are not included in the dataset for lack of data.
Figure 2: Average years of education of population aged 25 years and more (SSA/other
regions)



                               12


                                                                              Europe and
                               10
                                                                              Central Asia
  Average years of education




                                                                                                     East Asia and
                                8                                       Latin America and             the Pacific
                                                                          the Caribbean
                                                                                                    Middle East
                                                                                                  and North Africa
                                6                                                                        Central
                                                                                                        America
                                                                                                     South
                                4                                                                     Asia


                                2                                                            Sub-Saharan
                                                                                                Africa

                                0
                                    1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995      2000         2005         2010
                                                                Year
 Note: Author’s calculations based on Barro and Lee dataset (2014) for Educational Attainment for Population Aged
 25 and Over (version 2.0)

However, there are enormous differences within the SSA region, reflecting past investments in
basic education. Figure 3 shows the range for just some countries in the Eastern and Southern
African region.
Figure 3: Average years of education of population aged 25 years and more – Selected
countries in Eastern and Southern Africa



                                10                                                           South Africa

                                 9                                                                   Botswana

                                 8                                                                   Mauritius
   Average years of education




                                                                                                     Zimbabwe
                                 7

                                 6                                                               Kenya
                                                                                             ESA Uganda
                                 5                                                               Tanzania
                                                                                                 SSA
                                 4
                                                                                                     Rwanda
                                 3
                                                                                                     Burundi
                                 2

                                                                                                    Mozambique
                                 1

                                 0
                                     1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005      2010
                                                                 Year
 Note: ESA= Average for Eastern and Southern Africa sub-region of World Bank. Individual countries are countries
 in the ESA area.

Providing quality basic education (8-9 years) to all African children will continue to be a priority
for African governments, as most new employment opportunities during the next decade will
require relatively low skills (basic literacy and numeracy and non-cognitive traits will suffice).

However, looking beyond 2025, several of the larger countries, which could potentially diversify
into more sophisticated higher technology activities, will be in need of more advanced skills
beyond basic education, and especially in the applied sciences, engineering and technology
(ASET). Moreover, even in the near term, a “critical level” of these skills will be needed to initiate
the process of technological absorption and prepare the groundwork for a broadening of the
industrial base. This requires training of workers in tertiary level and technical/ vocational
institutions.

The proportion of the population with higher education is extremely small, even in the middle-
income countries as well as in potential middle income countries, compared to comparator
countries such as Malaysia or Vietnam (Figures 4a and 4 b). For instance, Malaysia has almost 19
percent of the population with more than secondary education, whereas even South Africa and
Mauritius, which have the highest education attainment, have less than 5 percent. Kenya has a
similar profile to Vietnam, but Uganda and Rwanda, which also aspire to become middle income
countries, have less than 2 percent of their population with more than secondary education.

Figure 4a: Malaysia and Selected SSA countries - Proportion of Population Aged 25 years
or more with different levels of education




 Note: Author’s calculations based on Barro and Lee dataset
 (2014) for Educational Attainment for Population Aged 25
 and Over (version 2.0)



Figure 4b: Vietnam and Selected SSA countries - Proportion of Population Aged 25 years
or more with different levels of education




 Note: Author’s calculations based on Barro and Lee dataset
 (2014) for Educational Attainment for Population Aged 25 and
 Over (version 2.0)

The rate at which SSA countries are upgrading their higher level skills is relatively slow. Figure
5 shows the proportion of different age cohorts that have at least 12 years of education for the SSA
region compared to other regions. This proportion has remained more or less constant for the last
20 years, while other regions have accelerated their accumulation of skilled labor.


 Figure 5: Percentage of different age cohorts with at least Grade 12, SSA and other regions
 of the world

                                            100                                                       Europe and Central
                                                                                                             Asia
                                            90
   which has completed at least secondary




                                            80
          Percentage of age cohort




                                            70                                                    Latin America and the
                                                                                                        Caribbean           Middle East
                                            60
                                                                                                                          and North Africa
                                            50                                                                               South Asia
                                            40                                                                       East Asia and the
                                                                                                                           Pacific
                                            30

                                            20
                                                                                                                 Sub-Saharan Africa
                                            10

                                             0
                                                  60-64   55-59   50-54   45-49   40-44   35-39   30-34    25-29     20-24
                                                                                   Age



There is a special dearth of middle level technicians in Sub Saharan African countries. Consistent
data are not available, but the proportion of secondary students enrolled in TVET courses is
significantly below that in other countries. This reflects the limited relevance of these courses and
they are not attractive to students who prefer to continue with academic courses at the tertiary
level.

Among those who reach higher education, the proportion who enroll in science and engineering
courses is less than 25 percent. In Tanzania, only 14 percent of students are enrolled in science
and engineering courses. The proportion enrolled in engineering courses is generally less than 8
percent. At the postgraduate level, except in very large countries such as Ethiopia and Nigeria,
most Sub Saharan African countries have only a few hundred students enrolled in science courses.
Further, enrollment in the science and engineering courses is not aligned to the sectors of growth,
with students taking general science courses that have limited employment potential. A recent
study by the Royal Academy of Engineering noted that the lack of numbers is affecting
development in every field, from rural sanitation to reduction of poverty (Royal Academy of
Engineering (2012).

The poor quality of their training is as critical as the limited numbers of professional and technical
labor. Many Sub-Saharan scientists and engineers are unemployed because they lack the
specialized competencies and skills required by firms. The quality of their training relates to the
fact that curricula are outdated, most faculty lack Ph. D training, and students gain little practical
experience during their courses.

Skills constraints take about 10-15 years to emerge after periods of sustained growth. If Sub
Saharan African countries are to continue on their sustained growth path, the time to address the
skills constraints is now. Targeted investments in better quality technical/vocational education and
training, higher education, and research are required for creating skills for the emerging growth
sectors across the continent.

Creating better quality technicians and professionals also requires establishing appropriate system-
level and regulatory frameworks, including governance, quality assurance and financing. Merely
investing in infrastructure and equipment does not yield better trained graduates who can be
employed. Such requirements include:
     Implementing competency based training.
     Establishing a national qualifications structure based on employer ratified occupational
        standards.
     Ensuring employer participation in testing and certifying graduates, especially at the TVET
        level, and include employers in the governing bodies of institutions.
     Creating financial sustainability by mobilizing new sources of financing, from employers
        and through cost-sharing.
     Making more effective use of current public financing through performance-based
        transfers to institutions.

5. China’s Contribution to Skill Development in Africa11

China’s involvement in providing assistance to education, training, and research, particularly in
science and technology, in Sub Saharan African countries has long historical roots. Traditionally,
it has been provided by the Chinese government through bilateral agreements. More recently, this
assistance has been undertaken within the framework of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
(FOCAC). A new set of actors comprises the Chinese SOEs and private firms who are investing
in the continent. Figure 6 provides a schematic overview of the channels for assistance/investment
in education and training.




11
  This section draws on Yingquan Song. 2014. “China’s Contribution to Education, Training, and Research in
Science and Technology in Africa.” Mimeo
Figure 6: China – Assistance for Higher Education and Technical/Vocational Training 12




Author’s representation based on China’s Foreign Aid White Paper, various years; Brautigam
(2011) ; King (2011); websites of various Chinese Ministries and agencies.

Given the differing modalities through which Chinese aid to education is channeled, precise values
on the scale of aid are difficult to gauge (State Council of China, 2013). Based on the latest white
paper on China’s foreign assistance, this figure is estimated to be in the range of US$ 432 -850
million in 2010-2012.13 There is no separate demarcation for education sector, which is included
under the ambit of Human Resource Development (HRD). The main ministry coordinating foreign
assistance is the Ministry of Commerce, meanwhile a number of Ministries are involved in
implementing the specific programs.

A rising trend of cooperation in education and training by the Chinese government can be seen
since the launch of Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC). Five key modalities are used
by the Chinese Government:

12
  Preliminary presentation, subject to review
13
   The figure of US$ 432 million relates directly to the human development cooperation element of the foreign aid
appropriation for 2010-12 and the larger figure of US$ 850 million also covers agriculture and industry of the
foreign aid budget.
          Chinese governmental scholarships for Sub Saharan African students and providing places
           in Chinese universities for self-financed students from African countries;
           providing training for Sub Saharan African officials and professionals technicians in a
           range of fields;
          sending professional experts to Sub Saharan African countries to undertake specialized
           training;
          building education infrastructure;
          partnership programs implemented by various governmental ministries such as the
           Ministry of Education, Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
           etc.

Scholarships: The number of scholarships has grown rapidly since 2006, especially for Africa.14
(see Figure 7.). The annual increase in scholarships has averaged 835 and in 2011, a total of 6316
scholarships were given to Africans. However, only about 40 percent of these scholarships are in
the applied sciences, engineering or technology fields, which are in short supply. The majority
continue to be in humanities, social studies and Chinese language.

In addition to Central government scholarships, provincial governments and some enterprises also
provide scholarships but the numbers are not available.

Equally striking is the rapid growth in self-financing students, which increased from almost nil in
1989 to over 26,000 in 2013. Cumulatively, close to 95,000 African students have studied in China
in this period, constituting 78 percent of all students.




14
     It is not possible to disaggregate the figures for sub-Saharan African countries.
Figure 7: Chinese Government Scholarship for International Students from Five Continents
(1999-2011)

 14000
                                                                                 13310
 12000
                                                                          11197
 10000                                                                                   Asia
  8000                                                             8409                  Africa

  6000                                                                           6316    Europe
                                                           5628           5710
                                                                   4824                  America
  4000
                                          3501    3965 4171 3735
                      2946 3049 3076 3347              2733
  2000       2402 2648                                                                   Oceania
             1136 1154 1224 1256 1244 1317   1367 1861
     0
         1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011


Professional training: This segment has also seen a significant rise, with 27,000 people (mainly
administrators and others) being trained in China through short-term courses. The training covers
economics, foreign affairs, energy, industry, agricultures, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing,
medicine and health care, inspection and quarantine, climate change, security and other subject
areas.

Professional experts: China has also dispatched professional experts to African countries,
especially in the areas of agriculture, vocational and technical education, and health. China has
established a close cooperation with Ethiopia in technical and vocational education. Over 400
teachers were sent to Ethiopia to train local teachers working in agricultural, vocational and
technical education during 2010 to 2012. Further, China has established the Ethiopia-China
Polytechnic college at a cost of $14 million to train TVET students, which has since 2011 become
an institute to train TVET teachers. Tianjin University of Technology and Education is the partner
Chinese institution.

Education infrastructure: Chinese investment in building schools, technical institutes and
universities has also been undertaken. Most of this has been concentrated on infrastructure and
equipment. Examples of new universities are those which are being built in Senegal and Malawi.
In Malawi, the EXIM Bank provided $70 million to establish the Malawi University of Science
and Technology.

New partnership programs: The most significant partnership programs for education and
training are those related to higher education under the Ministry of Education (the 20+20 university
partnership program), the China-Africa Science and Technology Partnership Plan (CASTEP)
under the Ministry of Science and Technology (which promotes joint research), and programs
under the Ministry of Agriculture.

Issues for consideration
The growth in Chinese assistance for education and training is both impressive and much
appreciated by African countries, as it is well demarcated and time bound. To build on
achievements to date and increase its impact going forward, several issues could be considered
under two main categories:
    whether the existing modalities of aid can be improved for greater impact; and
    whether the current level and scope is aligned to the needs of Sub Saharan African
       countries, particularly the need for structural transformation of their economies.

Improving existing modalities – scholarship and university partnership programs:

There is considerable international experience on how to design scholarship programs and
university partnerships for better impact that could be drawn upon.

Scholarship programs can have an important impact on upgrading the skills of young people. In
order to have this impact, they need to operate on scale and pay attention to the following: (i) clear
objectives; (ii) needs assessment; (iii) eligibility rules and criteria; (iv) financial characteristics;
(v) monitoring and evaluation; and (vi) governance and program management. A regional
approach to the scholarship program, targeting clear capacity needs for priority sectors, and relying
more on African institutions could have a much greater impact and visibility. Further, using the
scholarship program to build capacity of African universities through ‘sandwich’ programs—
instead of sending students to China to the entire duration of the program—will also help to build
long term capacity on the continent.

Similarly, the partnership program between Chinese and African universities can be a powerful
mechanism for building up mutually reinforcing capacity in both universities. The main challenge
of any university partnership program is to match institutions with similar missions, forge linkages
that are mutually beneficial, and embed capacity building objectives in all joint activities
undertaken in the context of the partnership.

The first characteristic of any university partnership program should be its strategic focus. In each
case, the program should be fully anchored in the strategic plan of the participating African
universities. For that purpose, programs need to be jointly designed and based on consideration
of the priority capacity building areas of the concerned universities.

The need to initiate and nurture effective partnerships would be the second characteristic. Rather
than adopt a broad approach, African universities should concentrate on a small number of
carefully chosen partnerships that would make most sense in terms of academic complementarity
between Chinese and African universities and opportunities for mutual learning.

To increase the impact of the partnerships in the larger African countries, “cascade” capacity
building arrangements could be envisaged. This refers to cases where the lead university in an
African country would serve as intermediary between the more advanced Chinese partner
university and weaker institutions in the same African country. This approach was successfully
tested during the last World Bank financed tertiary education development project implemented
in China in the early 2000s, allowing for a two-step transfer of capacity, first from a foreign
university to a lead Chinese university in Beijing or Shanghai, and then from the lead Chinese
university to less developed universities in the Western provinces.
Aligning the scope and orientation of assistance in education and training to SSA needs.
Although China’s assistance in this domain has increased, it is still small relative to Chinese FDI
and trade with Sub Saharan African countries. One quarter of the projects undertaken under
Chinese foreign aid can be broadly categorized as supporting human resource development. As
the skills development programs in many African countries tend to be of low quality and labor
market relevance, for a variety of reasons, there is a great need to focus on improving the quality
and content of programs and on the system-level mechanisms required for private sector-oriented
skills development.

At present, China’s approach to foreign assistance to Sub Saharan Africa involves many
government bodies and is channeled through various modalities. Although the Ministry of
Commerce (MOFCOM) is the leading coordinating body for foreign aid and assistance, human
resource development projects are implemented across a number of ministries, higher education
intuitions, enterprises and other agencies. The involvement of a range of entities allows for specific
areas of expertise to be drawn upon, by strengthening the coordination among different bodies and
developing an overall strategic framework for provision of assistance, it can contribute to the
specific goal of human resource development for transformation on the continent.

The most important issue is whether the investments are aligned with the needs of the Sub Saharan
African countries, in particular the skills needs of the priority sectors of growth. This is a challenge
faced by many development partners. Where African countries have developed their overall
strategies and action plans, alignment of assistance with needs may be possible, but in reality,
many countries have broad strategies for education, higher education and science and technology,
but often lack specific operational plans. They also lack much of the analytical work required to
develop such plans (including assessments of skill needs, stocktaking of current capacity,
benchmarking of institutions etc). This often leads to duplication of efforts by different partners,
or investment in infrastructure and equipment without commensurate attention to quality,
governance and financing mechanisms.

An example of possible fragmentation and duplication is the case of Malawi. Malawi has very
limited capacity in higher education and technical/vocational education. As indicated earlier, the
Chinese EXIM Bank reportedly provided $70 million to establish the Malawi University of
Science and Technology, largely financing the buildings and equipment. In parallel, the World
Bank prepared a $50 million project for skills development in Malawi, to enhance the capacity of
the existing four universities and TVET institutions to create skills for particular sectors. This
project was based on extensive prior analytical work and included components to strengthen the
governance of the higher education and TVET sub-sectors. The project also aims to improve the
performance of the participating institutions by linking disbursements to achievement of specific
results. It does not appear that the new Malawi University of Science and Technology is
benefitting from these studies or the governance reforms introduced under the Bank-supported
project. While the responsibility of ensuring coordination and complementarity of development
partner investments lies with African governments, greater sharing of information among partners
themselves could also lead to greater synergy among investments and enhanced results on the
ground.
Investment by Chinese firms in TVET and higher education
There is some evidence that Chinese firms are starting to invest in these areas. Two such examples
are ZTE and Huawei, both telecommunications firms. ZTE University has set up training centres
in a number of countries and a telecom college in Equatorial Guinea. Huawei has built seven
training centres and one research and development centre in South Africa. An especially
interesting example is the agreement between the government of the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC) and Chinese enterprises in 2007-8 relating to investment in the mining sector, which
included agreements on local content so that no more than 20 percent of the workforce is Chinese;
at least 0.5 percent of the investment is allocated to training, and 12 percent of the work is sub-
contracted to local firms. China also agreed to build 2 universities along with hospitals and health
centres, and other social infrastructure (Kaplinksy and Morris, 2009).

A framework which encourages Chinese firms to invest at the system level in vocational/technical
education and higher education, particularly for the priority sectors would stimulate action. In
many cases, helping the countries to develop such a framework for the entire private sector could
be the best investment.

China Development Bank’s Assistance for Skills Development in Africa15

In addition to assistance provided by the Chinese government, China Development Bank (CDB),
which is China’s leading cross-border financier, has invested mainly in short-term training through
different modalities. These included (i) CDB Training sessions for management-level staff from
various government departments, financial institutions, and corporate partners in Africa. A diverse
range of program content included financial and economic reform, capital markets, local currency
settlement, industry cooperation, agriculture and infrastructure development, and support for small
and medium enterprises (ii) Joint Training Sessions organized jointly with the Ministry of
Commerce and the World Bank, covering China's experience with economic reform and
development, new trends in microfinance, micro-lending financial evaluation and review
methodology, micro-lending client assessment, CDB microfinance models, and microcredit
platform development (iii) Corporate Leadership Program under which CDB funded an
Executive MBA program for African entrepreneurs (particularly women entrepreneurs) at the
China Europe International Business School (CEIBS) and (iv) CDB Scholarships for African
students to study MA and PhD courses in Chinese, economics, finance, and management. Between
2007 and 2014, CDB organized a total of 57 such programs for beneficiaries from 52 countries.



6. Collaboration of the World Bank and China for Africa in Skill Development for Priority
   Sectors: Vocational/Technical Education, Higher Education and Research

The educational and skill challenges in Sub Saharan Africa continue to be significant despite
important improvements in access to basic education in the past decade. The new challenge is
expanding the provision and quality of post-basic education, especially secondary, technical and
vocational, and tertiary, education. Success here will be a critical to ensuring that the continent
continues to undergo structural transformation. Sub-Saharan Africa could benefit from better
15
     Information provided by China Development Bank, April 2015. The programs cover all of Africa.
coordination with development partners to ensure that investments in these areas are well targeted
and well-coordinated. The World Bank and China, as two of the most significant investors in the
region could be first movers in this area, in collaboration with African countries themselves.

Such a partnership is beneficial for both the World Bank and China. China’s own phenomenal
structural transformation while productively absorbing its large population, offers important
lessons on skills development for partners, including the World Bank. China’s experience in
forging strong industry partnerships between technical colleges and industry is an important area
of learning. In Sub Saharan Africa and other parts of the developing world, establishing credible
and sustainable relationships between these two stakeholders continually proves difficult, raising
questions about the relevance of qualifications from these institutions. Another area where
development partners have a lot to learn from China is how effective decentralized delivery of
technical and vocational learning has been, and what lessons can be drawn by African countries
seeking to devolve training to a sub-national level.

The World Bank’s extensive international experience also offers important learning opportunities
for China. As of 2012 the World Bank has invested US$ 69 billion in education in over 1500
projects (World Bank 2012). The World Bank’s private sector arm, the International Finance
Cooperation, has since 2001 invested over $500 million in 46 projects. In 2010, the World Bank
investment in education rose to US$ 5 billion alone (World Bank, 2012). Through this long
experience the World Bank has developed strong technical expertise in particular areas of
education such as higher education, learning assessment, benchmarking, teacher training, and
financing to name a few. Also, the World Bank has developed a significant knowledge base in
these areas and has increased its capacity to measure and assess impact.


The World Bank’s Stepping up Skills for Employment and Productivity (STEP) framework
shows that skills development is a cumulative life-cycle process from early childhood education
through working age and includes different types of skills produced by different levels and types
of education and training institutions, as well as on the job. Foundational skills (STEPs 1 and
2), comprising physical, cognitive and socio-emotional skills, are built during early childhood
and through basic education. Job-relevant skills (STEP 3) can be gained via multiple modalities,
including pre-employment TVET at secondary and post-secondary levels; lifelong learning, and
second chance programs; on the job training, apprenticeships, informal training and training-
related active labor market programs. Higher level professional and technical skills, innovation
and entrepreneurship (STEP 4) can be imparted through universities as well as technology
support and industrial promotion programs. Finally, in order to ensure that skills can be used for
productive employment requires programs to promote job-matching and facilitate labor mobility
(STEP 5).
 Figure 8: Analytical Framework- Stepping up Skills for Employment and Productivity
 (STEP)




 Source: World Bank (2010)



The World Bank’s experience in pre-employment skills development (from the technical-
vocational education/training level to higher education) and firm-based training has brought out a
number of lessons:

   (i)     Introduce literacy and soft skill development modules as part of pre-employment
           programs: In most countries, large numbers of school goers drop out early and large
           parts of the workforce have little knowledge and few skills that would make them
           eligible for better quality jobs. Introducing modules focused on literacy and soft skills
           as part of pre-employment training programs and second-chance programs can help
           break the vicious circle of the unskilled being trapped in jobs that require little skills,
           and establish accessible pathways for acquiring skills.
   (ii)    Invest in regulatory and quality assurance mechanisms: The government has a
           critical role to play mainly in regulation, quality assurance, developing qualification
           frameworks and occupational standards, testing and certification, creating appropriate
           governance, autonomy and accountability frameworks for training providers,
           monitoring and evaluation, enhancing public-private partnerships to enhance provision
           of market relevant skills
   (iii)   Ensure employers play a critical role in system:             Involvement of employers is
           required at the policy level, at the sectoral level and at the institution level. Designing
           the mechanisms for employer participation at each level is also crucial for ensuring that
           programs are relevant to the needs of the economy and that there is sustainable
           financing of training.
     (iv)    Introduce financing linked to performance: Currently, nearly all public funding is
             input based. A shift in this relationship towards financing linked to outputs/outcomes
             will be critical to make training more relevant for labor market needs
     (v)     Encourage private providers: A clear regulatory framework is required to encourage
             private sector participation and this should be combined with a quality assurance and
             certification system. Public funding can also encourage private provision of programs).
     (vi)    Invest in Monitoring and Evaluation: These can range from simple monitoring data
             on institutions, programs, students and faculty, to data on labor market outcomes of
             particular programs (employment, earnings) that can guide household decisions and
             public funding , to impact evaluations.

Further, the World Bank’s experience in SSA countries suggests that these general lessons from
global experience need to be tailored to country specific contexts, as the capacity of governments,
training institutions and strength of the private sector varies considerably. In all cases, it is
necessary to engage the government teams in project preparation and design, support capacity
development, provide on-going implementation support and use monitoring and evaluation to
adjust project design. Finally, a longer-term engagement is required to enable learning by doing.

7. Some Suggestions Moving Forward

The Partnership for Skills in Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (PASET) was
launched by several African countries and the World Bank, to build cooperation with new Partners.
Since its launch, Chinese academic institutions have participated in analytical work and in sharing
the experiences of China in the development of capacity in vocational training and science and
technology.16 The PASET is a regional initiative to build the skilled labor force in Africa (from
technical vocational to higher education and research) for priority sectors, with clear objectives
and targets, and provides a platform to align the investments and efforts of different partners. The
most recent regional PASET forum, held in Dakar in June 2014, issued a Call to Action, with very
specific objectives and targets for building skills for priority sectors.

The Education Units in the Africa region of the World Bank have already initiated collaboration
with Chinese academic institutions to build capacity in Applied Sciences, Engineering and
Technology (ASET). One example is in higher education in Africa where the World Bank is
working with the Shanghai Jiao Tong University to establish a benchmarking system for African
universities (see Box 1).




16
  Various Chinese institutions participated in the two Regional PASET forums held in Addis Ababa (July 2013) and
Dakar (June 2014), respectively. These included Tianjin University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Beijing Normal
University, Zhejiang Normal University, the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences and the Chinese Academy of
Sciences.
Box 1

China-World Bank Collaboration: Benchmarking African Universities

The World Bank is collaborating with Shanghai Jiao Tong University to develop and implement a
benchmarking instrument for African universities that specialize in ASET. The objective is to
compare these universities with peer universities in China in order to identify areas of strengths
and weaknesses for purposes of improvement. A pilot project was completed in 2014, covering
the following eight universities across SSA: Gaston Berger University (Senegal), the Federal
University of Agriculture Abeokuta (Nigeria), International institute of Water and Environment
Engineering (Burkina Faso), University of Abomey-Calavi (Benin), Makerere University
(Uganda), the University of Dar-Es-Salaam (Tanzania), the University of Ghana (Ghana), and
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (Ghana).

Notwithstanding the challenge of generating comparable data and the limited scope of the pilot,
this initial benchmarking exercise has brought out a few relevant findings at the national and
institutional levels. From the perspective of the higher education systems compared, the data on
public spending and enrollment show that the level of funding is not the main driver of enrolment
expansion. Across SSA, where public expenditures on higher education range from 0.4 to 1% of
GDP, some countries with higher levels of spending achieve much lower enrolment rates. This
confirms that institutional configuration matters: spreading enrollment growth across a variety of
tertiary education institutions—public and private, universities and non-university—, instead of
simply expanding the public university sub-sector, can be an effective strategy for achieving higher
enrollment rates in a financially manageable way from a public resources perspective.

At the institutional level, the Chinese universities included in the benchmarking sample tend to
have a higher proportion of graduate students (30-35%) than the African ones (5-15%). The
Chinese universities have a relatively higher output of PhD graduates, not only because of the
higher share of graduate students, but also because of the lower dropout rates. Paradoxically, the
proportion of academic staff holding a doctoral degree is slightly higher in the African universities.
This could reflect the fact that their teaching load may be too heavy to leave sufficient time for the
supervision of graduate students and for research activities.


Cheng and Liu, (2014)
There are three ways in which China and the World Bank could collaborate in the area of skills
development in Africa, building on the experience of both and recent efforts at collaboration. First,
under the PASET initiative, China and the World Bank could undertake joint analytical work to
assess the skills needs for different sectors in individual countries, continue the benchmarking of
African universities piloted with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, share the development
experience of China through targeted learning visits, and share experiences in skills development
through regional forums. The participation of Chinese institutions and firms in such events would
enable them to learn about the perspectives and concerns of African counterparts. The proposed
Trust Fund established by China could help with financing such activities. While China has
traditionally worked with the African Union, the possibility of also collaborating with the Bank
through the PASET combines strong ownership of the agenda by African countries with high level
impact and visibility.

Second, China could support the regional initiatives of the PASET such as the establishment of
the Regional Scholarship Fund for postgraduate studies in applied sciences, engineering and
technology; the proposed regional TVET centres of excellence; and co-financing of the regional
Africa Centres of Excellence project, currently financed by the World Bank. This would
supplement China’s on-going investments, which could also benefit from the experience of well-
designed programs with strong monitoring and evaluation.

Third, China could co-finance country-level projects which are being prepared with World Bank
assistance, focusing on technical/vocational and higher education. This will enable China to learn
from the experience of the World Bank and contribute to the development of the system in
individual countries, while also contributing China’s experience in a concrete fashion. This may
greatly enhance the impact of China’s bilateral investments in this area. For individual African
countries, this would be beneficial because there will be alignment of different partners. For the
World Bank, there is the opportunity to learn from and adapt China’s experience not only for the
specific country, but also to other countries in the region and across the world.
References:

Background Studies done for the Partnership for Skills in Applied Sciences, Engineering and
Technology

Banerji, Pradipta. 2014. India’s Current Activities and Contributions to Education, Training, and
    Research in Science and Technology in Africa. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Carrillo, Susana and Karin Costa Vazquez. 2014. Brazil – Sub Saharan Africa: Partnerships for
    Human Development. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Chavannes, Vidal. 2014. The Development of National Occupational Standards in Canada and
    their Translation to Training Programs and Certifications. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Hwang, Gyu-hee. 2014. Education and Development of IT HR in Korea: Past, Present and
   Challenge. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Inforum. 2014. Uhuru: An Economic Model for Understanding Human Capital Development
     Needs in Tanzania Analytical Report. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Inforum. 2014. Uhuru: An Economic Model for Understanding Human Capital Development
     Needs in Tanzania Methodological Report. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Mohamedbhai, Goolam. 2014. Improving the Quality of Engineering Education in Sub-Saharan
   Africa. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Wagle, Swarnim and Ramesh Paudel. 2014. FDI Flows into Sub-Saharan Africa from Traditional
   and Emerging Sources: Recent Trends and Patterns. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Song, Yingquan 2014. China’s Contribution to Education, Training, and Research in Science and
    Technology in Africa – An Assessment of Current Activities. World Bank, Washington D.C.

Saint, William. 2014. Applying Science, Engineering and Technology for African Competitiveness
    and Development. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Tran, Trang. 2014. Labor and Skills in Chinese FDI Firms in Ethiopia. World Bank, Washington,
    DC.

Usher, Alex. 2014. Science and Technology Benchmarks. World Bank, Washington, DC

Other Studies

Bräutigam, Deborah. ,2011. Aid 'With Chinese Characteristics': Chinese Aid and Development
Finance Meet the OECD-DAC Regime. Journal of International Development 23 (5): 752–764
Cheng, Ying and Nian Liu. 2014. A Benchmarking Study of Selected Applied Sciences,
Engineering and Technology (ASET) Oriented Universities in Africa and China, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University. Mimeo.

Corkin, L Christopher Burke and Martyn Davies (2008). China’s Role in the Development of
Africa’s Infrastructure. Centre for Chinese Studies, Stellenbosch University. SAIS Working
Papers in African Studies 04-08.

Farole, Thomas and Winkler, Donald (eds). 2014. Making Foreign Direct Investment Work for
Sub-Saharan Africa: Local Spillovers and Competitiveness in Global Value Chains. Washington
D.C. The World Bank.

Koko, A, Tansini, R., Zejan, M.C.1996. “Local Technological Capability and Productivity
Spillovers from FDI in Uruguayan Manufacturing Sector”. The Journal of Development Studies
32 (4): 602-611.

Lacovone, Leonardo, Vijaya Ramachandran and Martin Schmidt. 2014. Stunted Growth: Why
Don’t African Firms Create more Jobs? CGD Working Paper 353. Washington , D.C. Centers for
Global Development.

Leung, Denise and Lihuan Zhou. May 15 2014. “Where are Chinese Investments in Africa
Headed.” Retrieved on November 6th 2014 from http://www.wri.org/blog/2014/05/where-are-
chinese-investments-africa-headed

Kaplinsky, Raphael and Morris, Mike. 2009. Chinese FDI in Sub-Saharan Africa: engaging with
large dragons. European Journal of Development Research, 21(4), pp. 551–569.

King, Kenneth. 2011. China’s human resource engagement with Africa: a new voice, new values,
and a new partnership? Paper presented at Rethinking Development in an Age of Scarcity and
Uncertainty, New values, Voices and Alliances for Increased Resilience, 19-22 September 2011
University of York.

Pinghu, Zhung. May 5th 2014. “Trade with Africa will double by 2020, Li Keqiang tells Ethiopian
Conference.”       Retrieved November 6, 2014 from South Morning China Post
http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1505388/trade-africa-will-double-2020-li-keqiang-
tells-ethiopia-conference

Royal Academy of Engineering. 2012. ‘Engineers for Africa: Identifying Engineering Capacity
Needs in Sub-Saharan Africa’.

State Council of China. 2013. White paper on China-Africa Economic and Trade Cooperation.
Beijing. August, 2013.

State Council of China. 2014. White paper on China’s Foreign Aid. Beijing. July, 2014.
World Bank 2012. Learning for All: Investing in People’s Knowledge and Skills to Promote
Development: The World Bank Group Education Strategy. Washington D.C, The World Bank.

Yusuf, Shahid. 2014 “Sustaining Ethiopia’s Growth Acceleration”. George Washington
University, Washington DC. March 12, 2014.
We suggest that the sentence be deleted, for it has no connection with the “theme” on skills training. WB: OK
