                                                         97837




        Global Experiences with Special Economic Zones
                     With a Focus on China and Africa


                             Douglas Zhihua Zeng




The World Bank
Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice
February 2015




                                                                 1
                                   Acknowledgement



This paper was prepared by Douglas Zhihua Zeng (Senior Economist) at the World Bank, under
the overall management and guidance of Ganesh Rasagam (Practice Manager, GTCDR) and
Catherine Masinde (Practice Manager, GTCDR). Special thanks go to Thomas Farole (Senior
Economist, GTCDR), Asya Akhlaque (Senior Economist, GTCDR), and Martin Norman (Senior
Private Sector Development Specialist, GTCDR), as well as colleagues from the China
Development Bank, who peer reviewed the draft paper and provided very useful comments.




                                                                                        2
Global Experiences with Special Economic Zones: With a Focus on China and Africa

The special economic zones (SEZs) can be an effective instrument to promote industrialization if
implemented properly in the right context, as shown in some of the emerging countries,
particularly those in East Asia. More and more countries have begun to implement this instrument
for their industrialization process, especially as a way of attracting foreign direct investments
(FDIs) mostly in the manufacturing sector, creating jobs, generating exports and foreign
exchanges, and so on. So far, the results are quite mixed with some countries quite successful such
as China, Singapore, Malaysia, South Korea, Jordan, Mauritius, etc., and others still struggling, in
particular those in Sub-Sahara Africa (SSA).

This paper is intended to provide a brief overview of the different SEZ experiences in China and
Africa, the key lessons that Africa can learn from China, as well as the recent Chinese zones in
Africa. For this purpose, the paper is structured in the following way: section 1 starts with
definition of SEZs, then followed with the Chinese experiences (section 2), African experiences
(section 3), the lessons that Africa can learn from China (section 4), Chinese zones in Africa
(section 5), and then concludes.

   I.      Definition of SEZs

There is a big variation of “special economic zones (SEZs)”. The term “SEZ” here covers a broad
range of zones, such as free trade zones, export-processing zones, industrial parks, economic and
technology development zones, high-tech zones, science and innovation parks, free ports,
enterprise zones, and others.

The basic concept of SEZs includes several specific characteristics: (a) it is a geographically
delimited area, usually physically secured; (b) it has a single management or administration; (c) it
offers benefits for investors physically within the zone; and (d) it has a separate customs area (duty-
free benefits) and streamlined procedures (World Bank 2008; Farole 2011). In addition, a SEZ
normally operates under more liberal economic laws than those typically prevailing in the country.
In general, the SEZs confer two main types of benefits, which in part explain their popularity:
“static” economic benefits such as employment generation, export growth, government revenues,
and foreign exchange earnings; and the more “dynamic” economic benefits such as skills
upgrading, technology transfer and innovation, economic diversification, productivity
enhancement of local firms, etc. (Zeng 2010).

   II.     China’s Experience with Special Economic Zones

China is one of the most successful countries in terms of leveraging SEZs to achieve far-reaching
economic transformations. It started with four zones at the initial stage to experiment with market-
oriented economic reforms which involves laws, regulations, taxation, land, labor, finance,
customs, immigration, etc. After being successful, the zone program and relevant reforms were
gradually rolled out throughout the nation in more diversified forms, and some of the zones were
designed with more sophisticated agenda, such as the high-tech industrial parks. Together with the
numerous industrial clusters, the SEZs have contributed significantly to national GDP,
employment, exports, and attraction of FDIs. It was estimated that in recent years, SEZs at national

                                                                                                     3
level accounted for about 22% of national GDP, 46% of FDI, and 60% of exports and generated
in excess of 30 million jobs (Zeng 2010). The SEZs have also played important roles in bringing
new technologies to China and in adopting modern management practices.

While most lessons in China are positive, such as gradualism with a pragmatic and experimental
approach; reform-oriented mindset; strong commitment and active facilitation of the state; open-
up to FDIs; sound infrastructure; effective marketing and investment promotion; and continuous
technology learning and upgrading, etc. (Zeng 2010), there are also some adverse lessons for the
late-comers to avoid, such as the “mushroom approach” at the local levels and high-level overlaps
of various zones with vicious competitions at the later stage; environmental degradation; and
limited urban-industry integration, with some exceptions such as the Suzhou Industrial Park.

          II.1 A Brief Overview of China’s SEZ Programs

After decades of centrally planned economy, the Government of China adopted the Open Door
policy in 1978, and in July 1979, it decided that Guangdong and Fujian provinces should take the
lead in opening up to the outside world and implement “special policies and flexible measures”.
By August 1980, Shenzhen, Zhuhai, and Shantou in Guangdong Province were designated as
special economic zones, followed by Xiamen in Fujian Province in October 1980. The four SEZs
were quite similar in that they comprised large areas within which the objective was to facilitate
broadly based, comprehensive economic development, and they all enjoyed special financial,
investment, and trade privileges.

The combination of favorable policies and the right mixture of production factors resulted in
unprecedented rates of growth in the SEZs. Encouraged by initial success, the Chinese government
opened more SEZs mostly in the form of economic and technological development zones
(ETDZs), informally known as China’s national industrial parks, which were smaller than the
earlier zones.
By March 2013, there are 191 national level ETDZs in China. In addition to the SEZs mentioned
above, there are many other types of SEZs in China at various levels, including high-tech industrial
development zones (HIDZs), free trade zones (FTZs), export-processing zones (EPZs), and others.

The SEZs have made crucial contributions to China’s success. Most of all, they—especially the
first ones—successfully tested the market economy and new institutions and established role
models for the rest of the country to follow. The institutional reforms within the SEZs promoted
synergy between a host of domestic and international factors which led to accelerated growth.
Economically, SEZs have contributed significantly to national GDP, employment, exports, and
attraction of foreign investment as mentioned above. In some regions, industrial parks account for
anywhere between 50% to 80-90% of growth in GDP. SEZs have also aided the increased openness
and resource clustering by offering a vehicle and platform for the entry of capital, technology,
talents and R&D activities from all over the world.1

In addition, SEZs have significantly contributed to technological progress and innovation. Up to
date, China’s overall technology commercialization rate is only about 10%, while industrial parks
in China on average boast a commercialization rate of over 60%. In agriculture, the contribution
1
    Cited from comments received from the China Development Bank in May 2015.

                                                                                                  4
of technological development stands at 55.2%, while in agro-tech parks and agricultural
demonstration zones, the contribution rate of technology reaches roughly 70%, nearly the average
level of developed nations. These parks have also significantly contributed to the increase of
farmers’ income – on average, agricultural incomes within these parks are over 30% higher than
incomes in surrounding villages.2

        II.2 Major Factors for Success and Lessons Learned

Many factors contributed to the success of China’s SEZs, and in every case, the situations and
factors might be different. However, their success points to some common lessons.
   Strong commitment and support of the government to pilot market-oriented economic
    reforms. Despite the high uncertainty at the beginning, the top leaders were determined to
    make changes, through a gradualist approach. Such a determination ensured a stable and
    supportive macro-environment. The central government also tried to decentralize its power and
    help create an open and conducive legal and policy environment for the SEZs. At the same
    time, the local governments made a great effort to build a sound business environment. They
    not only put in place a conducive regulatory environment for reforms, an efficient
    administrative system such as “one-stop-shops”, but also good infrastructures for the zones.
   Land Reforms. In China, the land reforms started from Shenzhen has played an important role
    in the SEZs’ success. Before 1981, all land belonged to the State in the urban areas and, in
    rural areas, land was “collectively” owned. Since 1981, the government allowed SEZs to lease
    land to investors with an initial term of 20-50 years with the possibility of renewal. Meanwhile,
    a land auction system was established for all the commercial land (2002) and industrial land
    (2007) to ensure the efficient use of land resources (Shen and Xu 2011). These reforms helped
    to establish a modern land market which has transformed whole China’s urban landscape.
   Investment incentives and institutional autonomy. To encourage firms (especially FDIs) to
    invest in the zones, the SEZs had in place various fiscal and non-fiscal incentives3 and
    preferential policies, including streamlined administrative process, sound infrastructure, rapid
    customs clearance, concessionary tax rates, and flexibility in hiring and firing workers, among
    others (Ge 1999; Enright, Scott, and Chung 2005). Favorable policies were also in place to
    attract skilled labor, such as the provision of housing, research funding, education subsidies,
    etc. In addition, the SEZs (especially the early-stage ones) were given greater political and
    economic autonomy. They had the legislative authority to develop municipal laws and
    regulations to govern these zones. Such an unusual discretion allowed them more freedom in
    pursuing new policies and development measures deemed necessary to vitalize the economy.
   Foreign Direct Investment and the Chinese diaspora. FDI and the Chinese diaspora have
    played important roles in the success of the SEZs by bringing capital investment, technologies,
    and management skills; generating learning and spillovers; and ultimately helping to build
    local manufacturing capacity. At the same time that the SEZs were opening up in the 1980s,
    Hong Kong (China), Macao (China), and Taiwan (China) were also beginning to upgrade their

2
  These figures are based on comments received from the China Development Bank in May 2015.
3
  Some of these incentives were applied to all firms but many are only for FDIs. For example, for FDI, the corporate
tax rate was especially generous—15 percent as opposed to 30 percent for domestic firms —plus exemption from
local income tax. This was streamlined later – 25% for both foreign and domestic firms as mentioned above.

                                                                                                                   5
    industrial structure and transfer out their labor-intensive manufacturing sectors. The cheap
    labor and good infrastructure in the SEZs, as well as the Open Door policies coupled with
    various incentives, provided a great opportunity for FDI to flow into China from the diaspora.
   Technology learning, innovation, upgrading, and strong links with the domestic economy.
    One of the key strengths of the SEZs is that they have a high concentration of very skilled
    people, including many R&D personnel, especially in the HIDZs and ETDZs. As a result, they
    have become centers of knowledge and technology generation, adaptation, diffusion, and
    innovation. The abundance of FDI provides a good opportunity for technology learning.
    Governments also put strong emphasis on technology learning and innovation, as well as
    technology-intensive industries. In addition, the SEZs are closely linked to domestic
    enterprises and industrial clusters through supply chains or value chains. This connection not
    only helps achieve economies of scale and business efficiency, but also stimulates synergistic
    learning and enhances industrial competitiveness (Zeng, 2010).
   Innovative cultures. In addition to institutional flexibility, the composition of people in the
    SEZs also helped nurture innovation and entrepreneurship. Because most SEZs were built in
    new areas or suburbs of cities and were open to all qualified workers, they have attracted a
    large number of immigrants from across the country and, later on, from overseas, who hoped
    for better jobs and new opportunities. Such a strongly motivated migrant community tends to
    generate an innovative and entrepreneurial culture.
   Clear objectives, benchmarks, and competitions. In China, SEZs were normally set up in
    batches—initially four—and then the number increased rapidly. Despite the large number of
    these zones, most of them have clear goals and targets in GDP growth, exports, employment,
    revenues, FDI generation, and the like. These expectations put a great deal of pressure and
    responsibility on the shoulders of the zone management. Meanwhile, the SEZs are highly
    competitive among themselves. Such competition helps make them more efficient and
    competitive.
   Location advantages. Most SEZs in China are located in the coastal region or near major
    cities with a history or tradition of foreign trading or business and thus are better linked to the
    international market. They also have good access to major infrastructure, such as ports,
    airports, and railways. The location advantage is especially obvious for the SEZs in the Pearl
    River Delta region (close to Hong Kong, China) and the Min Delta region (close to Taiwan,
    China).

    II.3 Some Pitfalls to Avoid

While overall SEZs lessons from China are positive and encouraging, there are also a few adverse
lessons which other countries should try to avoid in their pursuit of SEZ programs. Such lessons
include:
   Mushroom approach at local level and high-level overlaps at the later stage. Seeing the
    success of SEZs at the coastal region, in the 1990s and early 2000s, many local governments
    and cities began to imitate this approach and set up various industrial zones/parks to attract
    investments or to support the local township and village enterprises (TVEs) without any
    appropriate assessment and planning. This led to big waste of resources and environmental
    damage and many of them have failed. At the central and provincial levels, the zone programs

                                                                                                     6
    were more organized with better planning and management, but at the later stage, after huge
    success in the coast region, there was also a high level of competitions since late 90s, with
    “race-to-the-bottom” fiscal incentives. This situation led to significant overlaps and declining
    efficiency of the zone programs.
   Environmental degradation. In China, the GDP performance used to be the top priority for
    the government officials, also related to China’s growth model based on low technology and
    labor- and resource intensive manufacturing, many SEZs face serious environmental and
    resource challenges. The World Bank estimates that the environmental costs in China is about
    8% of GDP. To tackle these issues, China has since implemented tougher environmental
    standards and tried to use fiscal policies to force firms to adopt “green technologies” and
    conduct innovations.
   Unbalance between industrial development and social dimensions. While the special
    economic zones have achieved great economic success, many of them are somewhat lagging
    behind in providing the commensurate social and urban services, especially those located in
    remote areas or lagging regions. Such zones have problems attracting high-quality investments
    and talents and face great challenges in sustaining their growth or upgrading their industrial
    structures.

    III.   SEZs in Africa – A Long Journey Ahead

In the Sub-Sahara region, several countries launched zone programs in the early 1970s (Liberia in
1970, Mauritius in 1971, and Senegal in 1974), but they did not operationalize programs until the
1990s or 2000s (table 1). Also, these zones are largely different from the modern large scale multi-
use zones that are currently being proposed (Farole 2011).

Table 1. Overview of African zone programs by decade of launch
 1970s Liberia, Senegal, Mauritius
 1980s Djibouti, Togo
 1990s Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar,
         Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Seychelles, Sudan, Uganda,
         Zimbabwe
 2000s Gabon, Gambia, Mali, South Africa, Botswana, Zambia, Eritrea, Mauritania, DRC
         Congo, Tanzania, Ethiopia
Source: FIAS (2008) with author’s amendments. Note that this list is not exhaustive.

The lack of data makes it hard to have a comprehensive analysis of Africa’s performance in
SEZs—in terms of investments, exports, and employment—relative to other regions. The available
evidence suggests that SSA’s experience with traditional EPZs and IZs has been relatively poor in
terms of both employment generation and export performance (Table 2).

Table 2. Estimates of direct employment and exports in zones in select regions around
2004-07
                                        Direct employment          Exports
 Region
                                        (million)                  (US$ million)
 Sub-Saharan Africa                     1.0                        8,605

                                                                                                  7
 Asia and the Pacific                        61.1                        510,666
 Americas                                    3.1                         72,636
 Central and East Europe and Central
                                             1.6                         89,666
 Asia
 Middle East and North Africa                1.5                         169,459
 Global                                      68.4                        851,032
Source: FIAS (2008).

A World Bank study (Farole 2011) of six African Zone programs (Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho,
Nigeria, Senegal, and Tanzania) in comparison with four non-African countries (the Dominican
Republic, Honduras, Vietnam, and Bangladesh) shows that success in Africa zones are rather
limited with a few countries with relatively better performance, such as such as Mauritius, Kenya,
Madagascar, and possibly Ghana. In terms of investments, exports and employment generation,
the African zones are in general falling behind their peers in other continents. One important reason
could be the weak business environment (Farole 2011). Figure 1 shows that the downtime
(measured by hours) due to power shortages is still quite high in absolute terms in most African
zones despite some reduction compared with outside zones (on average the reduction is about 54%
in African zones vs. 92% in non-African zones). Figure 2 shows that the average time needed for
custom clearance is not significantly reduced in most African zones, and in some cases, it actully
takes longer within the zones than outside.

Figure 1. Average Monthly Downtime Due to Power Outages




Source: Farole 2011.

Figure 2. Average Time Needed for Imports through Major Seaport to Customs Clearance
(days)




                                                                                                   8
Source: Farole 2011.

However, when measuring the African zone programs, it’s important to consider that most African
counries are relatively latecomers in implementing modern zone programs and many of these
zones are still in the early stages (Farole 2011). The change and reblancing of the global value
chain and industrial structure can possibly provide a good opportunity for these zones.

Overall, various evidence shows that so far very few African zones (with the exception of
Mauritius) appears to have made significant progress toward taking advantage of the dynamic
potential of economic zones as an instrument of sustainable structural transformation. Some of the
key challenges, among others, include (Zeng 2012a):
    Legal, regulatory and institutional framework. In many African countries, the current legal,
     regulatory and institutional framework for SEZs is either outdated or does not exist, even
     though the SEZ initiative has been launched or, even in some cases, the parks have been built
     and operational. This is like “putting the cart in front of horse”, which has created a lot of
     confusion and deterred potential investors. This is quite evident through a review of six zones
     in Nigeria (Zeng 2012b).
    Poor business environment. In most Sub-Sahara African countries, the costs of doing
     business are high due to overall constraining environment in terms of registration, licensing,
     taxation, trade logistics, customs clearance, foreign exchange, and service delivery. Many
     one-stop-shops for investors do not live up to their names.
    Lack of strategic planning and demand-driven approach. International experience shows that
     effective zone programs are an integral part of the overall national, regional or municipal
     development strategy and build on strong demand from business sectors, such as those in
     Malaysia, China, South Korea, and Mauritius, etc. However, many zone initiatives in Africa
     are driven by political agenda and lack a strong business case.
    Inadequate infrastructure. This is an overall constraint for all the zones but at different
     degrees. In general, power, gas, roads, ports, and telecom are the key constraints and many
     governments and developers try to resort to the PPP approach to solve the constraints. Given
     the large investments required for the zones, a strong commitment from government and
     active participation of the private sector is essential.



                                                                                                  9
        Zone management and operational know-how. Most of the zone developers, including the
         relevant government agencies, do not have the zone management and operational
         experiences, and many zone developers are only construction companies; therefore, it's a
         challenge for them to identify the right partners to provide the critical knowledge and
         expertise on zone management and operations. This seriously undermines the
         implementation capacity.
        Host government ownership & policy consistency. This is especially a challenge for those
         zones that face a new government that does not fully recognize the potentials of the economic
         zones and or fully acknowledge the commitments made by the previous governments. Strong
         and long-term government commitment is crucial for the zone’s success.
        Resettlement issues. In several zones, state governments promised to provide the
         compensation in the case of land acquisition and resettlement, however, these promises were
         not or only partially fulfilled, which hinders the further development of the zones.

        IV.    What Can Africa Learn from China?

Given the various challenges that the SEZ programs in Africa face, in order to avoid falling into
the same pitfalls in the past, Africa needs a new SEZ strategy. Such a strategy can draw on the
useful lessons and experiences of China and other countries, and can build on the following thrusts
(Zeng 2012a):
       Using SEZs to address the market failures or binding constraints that cannot be addressed
        through other options. Such constraints may include issues related to land, infrastructure, trade
        logistics, etc. If the constraints can be addressed through country-wide reforms, sector-wide
        incentives, or universal approaches, then SEZ might not be necessary. Since SEZ is a very
        expensive undertaking and involves very careful and skilled planning, design and management,
        it should not be taken lightly. China leveraged the SEZ as a breakthrough towards a market-
        oriented growth model in an overall very constraining environment. Given its extreme situation
        in the early days, China offered generous fiscal incentives besides good infrastructure and
        efficient public services to lure foreign investors. However, today’s macro-environment is
        different and many African countries are the destinations of industrial transfer from East Asia.
        Instead of focusing on tax incentives, they should put more efforts on improving the business
        environment including infrastructures and consider “smart incentives” that encourage skills
        training, technology transfer and local economic linkages.
       A sound legal, regulatory framework and effective institutions with strong and long-term
        government commitment. In China, the first SEZ legislation was formulated to govern the
        SEZs at the local level: in August 1980, the SEZ Act for Guangdong Province was passed by
        the National Congress at the same time when the Shenzhen SEZ was launched. Although it
        was drafted by the provincial government, it was enacted by the national congress to ensure its
        supremacy and the full support of the central government. In South Korea, Malaysia, Jamaica,
        Jordan and other countries with successful SEZ programs, relevant laws and regulations are
        also put in place when they launched the programs. In addition, strong and long-term
        government commitment is needed to ensure the policy continuity and the adequate provision
        of various public goods. It’s also important to establish a proper dialogue and cooperation


                                                                                                      10
    mechanism between the central, provincial and local governments and across different
    government agencies.
   Adopting the suitable development model through strategic planning and industrial
    positioning. SEZ programs should be part of the national or regional development strategy and
    based on the most suitable model which depends on the local comparative or competitive
    advantages. To identify the right model which is built on local strengths, it is important to
    conduct an in-depth analysis of the base conditions through a strategic planning and industrial
    positioning exercise. This would include a rigorous assessment of the local market condition,
    connectivity, industrial base, supply chain, business environment, and land and labor supply,
    etc. Such an exercise will also help the zones to better leverage foreign technologies and know-
    hows optimally catering to the local needs.
   A better business environment inside the zone, including efficient services, such as one-stop
    shop and good infrastructure. One of the key objective of the zones is to overcome the
    constraints (both soft and hard) of doing business in an economy. In most Chinese zones, unlike
    those in many African countries, all the basic infrastructures are provided with high quality
    and the one-stop-shop services and aftercare are very efficient and effective such as those in
    Shenzhen, Suzhou, and TEDA, run by skilled and competent professionals. One thing African
    countries can do differently is that they can attract more private investors through a PPP
    framework given the limited resources. China is also increasingly moving towards this
    direction.
   A realistic scheme - starting small and implementable. It’s crucial to make one or two zones
    work first before scaling-up. Although there were many overlaps in terms of the zone programs
    at the later stage, initially China started with only four zones at very strategic locations, and
    once successful, the program was then rolled out in the entire economy. Many African
    countries start with 10 or even 20 zones all at once, which is a recipe for failure.
   Skills training and technology transfer and diffusion. This is crucial for the zones to acquire
    sufficient manpower and make their products competitive. In China, many zones have well-
    equipped skills training center, which works closely with technical and vocational schools,
    colleges and universities to provide relevant skills training and technology support for the firms
    in the zones. Local governments also have talents strategy to attract highly skilled people to
    work in the zones.
   Better linkages with local economy. Zones need to build on local comparative advantages and
    have local suppliers/clusters as part of their value chains. In China, unlike many African
    countries, most zones are well plugged in the existing local clusters, so the zones and local
    clusters reinforce each other through business linkages. Chinese zones also encourage foreign
    investors to establish joint-ventures with local counterparts. In Taiwan (China) and South
    Korea, governments also encourage the backward linkages through technical assistance and
    other policy interventions.

    V.     Chinese Investments in SEZs in Africa: “Flying Geese” from Asia?

In the mid-1990s, the Chinese Government began to emphasize a policy of “going global” (zou
chuqu), which encouraged Chinese companies to target new markets, build global brands, and
invest abroad. One component of this policy was the establishment of overseas industrial and trade

                                                                                                   11
zones. Overseas economic zones were believed to serve several strategic objectives. First, they
would help increase demand for Chinese-made machinery and equipment, while making it easier
to provide post-sales product support. Second, by producing overseas and exporting to Europe or
North America, Chinese companies would be able to avoid trade frictions and barriers imposed on
exports from China. Third, they would assist China’s efforts to boost its own domestic
restructuring and move up the value chain at home. Fourth, they were intended to create economies
of scale for overseas investment, and in particular, to assist less experienced SMEs to venture
overseas “in groups”. Finally, they were viewed as a way to transfer one element of China’s own
success to other developing countries; a strategy that the government believed would be helpful
for recipient countries (World Bank 2010).

This strategy was pioneered by Chinese companies such as Haier, which established an industrial
zone in Camden, South Carolina, USA, in 1999, and then officially endorsed by the central
government in 2006, which announced a policy decision to eventually establish up to fifty special
economic and trade cooperation zones outside the country (World Bank 2010). Under the 2006
policy, the Chinese government identified SEZ projects in about 15 countries4—including four in
SSA—that would be formally supported by MOFCOM.

The Chinese government views overseas zones program as a long-term initiative and the zone
projects currently are still in early stages of implementation as shown in Annex 1. Therefore it is
premature at this stage to draw definitive conclusions on the performance of these overseas
Chinese zone projects. Overall the implementation of Chinese SEZs in SSA so far seem to be slow
compared with other regions. The process has been delayed in some cases due to difficulties over
access to land, regulatory barriers, and resettlement issues by the host government, restructuring
of the Chinese investments during the global financial crisis, and coordination issues, etc.
MOFCOM has highlighted four key challenges faced by these overseas Chinese zones, including
those in Africa, as follows (World Bank 2010):

      Improving the management capability of the zone developers: the current Chinese investors
       are largely industrial, engineering or trading enterprises and lack specific experience in
       developing and managing industrial development zones;
      Difficulties in coordination with host government counterparts: the practical problems
       involving laws, policies, government services and work efficiency require effective
       communication, which is difficult due to the unequal status of the Chinese developers and local
       governments during the negotiations as well as communication problems;
      The lack of external infrastructure: many zones have to develop their own infrastructure,
       which increases the development costs and construction difficulties; and
      Financing difficulties faced by the developers: the zone developers are facing financing
       difficulties due to the high capital requirements for infrastructure development and the high
       cost of finance in the host countries.
Despite these challenges, several zones have made some good progress and began to show positive
impact on the host countries. Such initial impact is manifested in the following areas:

4
    A total of 19 zones were approved in 2006.

                                                                                                   12
1) Investments and employment. In the Zambia Chambishi zone, 36 firms had signed contract
   and 26 were operational, with a total investment of $322 million actual and over $1 billion
   committed by July 2013. It employed 7,973 Zambian workers and 1,372 Chinese, including
   the mine workforce (Brautigam and Tang 2013). The Lekki Free Trade Zone in Nigeria had
   attracted $76 million investment ($700 million commitment) by July 2013. 30 firms had signed
   lease agreements and 6 were operational. Among the 30 investors who signed contracts, 60%
   were Nigerians, 20% were Chinese, and 20% were from other countries including UK, India
   and Ukraine (Brautigam and Tang 2013; Gabriel 2012). The Ogun-Guangdong Free Trade
   Zone had attracted 34 investors who signed contracts, and 7 were operational, with actual
   investment of $58 million and committed investment of $150 million. As of June 2013, all the
   committed investors were private firms. They employed 1,619 African workers and 177
   Chinese workers (Brautigam and Tang 2013). In Ethiopia, all the factory shells in the Eastern
   Industrial Zone have been leased out with 12 investors, and one remarkable story is the Huajian
   Shoe Manufacturer from China, which has set up 2 production lines in the zone with a
   production capacity of 2,000 pairs per day, exporting to the US and European markets. It
   employs around 3,000 people, mostly local, and provides vocational training to its employees,
   including training of local technicians overseas.5

2) Infrastructure and regional development. This potential will become more prominent once
   the zones are more successful. The Lekki Zone is planned as part of the urban development of
   Lagos, and the zone and its associated (planned) port and airport are intended to form a coastal
   city in the Gulf of Guinea and the logistics center of West Africa (Xinhua 2011). The
   Chambishi Zone in Zambia is located in the country’s industrial hub, and envisaged to forge a
   relatively complete value chain of copper/cobalt mining and processing, eventually creating a
   regional “strategic base” using the Tanzam Railway and extending through Central Africa
   (Brautigam and Tang 2013). The China-Egypt Suez zone is situated near Egypt’s new deep-
   water Sokhna Port and 40 km away from the South entrance of the Suez Canal. It will be
   integrated with the port facility, the canal to be part of the regional industrial and logistics hub
   (GAFI 2011).

3) Knowledge learning and policy experiment. The Chinese zones in Africa have played an
   important role in sharing the Chinese experiences and practices in the zone development.
   Through seminars, training and study tours, often facilitated by the Chinese government and
   international donors, such as the World Bank, the host government officials and zone managers
   learned a lot about the experiences and lessons from East Asia, especially China. Such
   knowledge sharing and learning helped many host governments to understand the concept and
   operation mechanisms of industrial zones and began to accept SEZs as an instrument for
   development and to experiment certain new policies to build a more pro-business environment,
   such as opening-up to FDIs, improving the trade logistics and setting-up one stop shops. In
   Ethiopia, both the World Bank and the Chinese government work actively to assist the
   Ethiopian government’s SEZ initiatives.

4) Backward linkages. Besides the employment and skills linkages, some backward linkages
   seem to begin to emerge among the firms. In Ethiopia, the Huajian Group in the Eastern
5
    Based on author’s field visit to the Eastern Industrial Zone in Ethiopia in November 2014.

                                                                                                    13
      Industrial Zone is actively seeking local material suppliers, though so far it can only source no
      more than 30% of its leather inputs locally. In the Ogun zone, Hazan, a major Chinese shoe
      manufacturer from Wenzhou, had identified a potential to produce rubber soles in Nigeria from
      local rubber and were in discussions with one of the suppliers, though in the end this process
      was stopped in 2012 due to the financial problem of its parent company (Brautigam and Tang
      2013).

In comparison, so far Chinese overseas zone projects in other regions beyond SSA, such as those
in Egypt, Thailand and Vietnam, seem to be more successful. In some of the SSA zones, especially
those in conflict and fragile states, it’s important to establish early risk warning and crisis
management systems to ensure the safety of the zones and workers.6

      VI.     Conclusion

In conclusion, the concept of SEZ and its impact on economic growth is gaining more and more
acceptance globally and the instrument has been widely applied. However, the mixed results of
SEZ development in different continents/countries show that it is not a panacea and has to be
implemented properly and carefully tailored into a country’s specific situations. It is not
necessarily a suitable instrument for any country. Given the complex and heterogeneous
environments in which zone programs are implemented, it would be useful to establish a clear
framework to guide the operations of SEZs in countries where they are deemed relevant.

China has successfully implemented the SEZ programs and offers many very useful lessons. These
lessons should not be taken as given and need to be carefully tailored into the local context of
African countries, just as China did when it implemented its own SEZ programs in the 1980s.

The Chinese investments in Africa in the backdrop of a new wave of industrial transfer from East
Asia, present an unprecedented opportunity for Africa. It could be the continuation of the “Geese
Pattern”, which created the “East Asia Miracle”, from Asia to Africa. However, to make this truly
successful, the host governments and investors need more mutual understanding of the difference
of development stages, legal and governance systems, institutions, social norms, cultures and even
mindsets, etc., and come out a pragmatic approach which builds on the strengths of both sides and
fits into the local context. Such an approach will eventually leads to a win-win situation.

Despite the various efforts to understand Chinese investments overseas, the data availability is still
quite scarce and many areas still need to be further studied and understood. Such studies can help
the policy-makers and private investors to understand the situations better and to make more
informed decisions. Under the new World Bank-China partnership, two areas could be further
explored: 1) Chinese overseas zones (including those in Africa): status, progress, challenges and
future directions; and 2) Chinese investments in Africa: key motivations, geographical and sector
distributions, progress today, key constraints and way forward, etc.




6
    Cited from comments received from the China Development Bank in May 2015.

                                                                                                    14
References

Alder, S., et al. 2013. “The Effect of Economic Reform and Industrial Policy in a Panel of Chinese Cities”. Working
paper No. 207, Center for Institutions, Policy and Culture in the Development Process, University of Zurich.

Asian Development Bank. 2007. “Special Economic Zones and Competitiveness : A Case Study of Shenzhen,
China.” PRM (Pakistan Resident Mission) Policy Note, Islamabad.

Baeumler, Axel, et al. 2009. Sino-Singapore Tianjin Eco-City: A Case Study of an Emerging Eco-City in China.
Technical Assistance Report, Washington, DC, World Bank.

Bräutigam, D.A. and X. Tang. 2010. “China’s Investment in Africa’s Special Economic Zones”. Mimeo.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Bräutigam, D.A. and X. Tang. 2013. “Going Global in Groups: Structural Transformation and China’s Special
Economic Zones Overseas”. World Development (2013).

China Development Zones Association. 2011. China Development Zones Yearbook. Beijing: China Financial &
Economic Publishing House.

China Knowledge Online. 2009. “China Special Report: Industrial Parks—China’s Vehicles for Manufacturing.”
http//:www.chinaknowledge.com.

Enright, Michael J., Edith Scott, and Ka-mun Chung. 2005. Regional Powerhouse: The Greater Pearl River Delta
and the Rise of China. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons (Asia).

Farole, Thomas. 2011. Special Economic Zones in Africa: Comparing Performance and Learning from Global
Experience. Washington, DC: World Bank.

FIAS. 2008. Special Economic Zones: Performance, Lessons Learned, and Implications for Zone Development.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Gabriel, Omoh. 2012. “Lekki free trade zone attracts N170bn investment”. Vanguard, August 6.

Ge, Wei. 1999. “Special Economic Zones and the Opening of the Chinese Economy: Some Lessons for Economic
Liberalization.” World Development 27 (7): 1267–85.

General Authority for Investment (GAFI). 2011. “Special Economic Zone”. http//:www.gafinet.org/ English/Pages-
/SpecialEconomicZone.aspx.

Hong Kong Trade Development Council. 2014. “China-Singapore Suzhou Industrial Park (Including Suzhou
Industrial Park Export Processing Zone)”. Hong Kong, China. http://china-trade-research.hktdc.com/business-
news/article/Fast-Facts/China-Singapore-Suzhou-Industrial-Park-Including-Suzhou-Industrial-Park-Export-
Processing-Zone/ff/en/1/1X000000/1X09WGSW.htm#sthash.iMoxx367.dpuf

Li, Yaorao. 2011. Agglomeration Development Theory: The Economic Measurements of China’s Development
Zone Evolution. Jinan (China): Jinan University Press.

Lin, Justin Yifu, and Y. Wang. 2014. “China-Africa Cooperation in Structural Transformation: Ideas, Opportunities
and Finances”, UNU-WIDER working paper 2014/046.

Mengistu, Amanuel. 2014. “Connecting Africa & Asia: Business Trends that are Driving Opportunities on Both
Continents”. Selamta (Ethiopia), March/April.

MOFCOM (Ministry of Commerce) and MOF (Ministry of Finance). 2008. “Temporary Methods to Manage the
Development Funds for Overseas Economic Cooperation Zones”. Beijing.

                                                                                                                15
ProLogis. 2008. “China’s Special Economic Zones and National Industrial Parks—Door Openers to Economic
Reform.” ProLogis Research Bulletin (Spring).

Razaq, Ayinla. 2014. “Chinese investors to establish power plant, four additional factories in Ogun -Guangdong
FTZ”. Businessday, February 19.

Shen, Xiaofang, and S. Xu. 2011. “Shenzhen Special Economic Zone: A Policy Reform Incubator for Land Market
Development in China”. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Sklair, Leslie. 1991. “Problems of Socialist Development—The Significance of Shenzhen Special Economic Zone
for China Open-Door Development Strategy.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 15 (2): 197–
215.

Wang, Jin. 2013. “The economic impact of Special Economic Zones: Evidence from Chinese municipalities”,
Journal of Development Economics, Volume 101, 2013, pp133 – 147.

Watson, P. L. 2001. “Export Processing Zones: Has Africa Missed the Boat? Not Yet!” Africa Region Working
Paper Series No. 17. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank and the Development Research Center of the State Council of China. 2014. “Urban China: Toward
Efficient, Inclusive, and Sustainable Urbanization”. Beijing.

World Bank. 2010. “Chinese Investments in Special Economic Zones in Africa: Progress, Challenges, and Lessons
Learned.” Washington, DC: World Bank.

Xinhua. 2011. “Sino-Nigerian Lekki Free Trade Zone Having Promising Future”. http://www.china.com.cn/econo-
Mic/txt/2011-06/27/content_22865210.htm.

Yeung et al. 2008. “China’s Special Economic Zones at 30.” Eurasian Geography and Economics 2009 50 (2).
Yeung, Yue-man, J. Lee, and G. Kee. 2009. “China’s Special Economic Zones at 30.” Eurasian Geography and
Economics 50 (2): 222–40.

Zeng, Douglas Zhihua. 2001. “Suzhou Technology Park.” Research note for WBI Development Series. China and
the Knowledge Economy: Seizing the 21stCentury, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Zeng, Douglas Zhihua. 2010. Building Engines for Growth and Competitiveness in China: Experience with Special
Economic Zones & Industrial Clusters. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Zeng, Douglas Zhihua. 2012a. “SEZs in Africa: Putting the Cart in Front of Horse?” (blog). Washington, DC: World
Bank.

Zeng, Douglas Zhihua. 2012b. “An Overview of Six Economic Zones in Nigeria: Challenges and Opportunities”.
World Bank Policy Note.

Zhang, Ming. 2009. Competitiveness and Growth in Brazilian Cities: Local Policies and Actions for Innovation.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Zhong, Jian, et al., eds. 2009. Annual Report on the Development of China’s Special Economic Zones. Beijing:
Social Sciences Academy Press.




                                                                                                                 16
Annex 1. Overseas Chinese SEZs Officially Supported by MOFCOM

                                                                       Tender
Region            Zone                                                             Status
                                                                       Year
Sub-Saharan Africa
                Chambishi Nonferrous Metal Mining Group                            Operational
Zambia          Industrial Park                                        2006
                Lusaka sub-zone                                                    Under construction
                Lekki Free Trade Zone                                  2007        operational
Nigeria
                Ogun-Guangdong Zone                                    2006        operational
Ethiopia        Eastern Industrial Park                                2007        operational
Mauritius       JinFei Economic and Trade Cooperation Zone             2006        Under construction
North Africa
                Jiangling Economic and Trade Cooperation
Algeria                                                                2007        Not implemented
                Zone
Egypt           Tianjin TEDA Suez Zone                                 2007        Operational
East Asia
                China-Vietnam (Shenzhen-Haiphong) Economic             2007        Under construction
                and Trade Cooperation Zone
Vietnam
                  Longjiang Industrial Park                            2007        Operational
Thailand          Thai-Chinese Rayong Industrial Zone                  2006        Operational
Cambodia          Sihanoukville SEZ                                    2006        Under construction
Indonesia         China-Indonesia Economic Trade Zone                  2007        Under construction
S. Korea          Korea-China Industrial Park                          2007        Delayed due to funding problem
South Asia
Pakistan          Haier-Ruba Industrial Zone                           2006        Operational
Latin America
                  Venezuela-China Science Technology Industry
Venezuela                                                              2007        Not Implemented
                  Zone
                  Mexico and China (Ningbo) Geely industrial                       Not Implemented due to land
Mexico                                                                 2007
                  and trade cooperation zone                                       access issue
Eastern Europe
                  Ussuriysk Economic and Trade Cooperation             2006        Under construction and partly
                  Zone                                                             operational

                  Tomsk Timber Industry and Trade Cooperation          2007        Operational
Russia
                  Zone

                  St. Petersburg Baltic Economic and Trade              2006         Dropped
                  Cooperation Zone
Note: Due to limited information, the status of the zones is not necessarily the latest.
Source: World Bank (2010), Brautigam and Tang 2013, and Author’s compilation.




                                                                                                                   17
